CODE OF THE CITY OF HELEN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted July 19, 1994 
Effective July 19, 1994 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HELEN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ralph Hofer 
William Holtzclaw 
Andrea Smith 
Mike Vandegriff  Barbara Westmoreland 
City Commission 
____________ 
Kim A. Cox 
City Manager 
____________ 
Larry Fowler 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janie Henderson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Helen, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, which code was current through August 11, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger Merriam, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. James B. Whitford, Jr., former City Manager, and Mr. Kim A. Cox, the current City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 94-03-01 
An Ordinance adopting and enacting a new Code for the City of Helen, Georgia providing for the repeal of certain Ordinances not included therein; providing a penalty for the violation thereof; providing for the manner of amending such Code; and providing when such Code and this Ordinance shall become effective. 
The Helen City Commission, the governing authority of the City of Helen hereby ordains: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Helen, Georgia, published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 70, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All Ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 14, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any Ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent Ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any Ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both or labor for the City on the streets, sidewalks or other public places for a period not exceeding 60 days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory Ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 14, 1993 that amend or refer to Ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. The following sections of the "Code of the City of Helen, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 70, shall be amended to incorporate therein the following revisions: 
(1)  The first sentence of Section 34-52.a., entitled Membership, shall hereby read as follows: "The Planning and Design Review Board shall be comprised of seven (7) members appointed by the City Commission." 
(2)  The first sentence of Section 34-56, entitled Staff Advisor, shall hereby read as follows: "The City Manager or his designee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Planning and Design Review Board." 
(3)  In Chapter 38, Law Enforcement, there is hereby inserted the following Section 38-32, to be entitled Entering Private Dwellings, and is to read as follows: "No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless in pursuit of a fugitive of whom the officer has personal knowledge or if the officer has probable cause to believe the suspected offender has committed or attempted to commit a felony, or under such other facts and circumstances authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States." 
(4)  Section 2-50.(1)., entitled Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements, shall hereby read as follows: "Preparation. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the commission unless ordered by a majority vote of the commission, requested in writing by the mayor, or prepared by the city manager on his own initiative. All ordinances shall be approved as to form by the city attorney prior to final adoption by the City Commission." 
Section 8. This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Passed and adopted this 19th day of July, 1994. 

First Reading: April 19, 1994 
Second Reading: July 19, 1994 
Passed: July 19, 1994 
This ordinance approved as to form: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CITY OF HELEN - NEW CHARTER 
No. 87 (House Bill No. 451). 
AN ACT 
To reincorporate and provide a new charter for the City of Helen, Georgia; to provide for the corporate limits of the city, the powers of the city, and the form and method of government of the city; to provide for the administration of city affairs; to provide for the municipal court of the city; to provide elections for city offices; to provide for taxation by the city; to provide for the financial management of the city; to provide for financial and fiscal affairs of the city; to provide for municipal services and regulatory functions; to provide general provisions; to provide for other matters relative thereto; to provide for specific repeal; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city charter, being 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 87), page 3743. Amendments to the charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, expression of numbers and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Helen in White County is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Helen." References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Helen. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Helen, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The city commission may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace but such earlier maps shall be retained in the office of the mayor. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of this city shall include, but not be limited to, the following powers: 
(1)  Ad valorem taxation: to levy, assess, and collect ad valorem taxes on all taxable property in the city; 
(2)  Other taxes: to levy, assess, and collect other taxes allowed by general law; 
(3)  Business regulation and taxation: to levy, assess, and collect occupational and business taxes and to license and regulate occupations and businesses; 
(4)  Appropriations: to make appropriations and expend funds for support of the city and any other lawful purpose; 
(5)  Municipal debts: to borrow money and issue bonds as authorized by general law; 
(6)  Property: to own property and interests in property; 
(7)  Gifts: to accept gifts and grants for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city on such terms as the donor may impose; 
(8)  Condemnation: to condemn property inside or outside the city for present or future use; 
(9)  Municipal utilities: to acquire, lease, operate, and dispose of public utilities; 
(10)  Public utilities: to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and to prescribe the conditions of such franchises and contracts; 
(11)  Roadways: to open, maintain, improve, and close streets and roads and to grant franchises and rights-of-way thereon; 
(12)  Public facilities: to acquire, operate, and dispose of public buildings, public projects, parks, cemeteries, golf courses, and other public improvements inside or outside the city; 
(13)  Sidewalk maintenance: to require real estate owners to repair and maintain sidewalks adjoining their land; 
(14)  Building regulation: to regulate the building trades and the construction of buildings and to adopt and enforce building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, heating, and air-conditioning codes; 
(15)  Planning and zoning: to provide for city planning by zoning, subdivision regulation, and the like; 
(16)  Police power: to exercise the police power for the public safety and well-being of the city; 
(17)  Roadside regulation: to prohibit or regulate signs, billboards, and other items upon or adjacent to streets and roads; 
(18)  Health: to prescribe and enforce health and sanitation standards; 
(19)  Pollution: to regulate emissions which pollute the air and water; 
(20)  Fire safety: to fix fire limits and to prescribe and enforce fire safety regulations; 
(21)  Public hazards: to provide for the destruction or removal of public hazards; 
(22)  Waste disposal: to provide for and regulate the collection, disposal, and recycling of garbage and wastes; 
(23)  Garbage fees: to fix and collect garbage fees; 
(24)  Sewer fees: to fix and collect sewer fees; 
(25)  Nuisances: to define and provide for the abatement of nuisances; 
(26)  Property protection: to preserve and protect the property of the city; 
(27)  Prisoners: to provide for public work by municipal prisoners and for their confinement; 
(28)  Animal control: to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals; 
(29)  Motor vehicles: to regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles; 
(30)  Taxicabs: to regulate vehicles operated for hire in the city; 
(31)  Pensions: to provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for city employees and officers; 
(32)  Special assessments: to levy, assess, and collect special assessments to cover the cost of public improvements; 
(33)  Contracts: to enter into lawful contracts and agreements; 
(34)  City agencies: to create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer appropriate authority upon them; 
(35)  Penalties: to provide penalties for violations of municipal ordinances as provided in section 414; 
(36)  Police and fire protection: to exercise the power of arrest through appointed policemen and to operate a fire department; 
(37)  Emergencies: to provide for the determining, proclamation, and combating of emergencies; 
(38)  Urban redevelopment: to organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(39)  Public transportation: to organize and operate public transportation systems; 
(40)  General health, safety, and welfare: to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; 
(41)  Archives: to organize and operate a municipal archives; 
(42)  Art: to encourage the development and appreciation of the arts; 
(43)  Architectural standards: to provide for and maintain architectural and design standards throughout the city; and 
(44)  Other powers: to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by the Constitution of Georgia, by general law, or by this charter. If general law and this charter make no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City commission creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city commission to be composed of five commission members who shall be elected in the manner provided by article V of this charter. One member of the commission, elected as provided for in section 2.27, shall be designated as the mayor. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.11. - City commission terms and qualification for office. 
The members of the city commission shall serve for terms of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as a commission member unless he or she is a qualified municipal voter, 21 years of age, and shall have been a resident of the city for one year immediately prior to the date of his or her election. Each city commission member shall continue to reside therein during such member's period of service. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
A vacancy shall exist if a member of the city commission resigns, dies, moves his or her residence from the city, has been continuously disabled for a period of six months so as to prevent him or her from discharging the duties of his or her office, or is convicted of malfeasance or misfeasance in office, or of a felony, or of a violation of this act or a violation of the election laws of the state. The city commission shall appoint a qualified person to fill such a vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. If a tie vote by the city commission to fill a vacancy is unbroken for 15 days, the mayor or mayor pro tempore shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy. At no time shall there be more than two members so appointed holding office and, if a vacancy occurs with two members so appointed on the city commission, a special election shall be held by the city election managers within 45 days following the occurrence of the vacancy, at which election a city commission member shall be elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term of the vacant office, provided that no such election shall be held if a regular annual election will occur within six months. Candidates in such a special election will occur within six months [sic]. Candidates in such a special election shall be nominated as provided in section 2.11 of this act. The special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  Beginning on the effective date of this charter, the compensation of the commission member selected as mayor shall be $150.00 per month and the compensation of the other commission members shall be $100.00 per month. 
(b)  In the event any one or more of the city commission members travels beyond the limits of the county in connection with the business affairs of the city in performance of his or her duty as city commission member, he or she shall be reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred for travel, lodging, and meals as may be authorized by city commission. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office. 
Except as authorized by general state law, a city commission member shall not hold any other city office or employment during the term for which he or she was elected. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.15. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city commission. Any city commission member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city commission shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city commission and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city commission or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city commission. 
(e)  (1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in paragraph (1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to, or employment in, a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.16. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city commission may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city commission shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.17. - General power and authority of the city commission. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city commission shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.18. - Organization meeting. 
The city commission shall meet for organization on the second Tuesday in January of each year or as soon thereafter as practicable. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of a city commission member of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city commission shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city commission may be held on call of the mayor or three other members of the city commission. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to commission members shall not be required if all city commission members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a commission member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such commission member's presence. Except where waiver by all members is effected by their presence or in writing, only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city commission shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of all meetings shall be made as required by general state law. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city commission shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city commission shall be appointed by the city commission. The city commission, by a majority vote, shall have the power to remove members of any committee and the power to appoint new members to any committee, at any time, within the city commission's discretion. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
Three city commission members constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city commission. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city commission shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedure; notice and reading. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be: "The Commission of the City of Helen hereby ordains…." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any commission member. Before an ordinance can be voted on, it should be read twice and posted at city hall during the period between the two readings. The first reading should be of the entire ordinance and the second reading, which must take place no sooner than two weeks after the first reading, may be by title only. 
(c)  Upon passage, all ordinances shall be signed by the mayor, or mayor pro tempore if presiding, and the city clerk. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the technical requirements of this section shall not invalidate an ordinance if the intention of the governing authority that the ordinance be effective is evident. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.23. - [Acts of commission by motion, resolution or ordinance.] 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this charter, acts of the city commission which have the force and effect of law may be done by motion or resolution of the city commission, except that any act of the city commission to amend the charter or the Code of Ordinances or any other act required by general state law to be done by ordinance shall be done by ordinance. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city commission may convene on call of the mayor or three city commission members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it is adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city commission may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the commission. 
(b)  The city commission shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city commission and shall be published as soon as is practicable, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city commission may specify. Ordinance codification shall be updated at least every two years. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the "Code of the City of Helen, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city commission. 
(c)  The city commission shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be published as soon as is practicable following its adoption, and the published ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city commission. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city commission shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.27. - Election of mayor. 
At the first meeting held during each calendar year, the commission shall elect one of the commission members as mayor of the City of Helen. The commission member so elected shall continue to hold the title of mayor for one year thereafter, and successors shall be elected by the commission for each year. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.28. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The city commission member elected as mayor shall have no more authority than any of the other commission members, except that he or she shall act as chairperson at all meetings of the commission, shall, upon approval by the commission, sign the minutes of such meetings, shall act as mayor of said city on all ceremonial occasions, and shall have such other authority and duties as hereinafter provided. The mayor shall be an ex officio member of all boards of which the mayor of said city is now ex officio a member. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.29. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The city commission at the first regular meeting, after the newly elected commission members have taken office following each annual election, shall elect from its membership a mayor pro tempore for a term of one year. In the event that no decision is reached at such first regular meeting, the city commission shall elect from its membership, within ten days following such meeting, the mayor pro tempore; otherwise the commission member who received the highest number of votes when he or she was last elected shall become the mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the mayor during his or her absence or inability to act and shall fill out any unexpired term in the office of mayor, in which case a new mayor pro tempore shall be elected by majority vote of the city commission. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.30. - City manager and acting city manager. 
(a)  Appointment of city manager; compensation. The city commission shall appoint, for a term as arranged by an employment contract of not less than a one-year term, an officer of not less than 25 years of age whose title shall be city manager and who shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city government. The city manager shall be chosen by the city commission on the basis of qualifications for the position as such with special reference to actual experience in and knowledge of the duties of the office as hereinafter prescribed. The city manager shall have received a bachelor's degree as a minimum educational requirement or, in lieu thereof, a minimum of five years' experience in a city in a supervisory capacity. The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission and according to the terms of an employment agreement between the city commission and the city manager. The city manager shall receive such salary as the city commission may fix. 
(b)  Acting city manager. By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city commission, a qualified city administrative officer to execute the powers and perform the duties of the city manager during the manager's temporary absence or disability. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 2.31. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall be responsible to the city commission for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. As chief administrator, the city manager shall have the power to appoint and remove all officers, department heads, and employees in the administrative service of the city; and these officers, department heads, and employees shall be administratively responsible to the city manager, except the city attorney and the city judge who shall be appointed by the city commission. The city manager shall report every appointment and removal of a department head to the city commission at the commission meeting next following the appointment or removal. It shall be the duty of the city manager to supervise the administration of the affairs of the city; to see that the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the city commission and the laws of the state are faithfully executed and enforced; to make such recommendations to the city commission concerning the affairs of the city as he or she shall deem expedient; to keep the city commission advised of the financial condition and future financial needs of the city; to attend all meetings of the city commission; and to prepare and to submit to the city commission such reports as may be deemed expedient or as may be required by the city commission. The city manager shall perform such other functions as assigned by the city commission; provided, however, remuneration shall not exceed the amount of salary fixed in section 2.30. 
(b)  The city manager shall be designated and given authority to delegate duties as the purchasing agent, the personnel officer, and the finance officer of the City of Helen. The city manager shall have responsibility for preparing and implementing the budget following budgetary review and adoption by the commission in regular meeting. All department heads employed by the city manager shall be administratively accountable to the city manager. All department heads employed by the legislative body shall be administratively communicative with the city manager. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city commission, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties of and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general state law or federal law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city commission shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative functions as the city commission deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city commission for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general state law. 
(c)  The city commission, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as specifically authorized by general law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter, by general law, or by ordinance. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the city commission. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman and one member as secretary. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  Appointment; qualifications; term. The city commission shall appoint a city attorney who shall be a member of the state bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least one year. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission. 
(b)  Duties of the city attorney; compensation. It shall be the duty of the city attorney to serve as legal advisor to the city commission, city manager, and other city officials with respect to the affairs of the city; to draw proposed ordinances when requested to do so; to inspect and determine the legality and form of all agreements, contracts, franchises, and other instruments with which the city may be concerned; to attend meetings of the city commission; and to perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position of city attorney. The salary of the city attorney shall be set by the city commission. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint an officer who shall perform the duties of the city clerk and who shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the city commission, maintain a safe place for all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city, and perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the city manager may direct, including but not limited to the office of city treasurer. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 3.14. - Personnel policies. 
The city commission may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, retirement, and the manner in which layoff shall be effected; and 
(4)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Helen. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 3.15. - Comprehensive land use plan. 
A comprehensive land use plan shall be adopted by the city commission within five years upon the effective date of this charter and official updates to this plan shall be made at least every five years thereafter. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Helen. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby associate judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years and is a member of the state bar of Georgia. The city judge need not be a resident of the City of Helen. No other officers of the City of Helen may serve as the city judge. All judges shall be appointed by the city commission. Upon the effective date of this charter, the present residing city judge may be eligible to continue holding office subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a majority vote of the city commission. 
(e)  Before entering on the duties of his or her office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall follow the form as set out in section 2.18 and shall be entered upon the minutes of the city commission. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 4.12. - Clerk of municipal court. 
The city manager shall designate, subject to the approval of the chief judge of the municipal court of the City of Helen, a municipal employee to serve as the clerk of the municipal court. The clerk of the municipal court shall attend all hearings and be responsible for all records of said municipal court. 
Sec. 4.13. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as designated by ordinance or as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.14. - Jurisdiction; power. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail or both. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1000.00 or imprisonment for 30 days or both or may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding 60 days. A fine levied by the municipal court shall not be subject to suspension, stay or probation except that, if the fine will impose an economic hardship on the defendant, the judge of the municipal court, in his sole discretion, may order the defendant to pay such fine in installments and such order may be enforced through a contempt proceeding. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party, to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences, and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(h)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by general state law. All judges of the municipal court and the clerk of the municipal court are authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to mayor's, recorder's, and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 08-09-02, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 4.15. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the appropriate court of White County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.16. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city commission, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary to secure the proper administration of the municipal court and to require the prosecution by a commission-appointed solicitor; provided, however, that the city commission may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations for procedure in the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general laws. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provision of O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 3 [§ 3-21-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  On the first Wednesday in December, 1985, and on that day annually thereafter, there shall be an election for successors to members of the city commission whose terms will expire the following January. The terms of office shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in section 2.18 of this charter. 
(b)  The city commission members in office on the effective date of this charter shall remain in office until their successors are elected and take office as provided in this charter. 
(c)  In December, 1985, two commission members will be elected for two-year terms to replace those three current members whose terms end on the second Tuesday of January, 1986. In December, 1986, three members of the city commission will be elected for two-year terms to replace those three current members of the city commission whose terms expire on the second Tuesday of January, 1987. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Editor's note— All general municipal elections are mandated to be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in each odd-numbered year pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. Runoff elections shall be held on the 14th day following a regular election. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city commission may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city commission in its discretion. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city commission, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city commission, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum and may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city commission, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city commission may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city commission, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. The city commission, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city commission shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city commission shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city commission, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer, sanitary, health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city commission, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
The city commission shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the special mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city commission, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, allowing exceptions for hardship, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city commission shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city commission as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
Any short-term loan obtained by the city must be repaid by December 31 of the year in which the loan was obtained unless otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The city commission shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.23. - Action by city commission on budget. 
(a)  The city commission shall adopt and may thereafter amend an annual budget, except that the budget as finally adopted and amended must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city commission, by resolution, shall adopt the final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the fiscal year. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such; and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable unless by a majority vote of the city commission. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.24. - Tax levies. 
As the next order of business following adoption of the budget, the city commission shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the amount operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.25. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city commission, by majority vote, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.26. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city commission. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing standards. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.27. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city commission and such approval is entered in the city commission minutes. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.28. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city commission may prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 6.29. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city commission may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law. 
(b)  The city commission may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city is of no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city commission may authorize the city manager to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city commission shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city commission. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue; and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel, or office as may be provided by the city commission. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1038), page 4397, § 1) 
Sec. 7.13. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it is the legislative intent of this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be treated as if enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.14. - Effective date. 
This act shall become effective on December 1, 1985. 
Sec. 7.15. - Specific repealer. 
An act incorporating the City of Helen in White County, approved April 28, 1969 (Ga. L. 1969, p. 3978), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.16. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
The following table shows the location within the basic Charter of Acts amending the Charter. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
The following table shows the location within the basic Charter of ordinances amending the Charter. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Helen, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1987, § 1-101) 
Charter reference— Ordinance codification, § 2.26(b), (c). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Generally. In the interpretation and application of any provision, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions than other provisions, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Advice and consent. "Advice and consent of the city commission" means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city commission. 
Charter. "Charter" means the charter of the city. 
City. "City" means the City of Helen, Georgia. 
City commission. "City commission" or "commission" means the city commission of the city. 
Code. "Code" means the Code of the City of Helen, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted, and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
County. "County" means White County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring an officer or employee of the city to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize such officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Gender. Any word importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the provisions giving the authority. 
May. The word "may" is to be construed as being directory and not mandatory. 
Misdemeanor. "Misdemeanor" means any violation of the state criminal law other than a felony. 
Must. "Must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing, and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of part of such building or land. 
Person. "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal property. "Personal property" includes every specie of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. "Property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Real property. "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. "Reasonable time or notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
References to city officials, agencies, etc. References made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only are references to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of this city. 
Shall. "Shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. "State" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. "Street" means any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the city. 
Technical and nontechnical words. All words and phrases are to be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law are to be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Tenant or occupant. "Tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
Week. "Week" shall mean seven days. 
Writing or written. "Writing" and "written" includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1987, § 1-103) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, history notes, references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1987, § 1-104) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1987, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect any section or subsection of this Code shall be numbered consecutively, but shall refer specifically to the section or subsection affected, and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions shall be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of the City of Helen, Georgia, is amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "Code of the City of Helen, Georgia, is amended by adding a new section to be numbered section ____________ , which section shall read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number in the following language: "Section (chapter or article) ____________ of the Code of the City of Helen, Georgia, is repealed." 
(Code 1987, § 1-106) 
Charter reference— Ordinance adoption, § 2.22. 
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper 
with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city commission. 
(Code 1987, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days or both, or labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks or other public places for a period not exceeding 60 days. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1987, § 1-108; Ord. No. 11-3-03, 4-5-2011) 
Charter reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, § 4.14. 
Cross reference— Municipal court, § 18-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections or subsections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money. 
(2)  Authorizing the issuance of bonds or any evidence of indebtedness. 
(3)  Authorizing or approving a contract. 
(4)  Granting a franchise. 
(5)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving or widening any street or public way. 
(6)  Establishing or altering the grades of any street. 
(7)  Approving or amending a budget or making appropriations. 
(8)  Providing personnel regulations not codified in this Code. 
(9)  Amending the charter. 
(10)  Levying or imposing taxes that are not codified in this Code. 
(11)  Establishing salaries or other benefits for officers or employees of the city not in such Code. 
(12)  Dealing with special assessments. 
(13)  Annexing property into the city. 
(14)  Approving plats or rezoning property. 
(15)  Whose purpose has been accomplished. 
(16)  Which is special although permanent in effect. 
(17)  Which is temporary although general in effect. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or allowing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Office hours. 
All units in the administrative service shall be open between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on all weekdays. Units shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays. 
(Code 1987, § 3-104(5)(a)) 
Sec. 2-2. - Records. 
All municipal records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service. 
(Code 1987, § 3-104(4)) 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
Secs. 2-3—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City commission, § 2.10 et seq. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city commission shall be held on the third Tuesday of each calendar month. 
(Code 1987, § 3-102; Ord. No. 98-08-02, 9-1-98; Ord. No. 99-09-03, 10-19-99) 
Charter reference— Regular meetings to be as prescribed by ordinance, § 2.19(a). 
Sec. 2-27. - Interaction with city employees through manager. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation, the commission shall deal with city employees who are subject to appointment and removal by the city manager solely through the city manager and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
(Code 1987, § 3-101) 
Secs. 2-28—2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Rules of procedure, § 2.20; quorum, § 2.21. 

Sec. 2-41. - Rules for conduct of business generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of commission meetings. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206) 
Sec. 2-42. - Call to order. 
The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special, or called commission meeting; and shall immediately call the commission to order. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(1)) 
Sec. 2-43. - Roll call. 
Before proceeding with the business of the commission, the city clerk or his deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(2)) 
Sec. 2-44. - Order of business. 
The business of the commission shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order by presiding officer. 
(2)  Roll call. 
(3)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
(4)  Petitions and communications from the public. 
(5)  Reports of standing committees. 
(6)  Reports of special committees. 
(7)  Unfinished business. 
(8)  New business. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(4)) 
Sec. 2-45. - Executive session. 
The city commission may, at any time, as permitted by state law, upon call therefor by the presiding officer or upon motion duly carried by a commission member, meet in executive session. Attendance at such sessions shall be limited to the mayor and members of the commission and such invitees as shall be invited with the unanimous consent of the mayor and commission. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(13)) 
State Law reference— When closed meetings allowed, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-46. - Reading of minutes. 
Unless a reading of the minutes of a commission meeting is requested by a commission member, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(5)) 
Sec. 2-47. - Reports by committees. 
(a)  Any business coming before the city commission concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction, may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor or by the city commission, or any member of the city commission, to examine any matter referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city commission, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. 
(b)  Each standing committee shall examine into the condition of the matters within its jurisdiction, and make such reports and recommendations from time to time as may be necessary. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(6)) 
Sec. 2-48. - Manner of addressing commission. 
No member, while the city commission is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call him to order or for explanation. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(7)) 
Sec. 2-49. - Limitations on addressing commission. 
Any person not a member of city commission who desires to address the commission shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer, and then shall step up in front of the rail, give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the commission as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to three minutes unless additional time is granted by the commission. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(8)) 
Sec. 2-50. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the following manner: 
(1)  Preparation. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the commission unless ordered by a majority vote of the commission, requested in writing by the mayor, or prepared by the city manager on his own initiative. All ordinances shall be approved as to form by the city attorney prior to final adoption by the city commission. 
(2)  Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before presentation to the commission, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or the attorney's authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the city manager. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(9); Ord. No. 94-03-01, § 7(4), 7-19-94) 
Charter reference— Ordinances generally, §§ 2.22, 2.26. 
Sec. 2-51. - Questions of order. 
The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any commissioner who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city commission in the manner provided by the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(11)) 
Sec. 2-52. - Elections. 
All elections by the city commission shall be by ballot, and a majority vote of the whole commission shall be necessary for election. 
(Code 1987, § 3-206(12)) 
DIVISION 3. - CODE OF ETHICS FOR CITY COMMISSION MEMBERS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-53. - Definitions. 
City commission member shall be any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the city. 
Employee shall be any person who is a fulltime or part-time employee of the city. 
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Helen, Georgia government. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-54. - Acceptance of gifts. 
City commission members shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have a council member exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; 
(3)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the commission member; 
(4)  This section shall not apply to campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with state laws. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-55. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this division that city commission members avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-54 which might result in, or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-56. - Financial interests of members. 
City commission members may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city commission members are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-57. - Use of public property. 
A city commission member shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-58. - Use of confidential information. 
A city commission member shall not directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-59. - Coercion by commission members. 
A city commission member shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a commission member has business or financial ties. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-60. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A city commission member shall not vote on an ordinance or amendment in a city commission meeting that would directly affect his or her private business. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-61. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city commission member shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-62. - Meetings of the council. 
Meetings of the commission shall be conducted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 50, Chapter 14, as amended, and Title 36, Chapter 80, Section 1. as amended, as it applies to municipalities. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-63. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A city commission member shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-64. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A city commission member shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-65. - Travel expenses. 
A city commission member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-66. - Penalties. 
The code of ethics to be observed by city commission members are set forth above and any violation thereof shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include censure and either public or private reprimand. Power to administer a greater punishment shall include power to administer the lesser. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Subdivision II. - Administration 

Sec. 2-67. - Ethics committee. 
The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the commission, and the third appointed by the two above named subject to approval by a majority of the city commission. The third member of the ethics committee shall be a member in good standing of the state bar. All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a two-year term. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-68. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city commission members shall be filed with the ethics committee. The ethics committee may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city commission. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city commission. The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(c)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city commission; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(d)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings where provided for in the rules. 
(e)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-69. - Additional regulations. 
This chapter shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-70. - Right to appeal. 
Any final decision by the city commission pursuant to this code of ethics for city commission members shall be reviewable by the superior court of the county. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the council. Provided, however, no action of the city commission refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-71. - Conflict of interest. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Subdivision III. - Conflict of Interest, Political Activities and Code of Ethics 

Sec. 2-72. - Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
(a)  Employees shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors, or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally nor to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships which might be construed as or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(b)  Employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure an economic benefit or advantages, special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others including the use of knowledge obtained by through their employment or by virtue of their position. 
(c)  Employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity which they may reasonably expect would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their official position. 
(d)  Employees shall not accept payment from outside sources for professional services (i.e., teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time or when such services pertain to the purchase or sale of city property. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-73. - Proprietorship of creations. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-74. - Confidential information. 
Employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-74.1. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  If an employee of the city is an officer, director, agent or member of, or owns interest any entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has financial commitments with the city, they shall file a sworn statement to this effect with the city clerk. 
(b)  Employees shall not transact any business in their official capacity with any business entity of which he or she is an officer, director, agent, member, or in which he or she owns a controlling interest, excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations. 
(c)  Employees shall not have personal investment in any enterprise which will create a conflict or a perceived conflict between their private interest and the public interest. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-74.2. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold himself out as a candidate in any city election while holding employment with the city. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaigns in election of mayor or any member of the city commission for the city during any period of time for which he is expected to perform work or receive compensation from the city. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during his hours of duty, service, or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
Subdivision IV. - Outside Employment 

Sec. 2-74.3. - Limitations and approval requirement. 
(a)  City employment shall be considered to be the primary employment of all full-time employees. No employee may engage in outside employment which will interfere with the interests of city service. Standards by which some employment is not acceptable include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Illegal activity; 
(2)  Employment that by virtue of association will reflect upon the reputation of the city; 
(3)  High hazard or fatiguing work which might detract from or reduce city performance. 
(b)  Prior to beginning any regularly scheduled outside employment, employees will obtain specific written approval from their department head or his designee on request forms which indicate the name of the outside employer, the nature of the work, hours of work, address and telephone number where the employee can be reached. Such information will become a part of the employee's official personnel record. Employees are required to obtain approval from their department head or his designee for any change in a previously approved outside employment request. 
(c)  Any employee accepting or engaging in outside employment under the terms of this rule shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be available to respond immediately to any emergency call of duty whenever the department head or his designed shall determine that the employee's services are necessary. 
(d)  Employees sustaining injuries while engaged in outside employment are normally ineligible to receive benefits under the city's worker's compensation program. If an employee sustains an injury while engaged in outside employment, but is performing duties, within the scope of his city responsibilities (i.e. a police arrest), he may be eligible for partial city worker's compensation benefits. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 04-04-02, 5-4-04) 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel, ch. 50; personnel policies and procedures, app. A. 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-76. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees (including members of boards, commissions and authorities) except for members of the city commission, required by charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
I, ____________ , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution and statutes of the United States, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Georgia, and the charter and ordinances of the City of Helen; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ____________ during my continuance therein, so help me God. 
(Code 1987, § 3-105) 
State Law reference— Loyalty oath required in certain officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-11 et seq. 
Sec. 2-77. - Bond. 
The amount and terms of the bond due from the city manager shall be $50,000.00 annually. The amount and terms of the bond due from the city clerk shall be $50,000.00 annually. 
(Code 1987, §§ 3-403, 3-503) 
Charter reference— Official bonds, § 7.10. 
Sec. 2-78. - City engineer. 
(a)  Appointment. The city engineer shall be appointed by the manager, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. The city engineer may be employed as a consultant on contract, negotiated by the city manager and subsequently approved by the city commission; or the city engineer may be employed full time as may be authorized in a budget approved by the city commission. 
(b)  Duties. The city engineer shall advise the city manager on all engineering matters referred to him and shall, from time to time as required by the manager, make reports regarding public improvement, repairs of streets, bridges and sidewalks, and prepare such other reports as the manager may request. He shall keep accurate maps, plats and records of all public works, lands or property owned by the city, and perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him from time to time by the manager. 
(c)  Compensation. The city engineer shall submit to the city manager a monthly bill for his services, itemizing the type of work performed for the city and the number of hours engaged in each type of work during the month, or as may be determined in an engineering services contract. 
(Code 1987, § 3-603) 
Charter reference— Authority of city manager to appoint and remove officers in the administrative service, § 2.31. 
Secs. 2-79—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 30-26 et seq.; police department, § 38-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-101. - Department heads. 
All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto. 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective departments to the manager. 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for periodic reports to the manager. 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him and to determine by the physician's report and the applicant's history whether the applicant has the necessary qualifications for the particular position applied for. 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(Code 1987, §§ 3-104(2), 3-604(1)) 
Charter reference— Authority of city manager relative to department heads, § 2.31. 
Sec. 2-102. - Mutual cooperation. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the manager, such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of another department. 
(Code 1987, § 3-104(3)) 
Secs. 2-103—2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70. 

Sec. 2-126. - Composition. 
The department of public works shall consist of the director of public works, who shall be the head of the department, and all officers and employees assigned thereto by the city manager. 
(Code 1987, § 3-702(1)) 
Sec. 2-127. - Director—Appointment. 
The director of public works shall be appointed by the manager following budgetary approval by the city commission. The director of public works shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to the control of the manager. 
(Code 1987, § 3-702(2)) 
Sec. 2-128. - Same—Duties. 
The director of public works shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To provide for and supervise the care, maintenance, construction and extension of all streets, sidewalks, street gutters and drains, alleys and public ways. 
(2)  To have charge of and be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the city water distribution system, the sanitary sewer system and disposal plant and the street lighting system. 
(3)  To have charge of and supervision over all public property of the city, including all parks, parkways, playgrounds, municipal cemeteries, buildings and utilities not assigned to some other department or officer. 
(4)  To have charge of and supervision over the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse either by the city work force or by contracted service. 
(5)  To have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles and other equipment of the city, and of all buildings or places in which the same are housed or kept. 
(6)  To be the custodian of all tools, equipment and other personal property belonging to the city and not assigned to the care of any other public officer of the city. 
(7)  To perform such additional duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the manager. 
(Code 1987, § 3-702(3)) 
Secs. 2-129—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Finance generally, art. VI. 
Cross reference— Business and occupation licenses and fees, § 14-26 et seq.; taxation, ch. 62. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-201. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1987, § 4-301) 
Charter reference— Fiscal year required, § 6.22. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required to be established, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a). 
Sec. 2-202. - Deposit of monies received. 
All units in the administrative service shall make a daily deposit with the city clerk of any monies received directly from the public. 
(Code 1987, § 3-104(5)(b)) 
Sec. 2-203. - Manner of paying out monies. 
All units in the administrative service shall pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1987, § 3-104(5)(c)) 
Sec. 2-204. - Investments. 
Management of monies not required immediately to pay operational expenses necessitates a definite investment policy. The city commission and city manager shall be responsible for developing and administrating respectively the city's investment policy, as set out below: 
(1)  The purpose and objectives of this policy are to: 
a.  Provide an investment medium for funds which may be needed for immediate liquidity purposes. 
b.  Provide an investment medium for funds which are not needed for near-term liquidity purposes. 
c.  Provide for funds with which to meet bond reserve requirements. 
d.  Provide for a reasonable income to the city with little or no risk on the investment. 
(2)  The city must rely on the expertise and advice of professional commercial and investment bankers for recommendations of proposed investments and investment strategies. The city commission shall review and approve the banking institutions with which the city is authorized to make investments. The following is a list of approved institutions with which the city will make investments: 
a.  United Community Bank 
b.  Regions Bank 
c.  Habersham Bank 
d.  Community Bank and Trust 
e.  Wachovia Bank 
f.  Suntrust Bank 
g.  Stephens County Bank 
h.  B B and T 
Whenever practical, investments should be made with the local banks. 
Should more than $100,000.00 be invested with any one institution, the city shall require such institution pledge assets sufficient to secure the excess amount at ratio of at least six to five. 
(3)  At the first of each fiscal quarter, for every fund individually, the amount available for investment shall be determined by deducting monies required to meet operational expenses in the coming 90 days from the aggregate of cash-on-hand and projected revenues in such ensuing period. This amount shall be invested in two different categories. The first shall be secondary reserves to meet the liquidity demands of the city. These investments must be highly liquid in order that they may be turned into cash with little or no loss. These investments are usually bank money market accounts. The second category shall be somewhat longer-term investments, such as bank certificates of deposit and U.S. Treasury obligations. All investments will be in conformance with applicable state law. 
(4)  The maturity schedule on bank certificates of deposit and U.S. Treasury obligations shall take into consideration the projected expenditures and revenues of the city. The annual budget shall be a major source document for making such projections. 
(5)  The city commission shall have a monthly report made available to it on all current investments of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 4-310, 7-18-89; Ord. No. 02-05-01, 5-21-02) 
State Law reference— Authorized investments, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-80-3, 36-80-4. 
Secs. 2-205—2-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Budget, § 6.23. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-226. - Procedures for adoption of budget. 
The municipal budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by ordinance, passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the city commission. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  The municipal budget shall be introduced in writing on or before June 1 of each year by the city manager and approved no later than July 30 of each year. 
(2)  Public notice regarding the proposed budget and subsequent consideration of the budget by the commission shall be conducted as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 
(3)  The commission shall make any amendments to the budget in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 
(Code 1987, § 4-302) 
Charter reference— Action by city commission on budget, § 6.23. 
State Law reference— Budget required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; budget preparation and adoption, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-81-5, 36-81-6. 
Sec. 2-227. - Budget message. 
In addition to such requirements as are provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq., when introduced to the city commission for approval, the municipal budget shall be accompanied by a budget message which shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues together with the reasons for each change; summarize the city's debt position; and include such other material as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 4-303) 
Sec. 2-228. - Form and content of budget. 
In addition to such requirements as are provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq., the municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: 
(1)  Administration, operation and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city. 
(2)  Interest and debt redemption charges. 
(3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable. 
(4)  Cash deficits or surpluses of the preceding year. 
(5)  Contingent expenses, and such reserves as may be approved by the city commission. 
(6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the city commission. 
The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. 
(Code 1987, § 4-304) 
Sec. 2-229. - Capital program. 
A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city commission at the same time that the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents. 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements. 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement. 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
(Code 1987, § 4-305) 
Sec. 2-230. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The city manager may at any time during the fiscal year transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office, and the city commission may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
(Code 1987, § 4-306) 
Charter reference— Changes in appropriations, § 6.25. 
Sec. 2-231. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city commission may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 1987, § 4-307) 
Charter reference— Changes in appropriations, § 6.25. 
Secs. 2-232—2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.11. 
Cross reference— Planning and design review board, § 34-51 et seq.; board of appeals, § 34-76 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 46-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-301—2-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-326. - Composition, appointment, tenure. 
The downtown development authority shall consist of seven persons appointed by the commission for terms of six years each. 
(Code 1987, § 3-804(1)) 
Sec. 2-327. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on the downtown development authority shall be filled by the commission for unexpired terms only. 
(Code 1987, § 3-804(2)) 
Sec. 2-328. - Compensation. 
The members of the downtown development authority shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1987, § 3-804(3)) 
Sec. 2-329. - Officers, rules of procedure. 
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the downtown development authority shall meet and elect one of their members chairman and elect such other officers as may be necessary. The authority shall adopt rules and regulations on the governance of its proceedings. Following any adoption, the downtown development authority shall keep a correct record thereof. 
(Code 1987, § 3-804(4)) 
Sec. 2-330. - Powers. 
The downtown development authority has the powers provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
(Code 1987, § 3-804(5)) 
Secs. 2-331—2-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-06-07, adopted July 14, 1998, amended the Code by repealing div. 3, §§ 2-351—2-360, in its entirety. Former div. 3 pertained to the convention and visitor's bureau, and derived from Ord. No. 90-7, adopted December 27, 1990; Ord. No. 93-6-2, adopted July 13, 1993; Ord. No. 95-11-02, adopted December 11, 1995; Ord. No. 96-02-01, adopted April 16, 1996; and Ord. No. 96-06-02, adopted July 15, 1996. 

Secs. 2-351—2-360. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers of city, §§ 1.12, 1.13. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-7-01 , adopted Aug. 1, 2017, repealed § 6-1, which pertained to power to temporarily close business and derived from Code 1987, § 33-109. 
Sec. 6-2. - Posting of license; posting of advertisements. 
The city shall provide for all retail licensees a decalcomania to post on the premises of their places of business. Additionally, licensees shall not post more than two authorized signs in keeping with the city's sign ordinance at their places of business; nor shall they display signs advertising brand, product or price either outside or inside in such a manner as to be visible from the outside. 
(Code 1987, § 33-110; Ord. No. 14-02-02, 3-4-14 ) 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale on election days. 
As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, licensees at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold may open their places of business for such sales on all election days. 
(Code 1987, § 33-104) 
Sec. 6-4. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage for consumption by the drink on the premises, in or upon any licensed premises, except between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 1:00 a.m., on all days except for Sunday. Alcohol beverages may be consumed on the premises between the hours of 7:30 a.m. on Saturdays until 1:00 a.m. on Sundays. Notwithstanding the above, if December 31 st (New Year's Eve) falls on a Monday through Saturday, the hours for consumption are extended until 1:55 a.m. for December 31 st only. The hours for the Sunday sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises shall be in accordance with section 6-5 below. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale package alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail, in or upon any licensed premises except between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on all days, except for Sunday. The hours for the Sunday sale of package alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail, not for consumption on premises, shall be in accordance with section 6-5 below. 
(c)  All licensees under this chapter which serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink on the premises shall be closed at 1:30 a.m., and not open for business earlier than 6:00 a.m. following. 
(d)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit a place of business to sell alcoholic beverages on any other day or times during or upon which the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 94-06-02, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 94-06-01, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 11-11-01, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 17-1-01 , 1-17-17) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 6-52. 
State Law reference— Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20; § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 6-5. - Same—Sunday sales. 
(a)  The sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be permitted with food service at tables and booths in dining facilities at specially licensed establishments between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays. 
(b)  The additional annual fee for such special license shall be in the amount of $600.00 and be payable in the same manner as regular licenses permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on the other six days of the week; and such special license shall be issuable only in conjunction with such regular licenses and for establishments whereat both food and alcoholic beverages are sold; and be subject to all other conditions and requirements for application, consideration, approval and operations as such regular licenses. 
(c)  The applicant for such special license shall submit such documentation as may be required by the city manager to satisfy the city that the statutory mandate respecting food sales has obtained at the establishment for the preceding 12 months collectively or, in the alternative, such applicant may elect to submit within 20 days following the conclusion of each calendar quarter after issuance of such special license, a certificate from a certified public accountant that said statutory mandate was obtained within the preceding calendar quarter; the failure to submit as aforesaid being grounds sufficient for refusal or revocation, as applicable. 
(d)  The Sunday sale of package alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail, not for consumption on premises, shall be from 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 94-06-01, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 11-11-01, 12-6-11) 
State Law reference— Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 6-6. - No alcoholic beverage possession or consumption on certain premises. 
No alcoholic beverage, (to include, without limitation, malt beverages, distilled spirits, liquors, and wines), may be possessed or consumed, (or permitted to be possessed or consumed), upon the premises of any business, within the city, which provides food service, or live or recorded entertainment, or facilities for dancing, unless such business shall have a valid city license for the sale of such possessed or consumed beverage, and such possessed or consumed beverage is purchased upon such premises in conformity with the city license. The provisions of this section shall apply jointly and severally to any such person(s) possessing or consuming such beverage in violation hereof, and any business license holder, their managers, their agents, or employees permitting such possession or consumption in violation of this section. There is specifically and expressly excluded from the operation of this section, private gatherings upon business premises where food service or live or recorded entertainment are not usually provided by such business. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-02, 7-15-99; Ord. No. 05-01-02, 1-18-05) 
Sec. 6-7. - Removal of partially consumed and sealed bottle of wine from restaurant by patron. 
Notwithstanding any other contrary provision of law, any restaurant which is licensed by the City of Helen to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
State Law reference— Removal of wine from restaurant by patron, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(Ord. No. 09-12-02, 1-5-10) 
Sec. 6-8. - Permit of beer and wine sales at city special events. 
Special outdoor areas where beer and/or wine may be dispensed and consumed shall be permitted only within the delineated boundaries of a special city event subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The dispensing or consumption of beer and/or wine in designated outdoor areas shall be permitted only at special city events, when, by the adoption of a resolution of the city commission, an event is designated by the city commission, and solely within the commission's discretion, as a "special city event" for the purpose of fostering the city's economic development and/or tourism and to recognize events of historical significance. The city special event designation is intended for, and shall be issued only for a city special event. The designation is not for intended for events held by individuals or private businesses. 
(2)  In the event that an event is characterized as a special city event by the city commission, designated outdoor cafe areas may be outlined or designated where beer and/or wine may be served and consumed within the delineated boundaries of the event. 
(3)  Whenever any event will include the dispensing and consumption of beer and/or wine, any vendor of beer and/or wine who seeks a permit to sell within the delineated boundaries of the special city event will, at least 45 days prior to the event, meet with the Helen City Manager and chief of police; in order to review the plans, conditions and restrictions pertaining to the event. Prior to the issuance of an alcohol service permit for the event, the vendor shall sign a statement of understanding of and agreement to the terms and conditions imposed on the event. Such statement shall become a part of the conditions of the alcohol service permit for the event. 
(4)  The dispensing of beer and/or wine at any special outdoor cafe area shall be restricted to vendors possessing a valid city alcoholic beverage license for the sale of beer and wine on premises. The name of such licensee(s) and the current license number, as such appear on the license, shall be required as a part of the application for a special event vending permit. 
(5)  Every area where beer and/or wine is consumed shall be conspicuously posted at all times at each point of entrance/exit with signs stating the following: "The possession of alcoholic beverages beyond this point is prohibited." The letters of such signs shall not be less than three inches in height and one-half inch in width and shall be in black letters on a contrasting light background. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for patrons of any area(s) of a special event in which beer and/or wine is permitted to bring into or take outside the designated area(s) any alcoholic beverage or to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person outside the designated area where beer and/or wine is permitted. 
(7)  The application to dispense beer and/or wine at a special city event at which beer and/or wine is permitted shall include, in addition to the map identifying the outermost boundaries of the event, a map no smaller than 8½ by 11 inches in size, clearly identifying the area(s), including all public streets and sidewalks within and adjacent to the area(s), where the consumption of beer and/or wine is proposed; and the area from which the vendor proposes to conduct beer and/or wine sales. 
(8)  The fee for a permit to dispense and/or consume beer and/or wine at a city special event shall be set by the city commission no less that 45 days prior to the event and shall be made payable to City of Helen. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any person dispensing and/or consuming beer and/or wine in accordance with this section shall comply with all other laws and ordinances pertaining to the sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 13-05-01, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 14-08-01, 8-19-14 ) 
Secs. 6-9—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority relative to licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

Sec. 6-26. - Expiration, renewal, payment of fee. 
(a)  All licenses to manufacture and distribute alcoholic beverages shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. 
(b)  All applications for the renewal of licenses to manufacture or distribute alcoholic beverages shall be submitted to the city on or before December 1 of the year in which the license was issued, and the reapplication must be approved or disapproved within 30 days of December 1 of that year. 
(c)  The license fee shall be due and payable upon submission of the application to the city. Payment may be made only by certified check. If the commission fails to approve the application, the license fee shall be refunded. 
(Code 1987, § 33-105) 
Sec. 6-27. - Fines and/or suspension and/or revocation. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are the mere grant of privilege to carry on a business, and such licenses are subject to being revoked and annulled by the city. Each license issued hereunder is subject to the laws of State of Georgia and the ordinances of the city. 
(a)  The following shall be grounds for fines and/or suspension and/or revocation of a license to manufacture and distribute alcoholic beverages. 
(1)  The violation by the license holder or an employee of any state or federal law or regulation, or any ordinance of this city other than traffic violations. 
(2)  The failure of the license holder or an employee to report promptly to the police department any violation of the law or a municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring inside the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or an employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(4)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  The violation of any state or municipal law or regulation pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  The failure of a license holder or an employee to properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification," in this section, means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or ID card issued by a governmental entity. 
(7)  A license holder or an employee knowingly selling or furnishing alcoholic beverages to any person who is visibly and noticeably intoxicated. 
(8)  The furnishing of fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license and/or the failure to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter, and required in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The minimum penalties for any violation of section 6-27 by a license holder or its employee shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a first offense in a one-year period, a minimum fine of $300.00. 
(2)  For a second offense within a one year period, a minimum fine of $600.00 
(3)  For a third offense within a one year, a minimum fine of $1000.00. For a third offense within a one-year period, a license holder's license shall also be suspended for a minimum of three business days. 
(4)  The above are the minimum penalties to be imposed in the event of a violation. The city manager or his designee may impose increased monetary fines, suspend, or revoke the alcoholic beverage license of the license holder in accordance with this code section. Factors to be considered by the city manager in the imposition of disciplinary action to be taken against a license holder shall include: 
a.  The disciplinary history of the licensee. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or corrective steps being taken by licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(c)  If the city manager or his designee makes a finding a violation has occurred under this code section, the city manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an alcoholic beverage license and/or to impose monetary penalties upon the licensee under the conditions set forth in this section. However, no revocation, suspension or any other penalty shall be imposed without first providing a licensee the notice, hearing and appeal rights as more specifically provided in section 6-29, or unless an emergency situation is presented, such that immediate suspension or revocation of the license is determined appropriate as provided in subsection (d) below. 
(d)  If the city manager or the chief of police of the city makes the determination that an emergency situation is presented where there is a danger to human life, imminent criminal activity or other imminent danger to the peace, prosperity and welfare of the citizens of Helen, the city manager or the chief of police may immediately suspend or revoke a license by the delivery of a written order thereof to the license holder's premises, so long as a hearing thereon as specified in section 6-29(c) below is held within five business days of the emergency situation. 
(Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-7-01 , adopted Aug. 1, 2017, repealed the former § 6-27 and enacted a new § 6-27 as set out herein. The former § 6-27 pertained to revocation and derived from Code 1987, § 33-106. 
Sec. 6-28. - Imposition of fine. 
Grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a license under this article also constitute grounds for the imposition of a fine against a licensee. A fine may be imposed by the commission concurrent with or in lieu of suspension, but not revocation, of a license. No fine shall exceed $1,000.00; but each violation, even if arising out of the same transaction, may incur a fine. 
(Code 1987, § 33-107; Ord. No. 11-3-03, 4-5-11; Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Sec. 6-29. - Notice and hearing process; appeal. 
(a)  Prior to imposing any sanction authorized by section 6-27 of this chapter, the city manager shall provide a written order to the licensee specifying the licensee's alleged violations of this chapter and the penalty to be imposed. Written notice of such order shall be delivered to the premises of the license holder by an officer of the Helen City Police Department. Delivery of the written notice to those premises shall be considered legal service of process. 
(b)  The written order issued by the city manager in accordance with the procedures outlined above shall be stayed for a period of ten days after the service of the order. During this ten-day period, the licensee shall have the right to file a written hearing request with the city commission, stating the grounds for appeal of the city manager's order. If the licensee files a timely request for hearing, the city manager's order shall be stayed until the licensee's hearing is held or the request is withdrawn. If the licensee does not file a timely request, the city manager's order shall become final, and the sanctions imposed against the license in said order shall begin on the 10 th day after service of the order, and any fines imposed shall be due and payable immediately. 
(c)  If timely written hearing request is filed, a hearing shall be held before the Helen City Commission to determine if the violations have occurred. The date of the hearing shall be not less than five nor more than 30 days after the date of the filing of the written request for hearing. All testimony shall be sworn. The city manager or his designee will bear the burden of proof by preponderance of the evidence that the violation(s) have occurred. Following the hearing, the city commission may sustain, overrule or modify the order of the city manager. If the city commission does not find by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation as cited occurred, the city commission will overrule the order. Otherwise, if the city commission finds by preponderance of the evidence that the violation(s) occurred, the city commission will sustain or modify the city manager's order, based upon the evidence presented in the hearing. 
(d)  The findings of the city commission hearing shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the superior court of White County. 
(Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-7-01 , adopted Aug. 1, 2017, repealed the former § 6-29 and enacted a new § 6-29 as set out herein. The former § 6-29 pertained to commission hearing and derived from Ord. No. 89-3, § 33-108, adopted June 20, 1989. 
Sec. 6-30. - Employee licensing. 
The following provisions apply to all establishments holding a license under this chapter: 
(1)  This section has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community; to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and identification of employees of licensees under this chapter that are likely to serve alcohol or interact in a substantial way with those patrons purchasing or consuming alcohol from these licensees; and to ensure that such employees, having access to and control of alcoholic beverages and their distribution, are identifiable in the event of any reports of incidents occurring at establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Any person obtaining his or her initial serving license permit within the city shall be required to watch a mandatory training video on the responsible service of alcohol at Helen City Hall. The training video will be available for viewing twice weekly at city hall and only at those times designated by the city administrative staff. The serving license permit will not be issued without completing the training. 
(3)  This section does not apply to employees whose duties are limited solely to those of a bus person, cook or dishwasher; or to a restaurant host or hostess whose job consists solely of greeting and seating customers, and who does not serve, sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  No licensee under this chapter shall allow any employee required to hold a serving license on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid license permit of such employee in accordance with this chapter. The employee's photo identification serving license must clearly be displayed and visible on their person at all times when the employee is working. 
(5)  If any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee and permit holder shall immediately notify the city of this change in employment, in writing, and upon obtaining further employment in the city for a position as stated above, the permit holder shall notify the city of his or her new place of employment, in writing, within 72 hours. 
(6)  All serving license permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(7)  Violations of this section may be cited and punished in accordance with section 1-7 of this Code, and may also serve as grounds for suspension and/or revocation of licensees in accordance with section 6-27 of this Code. 
(8)  The fee for this permit is to be set by the city manager. 
(9)  This Municipal Code section specifically incorporates the provisions of Official Code of Georgia § 3-3-24. Persons under 18 years of age not to be allowed or required to serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages; exceptions 
a.  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
b.  This code section (O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24) shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 11-04-01, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 11-08-01, 8-16-11; Ord. No. 13-07-01, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Sec. 6-31. - Consumption sales only, full service grocery store exception. 
Except as otherwise provided herein (specifically, sections 6-71 and 6-73 of this Code), persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall also not hold a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package, with the exception that a full service grocery store, as defined herein, may hold both types of licenses. A full service grocery store is defined as a retail market which meets all of the following criteria: 
(a)  A retail market that maintains at all times that it is open an inventory of saleable food products, including meat, dairy, vegetables, fruits, dry goods, and beverages; 
(b)  Has an interior floor space and storage area of at least 8,000 square feet and devotes at least 50 percent of such interior floor space for the display of food for sale products; 
(c)  Includes a full service kitchen that sells and serves prepared foods; 
(d)  Has a designated location for beer and wine pouring for on premises consumption; and 
(e)  Does not sell or offer distilled spirits or vehicular fuel. 
(Ord. No. 17-04-01 , 4-18-17; Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Secs. 6-32—6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MALT BEVERAGES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-51. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of malt beverages within the city the following excise tax: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the city. 
(c)  Due date, required report. The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person having possession or custody of information relating to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(e)  Deficiency. 
(1)  Determination of deficiency. If the city has cause to believe that the report of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the deficiency shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus 3%, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue on the due date for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, and shall continue until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination and service. The city shall give to the person written notice of the determination. The notice may be serviced personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when mailed with a certificate of service stamped thereon and a copy retained in city files or when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed 
within three years after the 20th day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1987, § 4-102; Ord. No. 16-8-01 ; 9-6-16) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Malt beverage excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.; Rate of interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A., § 48-2-40. 
Sec. 6-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-06-02, adopted July 19, 1994, deleted former § 6-52, relative to hours of sale for malt beverages, and enacted new provisions regarding the hours of sale for alcoholic beverages which have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 6-4. The provisions of former § 6-52 derived from Code 1987, § 33-101(7). 
Sec. 6-53. - Sanitary condition of premises. 
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of this city and the laws of this state. 
(Code 1987, § 33-101(6)) 
Secs. 6-54—6-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING OF BREWERS AND DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General authority relative to licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20; local licensing of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq. 

Sec. 6-66. - License required. 
Each brewer, wholesale dealer and retail dealer of malt beverages, not exempted by state law from municipal licensing requirements, who does business within this municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. 
(Code 1987, § 33-101(1)) 
State Law reference— Local license required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40. 
Sec. 6-67. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each place of business engaged in malt beverage brewing, distribution and selling of malt beverages at wholesale or retail or for consumption on premises, whose place of business is located within the city shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1987, § 33-101(2); Ord. No. 99-10-01, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 01-05-01, 6-5-01) 
State Law reference— License fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42. 
Sec. 6-68. - Publication of notice of application for license; background investigation. 
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages within this city shall be acted upon by the city commission until after notice has been run two times in the county legal organ. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business and shall be run at the applicant's expense. Additionally, a background investigation of the applicant shall be conducted and a public hearing held on the application prior to commission action. A fee of $100.00 shall be charged the applicant to defray the city's expense in conducting the background investigation. 
(Code 1987, § 33-101(3); Ord. No. 98-06-04, 6-25-98) 
Sec. 6-69. - Factors for commission consideration. 
The full commission in passing upon an initial application for a malt beverage license shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny the application: 
(1)  The proximity of other establishments selling malt or alcoholic beverages to the proposed location. 
(2)  The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location. 
(3)  The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location. 
(4)  Whether the proposed location has adequate offstreet parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(5)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(6)  The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location. 
(7)  The information set forth in the application. 
(8)  Whether any malt or alcoholic beverage license previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the city commission. 
(9)  Whether the applicant has ever sold malt or alcoholic beverages illegally in the city. 
(Code 1987, § 33-101(4)) 
Sec. 6-70. - Change of location. 
A license issued under the provisions of this division shall permit the sale or manufacture of malt beverages only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 1987, § 33-101(5)) 
Sec. 6-71. - Sale of growlers and/or wine package. 
(a)  Growlers means a bottle or can not to exceed two liters and not less than 12 ounces that is filled with beer from a keg by a duly authorized licensee or employee of said licensee, with said licensee holding a package beer license issued by the city. 
(b)  Package beer/wine license. License holders who hold a license to conduct retail sale of beer beverages and/or wine in its original package. 
(c)  Growlers and/or wine may also be sold by the package from premises licensed for consumption on the premises, provided that the package wine and/or beer licenses are also obtained. Growlers and/or wine package sales are the only type of package sales permitted from premises which are also licensed for consumption on the premises. 
(d)  The sale of growlers, as defined above, is authorized for those licensees holding a package beer license, but is not authorized under any circumstances for those licensees also holding a package distilled spirits license; or for those licensees who offer for sale vehicular fuel. The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of package as contemplated by O.C.G.A., § 3-3-26. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale only if securely sealed. In order to be securely sealed, the growler must be sealed with a tamper proof cap or seal. 
(Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-7-01 , adopted Aug. 1, 2017, repealed the former § 6-29 and enacted a new § 6-29 as set out herein. The former § 6-29 pertained to sale of growlers and derived from Ord. No. 14-02-01, adopted Feb. 18, 2014 and Ord. No. 17-04-01 , adopted April 18, 2017. 
Sec. 6-72. - Ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license. 
(a)  The holder of a package beer and wine license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of wine, beer and malt beverages, offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. An ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license is not authorized for those licensees also holding a package distilled spirits license, or those licensees who offer for sale vehicular fuel. 
(b)  Wine, beer and malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine, beer or malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with education classes and sampling designed to promote wine, beer and malt beverage appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine, beer or malt beverage tasting for customers shall be conducted only at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Such sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day, on the days of the week authorized by State law to sell beer and wine by the package, for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(e)  The holder of an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes not more than two times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(f)  Wine, beer and malt beverage bottles shall be opened by the licensee or an employee only, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(g)  No open containers of wine, beer or malt beverage shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(h)  Such samplings and tasting is permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises only. 
(i)  The annual fee for an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license shall be set and may be revised by resolution of the city commission. 
( Ord. No. 14-04-01, 4-15-14 ; Ord. No. 17-04-01 , 4-18-17; Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Sec. 6-73. - Brewpubs. 
(a)  Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation and such other limitation as are prescribed in the Official Code of Georgia. 
(b)  No individual or entity shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without also obtaining a proper license from the Department of Revenue in the manner proscribed, and each brewpub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements; 
(c)  A brewpub license will authorize the holder of such license to manufacture malt beverages in this state shall include the right to sell up to 3,000 barrels of malt beverages per year produced at the brewer's licensed premises to individuals who are on such premises for: 
(1)  Consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 288 ounces of malt beverages per consumer per day. 
(3)  A license fee of $600.00 shall apply to brewpubs for the sale of malt beverages produced at their licensed premises. Additional licensing fees shall apply should the brewpub intend to sell any alcoholic beverages not produced on premises. 
(d)  A Brewpub may sell malt beverages brewed or manufactured on its premises on all days and at all times that sales of malt beverages by retailers are lawful within the city, including, but not limited to, Sundays. 
(e)  Any brewer engaging in sales of malt beverages pursuant to this Code section shall remit all state and local sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority, and comply with all other regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue and the Official Code of Georgia. 
(f)  A brewpub license holder may also obtain a package license for selling wine or malt beverage growlers for malt beverages not produced on its premises, in accordance with section 6-71 of this Code for consumption off the premises, provided the brewpubs remits payment for the package license required. 
(g)  A Brewpubs license holder may obtain an on premises consumption license and offer for on premises consumption any other alcoholic beverages, including wine, distilled spirits, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises; and that the brewpubs obtains and remits payment to the city for the on premises consumption required. 
(Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Secs. 6-74—6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WINE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-101. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of wine an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The wine excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in wine in the city. 
(c)  Due date, required report. The wine excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of wine sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person having possession or custody of information relating to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(e)  Deficiency. 
(1)  Determination of deficiency. If the city has cause to believe that the report of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the deficiency shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue on the due date for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, and shall continue until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination and service. The city shall give to the person written notice of the determination. The notice may be serviced personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when mailed with a certificate of service stamped thereon and a copy retained in city files or when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1987, § 4-105; Ord. No. 16-8-01 , 9-6-16) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Local wine excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq.; Rate of interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A., § 48-2-40. 
Sec. 6-102. - Hours of sale. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the sale at retail or wholesale of wine except during those hours authorized in section 6-4 and section 6-5. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(7); Ord. No. 91-5, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 94-06-02, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 17-04-01 , 4-18-17) 
State Law reference— Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-103. - Sanitary condition of premises. 
All premises used for the manufacture, distribution and selling of wine at wholesale or retail shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of this city and the laws of this state. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(6)) 
Sec. 6-104. - Farm winery annual fee(s). 
Each farm winery tasting room license, at each location, as defined and regulated under section 6-105, shall pay to the city a fee of $600.00 for the operation of a tasting room license only, where such tasting room serves solely as an outlet for the promotion of that farm winery's wine. Should the farm winery also seek authorization from the Revenue Commissioner for the sale of alcoholic beverages not produced by a farm winery for the on premises consumption of alcohol, pursuant to O.C.G.A., § 3-6-21.3, the farm winery shall pay to the city the same license fee(s) that would be applicable to any other licensee seeking licensure for on premises consumption, including the fee for Sunday sales, if Sunday sales are requested. 
(Ord. No. 17-04-01 , 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-04-01 , adopted April 18, 2017, repealed the former § 6-104 and enacted a new § 6-104 as set out herein. The former § 6-104 pertained to annual fee and derived from Ord. No. 95-04-01, adopted May 16, 1995. 
Sec. 6-105. - Farm winery tasting room, licensing. 
(a)  The provisions of this section provide a licensing process for the business of operating a Georgia farm winery tasting room in conformance with the laws of the State of Georgia and City of Helen. 
(b)  Definitions. "Farm winery" and "tasting room" shall be defined in accordance with O.C.G.A., § 3-6-21.1 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended. 
(c)  Types of Sales. Wine sold under the provisions of the Georgia Farm Wineries statutes, shall be sold for retail purposes only, sold only in accordance with the state requirements codified at O.C.G.A., § 3-6-21.1 et seq. and incorporated herein by reference, and only under the provisions of a city farm winery license issued hereunder. Sales for the on premises consumption of alcohol may be allowed under a city farm winery license to the extent consistent with the law, rules, and regulations of the State of Georgia, and upon payment of applicable fees as identified in section 6-104. 
(d)  Under this code section, the licensee shall be authorized to carry on the business of operating a farm winery tasting room in their licensed premises. For the purposes of this section, all areas within the city currently, or in the future, zoned PUD, C-1, C-2, C-3, or H/M as defined in chapter 34, "Land Development Code" of the 1994 Helen City Code, are designated as special entertainment districts pursuant to O.C.G.A., § 3-6-21.2. Such designation is made solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in farm winery tasting rooms. 
(Ord. No. 17-04-01 , 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-04-01 , adopted April 18, 2017, repealed the former § 6-105 and enacted a new § 6-105 as set out herein. The former § 6-105 pertained to farm winery tasting room and derived from Ord. No. 95-04-01, adopted May 16, 1995. 
Sec. 6-106. - Sunday sales. 
All farm winery tasting rooms, as defined in section 6-105 of the 1994 Helen City Code, and located within a special entertainment district may offer wine for on-premises consumption or in closed packages for consumption off premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, as permitted by O.C.G.A., § 3-6-21.2. 
(Ord. No. 95-04-01, 5-16-95; Ord. No. 17-04-01 , 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-04-01 , adopted April 18, 2017, changed the title of § 6-106 from "Hours of Sunday sales" to "Sunday sales." 
Secs. 6-107—6-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local licensing of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

Sec. 6-121. - Required. 
Each person engaged in the manufacture, distribution and selling of wine at wholesale or retail. not exempted by state law from municipal licensing regulations. shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. Operating a farm winery tasting room as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(b) shall be construed as selling wine at retail. License Holders who have a License to conduct retail sales of wine shall also be authorized to sell growlers, in accordance with section 6-71 of this Code, and in compliance with the requirements thereof. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(1); Ord. No. 14-02-01, 2-18-14 ) 
Sec. 6-122. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each place of business engaged in the manufacture, distribution and selling of wine at wholesale or retail or for consumption on premises, shall be $500.00. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(2); Ord. No. 99-10-01, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 01-05-01, 6-5-01) 
Sec. 6-123. - Publication of notice of application for license; background investigation. 
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of wine within this municipality shall be acted upon by the city commission until after notice has been run two times in the county legal organ. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business and shall be run at the applicant's expense. Additionally, a background investigation of the applicant shall be conducted and a public hearing held on the application prior to commission action. A fee of $100.00 shall be charged the applicant to defray the city's expense in conducting the background investigation. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(3); Ord. No. 98-06-04, 6-25-98) 
Sec. 6-124. - Factors for commission consideration. 
In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to a person engaged in the manufacture, distribution and selling of wine at wholesale or retail, the city commission shall be guided by the same considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(4)) 
Sec. 6-125. - Change of location. 
A license issued under the provisions of this division shall permit the manufacture, distribution, and selling of wine at wholesale or retail only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(5)) 
Sec. 6-126. - Ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license. 
(a)  The holder of a package beer and wine license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of wine, beer and malt beverages, offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. An ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license is not authorized for those licensees also holding a package distilled spirits license, or those licensees who offer for sale vehicular fuel. 
(b)  Wine, beer and malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine, beer or malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with education classes and sampling designed to promote wine, beer and malt beverage appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine, beer or malt beverage tasting for customers shall be conducted only at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Such sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day, on the days of the week authorized by State law to sell beer and wine by the package, for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(e)  The holder of an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes not more than two times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(f)  Wine, beer and malt beverage bottles shall be opened by the licensee or an employee only, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(g)  No open containers of wine, beer or malt beverage shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(h)  Such samplings and tasting is permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises only. 
(i)  The annual fee for an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license shall be set and may be revised by resolution of the city commission. 
( Ord. No. 14-04-01, 4-15-14 ; Ord. No. 17-7-01 , 8-1-17) 
Secs. 6-127—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTILLED SPIRITS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1 et seq.; local regulation thereof, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-49, 3-4-110. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-151. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of distilled spirits, an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The distilled spirits excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in distilled spirits in the city. 
(c)  Due date, required report. The distilled spirits excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of distilled spirits sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person having possession or custody of information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(e)  Deficiency. 
(1)  Determination of deficiency. If the city has cause to believe that the report of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the deficiency shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue on the due date for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, and shall continue until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination and service. The city shall give to the person written notice of the determination. The notice may be serviced personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when mailed with a certificate of service stamped thereon and a copy retained in city files or when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1987, § 4-103; Ord. No. 16-8-01 , 9-6-16) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; Rate of interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A., § 48-2-40. 
Sec. 6-152. - Distilled spirits by the drink excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the purchase of distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink an excise tax equal to three percent of the purchase price. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The distilled spirits by the drink excise tax shall be paid by each purchaser at the time of collection for beverages served. 
(c)  Collection, due date, required report. The distilled spirits by the drink excise tax shall be collected by every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. All amount of such tax collected by each licensee shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which it was collected and payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the gross receipt of the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of tax collected on such drinks. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(e)  Deficiency. 
(1)  Determination of deficiency. If the city has cause to believe that the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the deficiency shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue on the due date for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, and shall continue until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination and service. The city shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be serviced personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when mailed with a certificate of service stamped thereon and a copy retained in city files or when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(f)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  Estimates of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the city official. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed above. 
(2)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(g)  Penalty for nonpayment. Any licensee who fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the tax owed in addition to interest as set forth above. 
(h)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person or persons having possession or custody of information relating to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Code 1987, § 4-104; Ord. No. 16-8-01 , 9-6-16) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130 et seq.; Rate of interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A., § 48-2-40. 
Sec. 6-153. - Hours of sale. 
It shall be unlawful to sell distilled spirits except during those hours authorized in section 6-4 and section 6-5. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103(7); Ord. No. 94-06-02, 7-19-94) 
State Law reference— Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-154. - Sanitary condition of premises. 
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of distilled spirits shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of this city and the laws of this state. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103) 
Secs. 6-155—6-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE FOR MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local license for distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-40 et seq., 3-4-90 et seq. 

Sec. 6-171. - Required. 
Each manufacturer, wholesale distributor and retail distributor of distilled spirits, not exempted by state law from municipal licensing regulations, who does business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103(1)) 
Sec. 6-172. - Fees established. 
(a)  The annual business license fee for each manufacturer and distributor of distilled spirits which are to be consumed off the premises shall be $5,000.00. 
(b)  The annual business license fee for each distributor of distilled spirits, which are to be consumed on premises, shall be $2,500.00. 
(c)  The annual business license fee for each distributor of distilled spirits, whose place of business is located outside the corporate limits of this municipality, shall be $100.00. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103(2); Ord. No. 99-10-01, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 01-05-01, 6-5-01) 
State Law reference— Limitations on fees, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 6-173. - Publication of notice of application for license; background investigation. 
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of distilled spirits within this municipality shall be acted upon by the city commission until after notice shall have been run two times in the county legal organ. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business and shall be run at applicant's expense. Additionally, a background investigation of the applicant shall be conducted and a public hearing held on the application prior to commission action. A fee of $100.00 shall be charged the applicant to defray the city's expense in conducting the background investigation. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103(3); Ord. No. 98-06-04, 6-25-98) 
Sec. 6-174. - Factors for commission consideration. 
In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to manufacture or sell distilled spirits, the city commission shall be guided by the same considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the manufacture or sale of malt beverages. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103(4)) 
Sec. 6-175. - Change of location. 
A license issued under the provisions of this division shall permit the sale or manufacture of distilled spirits only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103(5)) 
Sec. 6-176—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOTEL—IN ROOM SERVICE LICENSE 

Sec. 6-181. - License requirements. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any hotel (as the term " hotel" is commonly used), inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire, may provide "in-room service" of alcoholic beverages if such establishment: 
(1)  Holds a valid city retail package or a valid consumption on the premises license; and 
(2)  Has been authorized to provide "in-room service" by the state revenue commissioner. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "in-room service" consists of: 
(1)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of the hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and 
(2)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in-room service of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations in this chapter relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages. In-room service sales shall be authorized only on such days and only during such hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages is otherwise authorized. 
(d)  All alcoholic beverages sold pursuant to this section shall be purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and shall be subject to all taxes imposed under this chapter, including the excise tax on mixed drinks where alcoholic beverages are sold as a mixed drink or the ingredients for a mixed drink. 
(e)  All hotels having in-room service shall comply with all requirements promulgated by the Department of Revenue of the State of Georgia dealing with storage of alcoholic beverages and records required to be maintained in order to provide hotel in-room service. 
(f)  No hotel-motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a license to do so. All such licensees must have a valid city retail package or a valid consumption on the premises license. An additional license fee of $600.00 shall be imposed for in-room service licenses. 
(Ord. No. 17-1-01 , 1-17-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-1-01 , adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended the Code by the addition of Art. VI, § 6-176; however, said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-181, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-03-01, adopted April 15, 2008, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 10, §§ 10-1, 10-2, 10-21—10-36, 10-41—10-48, 10-51—10-59, 10-61—10-77, 10-81—10-83, 10-91—10-96, and 10-101, and adding a new ch. 10. Former ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 05-11-01, adopted December 6, 2005. The current chapter is the same as the animal chapter adopted by White County, Georgia, by Res. No. 2005-14 and subsequently amended. Therefore, the history notes following each section indicate amendments by White County resolution, rather than amendment by city ordinance. 
Charter reference— Power of city to regulate animals, § 1.13(28). 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 26-51 et seq. 
State Law reference— Animal control authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(3); animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
Adequate food and water. Food and water in sufficient quantity and appropriate for the particular type of animal necessary to prevent starvation, dehydration or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
Animal control officer. An individual appointed by the county board of commissioners to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter including but not limited to the animal control officer, designated agents, employees, the sheriff, the sheriff's deputies or other county law enforcement officers. 
Animal shelter. A facility: 
(1)  Operated by the county board of commissioners or under contract to the board of Commissioners for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals. 
(2)  A veterinary hospital or clinic, which operates for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals in addition to its customary purposes. 
(3)  Operated, owned or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
Dangerous dog. A dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority has: 
(1)  Attacked, endangered, bitten or has inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(2)  On more than one occasion severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting; or 
(4)  When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or off the owner's property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by animal control. 
Dead animals. The carcasses or parts of carcasses of animals, regardless of whether they are considered to be farm livestock, poultry, equines, domesticated animals, pets or any other type of animal regardless of the cause of death of such animals. 
Equine. A member of the Equidae species, including horses, mules and asses. 
Governing authority. The county board of commissioners. 
Humane care. The provision of adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter and wholesome food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Humane society. An unincorporated nonprofit organization existing for the purpose of prevention of cruelty to animals. 
Kennel. An establishment, other than an animal shelter, where dogs or cats are maintained for boarding, holding, training or similar purposes for a fee. 
Livestock. Animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle and other grazing animals and all ratites, including, but not limited to, ostriches, emus and rheas. 
Local government. The county, or when appropriate, the City of Cleveland or the City of Helen. 
Owner. A natural person or any legal entity such as a corporation, partnership, firm or trust which owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, or has custody of an animal. 
Person. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, the state, the county or the cities of Cleveland and Helen. 
Pet dealer. A person who sells, offers to sell, exchanges or offers for adoption dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles or other animals customarily obtained as pets. However, a person who sells only animals that are produced and raised, not to exceed 30 animals a year, shall not be considered a pet dealer under this chapter. Operation of a veterinary hospital or clinic by a licensed veterinarian shall not constitute the veterinarian as a pet dealer, kennel or stable under this article. 
Potentially dangerous dog. A dog which, when unprovoked, 
(1)  Engages in behavior that requires a defensive action by a person to prevent bodily injury, which occurs off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog attack provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by animal control; or 
(2)  Has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury or otherwise caused injury while attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
Proper enclosure. An enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog securely confined indoors or outdoors in an enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a top. If the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements. 
Public or private animal refuge. A facility that harbors unwanted animals of any breed including crossbreeds. 
Public roads. A street, road or highway including the full width of the right-of-way which is open to the use of the public for vehicular travel. 
Running at large. Livestock not under manual control of a person on public roads or on property not belonging to the owner unless by permission of the owner of such property. 
Severe injury. A physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Stable. A building, structure or other enclosure where equines are maintained for boarding, holding, training, breeding, riding, pulling vehicles or other similar purposes and a fee is charged for maintaining such equines or for the use of such equines. 
Sterilization. The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-2. - Obstruction, interference or hindrance of duties. 
Whoever knowingly and willfully resists, obstructs or opposes an animal control officer in the lawful discharge of official duties by offering or doing violence to the person of such shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Secs. 10-3—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE OR STRAYING 

Sec. 10-21. - Legislative intent; county livestock pounds. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners has found and declared a necessity for a uniform county livestock law embracing all public roads and property in the county. 
(b)  The county commissioners shall provide, or contract for the provision of, truck transportation, establish and maintain suitable places for the keeping of impounded livestock until sold, redeemed or otherwise disposed. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-22. - Permitting livestock to run at large or stray; releasing impounded livestock; penalty. 
(a)  No owner shall permit livestock to run at large on public roads or any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock except by permission of the owner of such property. 
(b)  Any owner of livestock who intentionally or knowingly permits livestock to run at large on public roads or property not belonging to the owner, unless by permission of the owner of such property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, the owner of the livestock shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-23. - Impoundment of livestock running at large. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to impound livestock found to be running at large. 
(b)  Owners or operators of farms may also impound livestock. If an owner or operator of a farm impounds livestock, it shall be their duty to notify the owner of such livestock immediately. If the owner of the livestock is unknown and is not determined within three days, the person who impounds the livestock shall notify the animal control officer who shall transport the livestock to a county facility as provided for in section 10-21. The animal control officer shall then follow the procedure set out in this chapter as if the animal control officer had originally impounded such livestock. Owners or operators shall receive the feed and care fee allowed in section 10-30. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-24. - Caring for an impounded animal. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person impounding an animal under section 10-23(b) to make reasonable and proper arrangements to provide the impounded animal with humane care and adequate and necessary veterinary services. 
(b)  Any person impounding an animal under this article or providing care for an impounded animal shall have a lien for the reasonable costs of caring for such animal. Such lien may be foreclosed in any court that is competent to hear civil cases. 
(c)  Any person impounding an animal under this article is authorized to return the animal to its owner: 
(1)  Upon payment by the owner of all costs of impoundment and care; 
(2)  Upon the entry of a consent order; 
(3)  If the impounding entity fails to provide humane care to an animal, commits cruelty to animals, or engages in dog fighting. 
(d)  A consent order shall provide conditions relating to the care and treatment of impounded animals, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The animal being given humane care and adequate and necessary veterinary services. 
(2)  The animal will not be subjected to cruelty. 
(3)  The owner complying with this article. 
(e)  The provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to an animal that was an object or instrumentality of a crime nor shall any such animal be returned to the owner without the approval of the prosecuting attorney. An agency having custody of an animal that was seized as an object or instrumentality of a crime may, with the consent of the prosecuting attorney, apply to the court having jurisdiction over the offense for an order authorizing such agency to dispose of the animal prior to trial of the criminal case. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-25. - Notice of impoundment and sale of livestock. 
(a)  Upon the impoundment of livestock, the animal control officer shall serve a notice of impoundment upon the owner, advising the owner of the location where the livestock is being held, the amount due because of the impounding. The notice shall further state that unless the livestock is redeemed within three days from the date of the notice, the livestock shall be offered for sale. 
(b)  In the event the owner of such livestock is unknown or cannot be found, publishing a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation, Sundays and holidays excluded, shall be service upon the owner. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
"To Whom It May Concern: 
The owner of the following described livestock impounded at ____________ / ____________ / ____________ is hereby notified and the amount due to such impounding is ____________ dollars. 
The livestock will, unless redeemed within three (3) days from the date of this notice, be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. 
Description of livestock:  _____ 

 
(c)  Unless the impounded livestock is redeemed within three days from the date of the notice of impoundment, the animal control officer shall give notice of sale. The sale shall be held not less than five days or more than ten days, excluding Sundays and holidays, from the publication date of the notice of sale. The notice of sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, excluding Sundays and holidays, and by posting a copy of the notice at the courthouse door. Such notice of sale shall be in substantially the following form: 
"(Name of owner, if known, otherwise, 'To Whom It May Concern") is hereby notified that the following described livestock will be offered at public sale to the highest cash bidder at ____________ ____________ M. (the hours of sale must be between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.) on the ____________ day of ____________ at ____________ to satisfy a claim in the sum of ____________ dollars for fees, expenses related to the feeding and care of the livestock. 
Description of livestock:  _____ 

 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-26. - Redemption of livestock before sale. 
(a)  The owner of impounded livestock shall have the right at any time before the sale to redeem the livestock by paying the impounding expenses, including fees, keeping charges, advertising or other costs incurred to the clerk of the court who shall pay all fees and costs allowed in section 10-30. 
(b)  In the event there is a dispute as to the amount of such costs and expenses, the owner may provide bond, with sureties in an amount to be determined by the animal control officer, but not exceeding the fair cash value of such livestock, conditioned upon the payment of costs and damages. Within ten days after providing bond, the owner shall institute an action to have the dispute adjudicated by the court or referred to a jury if requested by either party to the action. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-27. - Disposition of livestock not sold at auction. 
If there is no bidder for the livestock at the sale provided for in section 10-24, the animal control officer shall have the livestock slaughtered and shall dispose of the carcass. If there are funds received from the disposal, it shall be disbursed in the manner provided for in section 10-28. If there is no ready sale for the carcass, the animal control officer shall deliver the carcass to a public institution of the county or municipality within the county or to any private charitable institution, in this order, based on need. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-28. - Return and disposition of proceeds of sale. 
(a)  The animal control officer, upon making a sale or other disposal, shall make a written report to the clerk of the court including an accurate description of the livestock sold or disposed of and if sold, to whom the livestock was sold and the sale price. 
(b)  At the time of making his report, the animal control officer shall remit to the clerk of the court the entire proceeds of the sale. The clerk shall pay all costs and fees allowed in section 10-30. If there is a balance remaining, it shall be paid to the owner of such livestock subject to the owner providing satisfactory proof of ownership within 90 days from the date the animal control officer reports the sale. 
(c)  If proof of ownership is not made within 90 days from the date the animal control officer reports the sale, the clerk of the court shall pay such proceeds into the fine and forfeiture fund of the county. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all sales, disbursements and distributions made under this chapter. If the amount realized from the sale or other disposition of the livestock is insufficient to pay all fees, costs and expenses as provided for in section 10-30, the clerk shall pay the deficit from its fine and forfeiture fund. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-29. - Care of impounded animals; employment of guards. 
The animal control officer shall ensure that animals have food and water provided not less than twice a day and shall see that all milk cows and milk goats are milked twice a day. The animal control officer shall employ persons as necessary to protect, feed and care for the impounded animals. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-30. - Fees for impounding, serving notice, care and feeding, advertising and disposing of impounded animals. 
The allowable fees for impounding, serving notice, care and feeding, advertising and disposing of impounded animals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Impounding - $10.00 per animal and mileage as provided by law for the arrest and commitment of prisoners. 
(2)  Serving any notice and making report - $7.50 and mileage provided by law for executing writs in actions at law and filing a report upon the same. 
(3)  Feed and care - $5.00 per day per animal. 
(4)  Advertising or posting Notices of Sale - the same as provided by law for advertising property for sale under process. 
(5)  Sale or other disposition - $5.00 per animal. 
(6)  Report of sale - $2.50 per animal. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
ARTICLE III. - DEAD ANIMAL DISPOSAL CODE 

Section 10-31. - Abandonment of dead animals; requirements as to disposal generally; disposal in wells, open pits, or surface waters or on private or public property; disposal in city or county landfill. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is caring for an animal, which has died or has been killed, to dispose of the carcass in any fashion other than provided for in this chapter. Dead animals shall not be abandoned in wells, open pits or surface waters of any kind on private or public land. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of a dead animal on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-32. - Removal and disposition of dead animals within highway rights-of-way generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the state department of transportation to remove and dispose of the carcasses of all dead animals found within the rights-of-way of all state maintained highways within the state. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the county public works department to remove and dispose of the carcasses of all dead animals found within the rights-of-way of all county maintained roads in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(c)  Such carcasses or parts of carcasses shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with this chapter. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-33. - Methods of disposal of dead animals. 
Methods which can be used for disposal of dead animals are burning, incineration, burial, rendering or any method using appropriate disposal technology which has been approved by the state department of agriculture. Disposal of dead animals must be completed within 24 hours after death or discovery. Dead animals that are buried must have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass and must not contaminate ground or surface water. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-34. - Destruction of diseased and disabled animals. 
(a)  For purposes of ending the suffering of an abandoned domestic animal, which is hopelessly diseased or injured past recovery, a person may apply to the animal control officer for a decision regarding whether such animal should be destroyed. 
(b)  The order authorizing the destruction of such animal shall defeat an owner's claim for damages against the person destroying or procuring the destruction of such animal. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-35. - Disposal of dead animals and waste material. 
Public livestock sales markets, livestock slaughter establishments, poultry dealers, poultry sales establishments, pet dealers, kennels, bird dealers, animal shelters and stables licensed by the state department of agriculture shall have an approved method and place for the disposal of dead animals and accessory waste material which die within the premises. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-36. - Penalty for violations of chapter or rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation, which violates any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Secs. 10-37—10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS 

Sec. 10-41. - Abandonment of dead dogs—upon private property. 
No person shall intentionally abandon a dead dog on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the dog is being left and the provisions of section 10-31 are complied with in full. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-42. - Abandonment of dead dogs—upon public property or public right-of-way. 
No person shall abandon a dead dog on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place in which the dog is being left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and has been designated by county or municipal authorities as a public facility for receiving trash or refuse. The provisions of section 10-31 shall be complied with in full. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-43. - Abandonment of dogs. 
No person shall release a dog on any property, public or private, with the intention of abandoning the dog. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-44. - Liability of owner or custodian for damages done to livestock or poultry by dog. 
(a)  The owner or, if no owner can be found, the custodian exercising care and control over any dog which goes upon the land of another and causes injury, death or damage directly or indirectly to livestock or poultry shall be civilly liable to the owner of the livestock or poultry for damages, death or injury caused by the dog. The liability of the owner or custodian of the dog shall include consequential damages. 
(b)  This section is to be considered cumulative of other remedies provided by law. There is no intent to do away with or limit other causes of action, which might inure to the owner of any livestock or poultry. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-45. - Cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs. 
(a)  No person shall harm, maim, kill, attempt to kill or perform a cruel act on a dog except that a person may: 
(1)  Defend his person or property or the person or property of another from injury or damage being caused by a dog. 
(2)  Kill a dog causing injury or damage to livestock or poultry. 
(b)  The method used for killing a dog shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills a dog under the circumstances indicated in subsection (a) of this section shall incur no liability for such death. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to limit the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer, animal control officer or veterinarian. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-46. - Permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free. 
The owner or custodian of a dog in heat shall provide an enclosure for the dog and shall not allow the dog to roam or run free. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-47. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  Animal shall not include any fish nor shall such term include any pest that might be exterminated or removed from a business, residence or other structure. 
(2)  Conviction shall include pleas of guilty, nolo contendere or probation as a first offender. 
(3)  Willful neglect means the intentional withholding of food, water, and necessary veterinarian care required by an animal to prevent starvation or dehydration. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of cruelty to animals by causing death or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering to an animal by an act, an omission or willful neglect. A person committing this offense may be cited pursuant to state law and be guilty of a misdemeanor if convicted, or may be cited for a county ordinance violation, and subject to the penalties as provided hereinafter. Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties) provided, however, that: 
(1)  A person who is convicted of a second violation of this section shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties); and 
(2)  A person convicted of a third or subsequent violation of this section, or a violation which results in the death of an animal, shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(c)  A person commits the offense of aggravated cruelty to animals when knowingly and maliciously causes death or physical harm to an animal by rendering a part of such animal's body useless or by seriously disfiguring such animal. A person convicted of the offense of aggravated cruelty to animals shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(d)  Before sentencing a defendant for any conviction under this section, the sentencing judge may require psychological evaluation of the offender and shall consider the entire criminal record of the offender. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting conduct which is otherwise permitted under the laws of the state or the United States, including, but not limited to, agricultural, animal husbandry, butchering, food processing, marketing, scientific research, medical, zoological, exhibition, competitive hunting, trapping, fishing, wildlife management, pest control practices or veterinary medicine. Nor to limit in any way the authority or duty of the department of agriculture, department of natural resources, any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, veterinarian or private landowner protecting one's property. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a person from: 
(1)  Defending one's person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal. 
(2)  Injuring or killing an animal reasonably believed to constitute a threat for injury or damage to any person, property, livestock or poultry. 
(g)  The method used to injure or kill such animal shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely injures or kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in this subsection shall incur no civil or criminal liability for such injury or death. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-48. - Dog fighting. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of dog fighting when he causes or allows a dog to fight another dog for sport or gaming purposes or maintains or operates any event at which dogs are allowed or encouraged to fight one another. 
(b)  A person convicted of the offense of dog fighting shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Secs. 10-49, 10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL 

Sec. 10-51. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be declared a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article. 
(b)  A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who was: 
(1)  An adult committing a willful trespass or other tort. 
(2)  Tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog. 
(3)  Committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-52. - Jurisdiction of local governments; joint dog control services; dog control officer; animal control board or local board of health to hold hearings. 
(a)  The county's jurisdiction for the enforcement of this article shall be the unincorporated area of the county and within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland or the City of Helen subject to an agreement with each municipality for animal control services and for the joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
(b)  The person carrying out the duties of an animal control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless the person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may provide by resolution for the creation of an animal control board to hold hearings provided for in section 10-54. If such an animal control board is created, such board may hear and determine matters provided for in section 10-54. An animal control board may be created by two or more of the local governments. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-53. - Investigations by the animal control officer; notice of classification as dangerous dog. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When an animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall contact the dog's owner in writing by personal service of the notice by the animal control officer or by the county sheriff's department, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known address, of such classification or reclassification. If the owner cannot be located, or if the certified letter is refused or the return receipt is returned unsigned for any reason, or if the owner is avoiding service of the notice, then the animal control officer may give notice of the classification or reclassification to the dog's owner by way of publication. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-54. - Procedures for classification as dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs; notice; hearing. 
(a)  As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article. 
(b)  When a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. If the owner of the dog is not identified within 72 hours, the dog shall be euthanized. 
(c)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request in writing a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the governing authority of the local government having jurisdiction or the animal control board, if created. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective on the date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
(d)  When the appropriate governing body or animal control board receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The governing body or board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(e)  At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence. In addition, the governing authority or board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing body or animal control board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(f)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the governing body or animal control board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-55. - Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the county a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this section for dangerous dogs, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner notifies the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The sign required shall conform substantially to the design provided by the department of natural resources. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy for insurance in the amount of at least $500,000.00 with a maximum deductible of $100.00 issued by an insurer authorized and approved by the state insurance commissioner to transact business in the state that insures the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries including but not limited to death, and property damage inflicted by the dangerous dog. A dangerous dog has the potential of deadly force, and for this reason liability insurance policies that unduly restrict coverage as to any personal injuries and property damage as determined by the animal control officer shall be deemed to not meet the insurance requirements of this subsection. The determination of the animal control officer as to whether the exclusion unduly restricts the liability coverage will be based upon the following facts: 
a.  A dangerous dog is capable of deadly force; 
b.  The intent of this subsection is that there be liability coverage for any personal injuries including death and any property damage inflicted by the dangerous dog; 
c.  The nature of the exclusions contained within the policy; and 
d.  Any other reasonable factor that may be considered in achieving the intent of this subsection that there be liability insurance coverage for any personal injuries including death and any property damage inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of at least $500,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Georgia, and with the bond issued to the dog's owner providing that it is payable to any person or persons that have suffered any personal injuries including but not limited to death and property damage inflicted by the dangerous dog. A dangerous dog has the potential of deadly force, and for this reason surety bonds that unduly restrict coverage as to any personal injuries and property damage as determined by the animal control officer shall be deemed to not meet the liability bond requirements of this subsection. The determination of the animal control officer as to whether the exclusion unduly restricts the liability bond coverage will be based upon the following facts: 
a.  A dangerous dog is capable of deadly force; 
b.  The intent of this subsection is that there be liability bond coverage for any personal injuries and any property damage inflicted by the dangerous dog; 
c.  The nature of the exclusions contained within the bond; and 
d.  Any other reasonable factor that may be considered in achieving the intent of this subsection that there be liability bond coverage for any personal injuries and any property damage inflicted by the dangerous dog; and 
(3)  A copy of the policy (and not the insurance binder) or surety bond for approval. Insurance coverage provided by a surplus line insurance carrier, shall be accompanied by a certification by the office of the state insurance commissioner that the specific surplus line insurance carrier, including but not limited to any specific group or subgroup of Lloyd's of London, is on the approved list for surplus line insurance carriers maintained by the state insurance commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-5-25. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is loose, unconfined, attacked a human, died or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving from the animal control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the county shall register the dog as required in this section within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(f)  The issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section are maintained on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, the animal control officer shall require evidence that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-56. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside proper enclosure. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting a person. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-57. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by subsection (c) of section 10-55. 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by section 10-55. 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure. 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of subsection (a) of section 10-56. 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by section 10-55. 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure. 
(3)  Outside of a proper enclosure in violation of subsection (b) of section 10-56. 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-58. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 10-55 or section 10-56 or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under subsection (a) of section 10-57 shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties) or in the alternative may be cited pursuant to state law and if convicted shall be subject to the penalties for misdemeanors of a high and aggravated nature. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, a second conviction shall require the mandatory penalties as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (Penalties), and a third or subsequent conviction shall require the mandatory penalties hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(b)  The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 10-55 or section 10-56 or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under subsection (b) of section 10-57 shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties) or in the alternative may be cited to state law and if convicted shall be subject to the penalties for a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, a second conviction shall require the mandatory penalties as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (Penalties), and for a third or subsequent conviction shall require the mandatory penalties as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(c)  If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this chapter knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, such owner shall be guilty of a felony under state law, and may be cited pursuant to state law if the owner's dangerous dog attacks or bits a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this chapter. In the discretion of the animal control officer or any duly certified law enforcement officer, in the alternative, the owner of the dangerous dog may be cited for an ordinance violation and may be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(d)  An owner who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a felony under state law, and in the discretion of the animal control officer or any duly certified law enforcement officer, may be cited pursuant to state law if the owner's dangerous dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being under circumstances constituting a violation of this chapter. In the alternative, and in the discretion of the animal control officer, the animal control officer may cite the owner of a dangerous dog for a violation of this ordinance subsection, and the owner of the dangerous dog shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). 
(e)  In addition to the penalties for violations under subsection (c) or (d) of this section, the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer and placed in quarantine. Thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-59. - Liability for damages. 
(a)  It is the intent that the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall the county, the animal control officer or an employee or official of the county which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages: 
(1)  To any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)  By a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  By a dog that a local government has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  By a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in section 10-55(b). 
(5)  By a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in section 10-55(c). 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COUNTY ANIMAL PROTECTION CODE 

Sec. 10-61. - Licenses for pet dealers, kennel, stable or animal shelter operators; requirement; issuance; application; display of licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a pet dealer or operate a kennel, stable or animal shelter unless such person has a valid license issued by the commissioner of agriculture. Any person acting without a license in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person licensed by the commissioner of agriculture as a bird dealer shall not be required to obtain a license under this article if such person does not deal in animals other than birds. If, however, a licensed bird dealer sells, offers to sell, exchanges or offers for adoption dogs, cats, fish, reptiles or other animals customarily obtained as pets, then such dealer shall be required to obtain a license under this article in addition to his bird dealer's license. 
(c)  A license must be prominently displayed at each place of business of a pet dealer and at each kennel, stable and animal shelter. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-62. - Quarantine of animal, premises or any area by the animal control officer. 
(a)  In the control, suppression, prevention and eradication of animal diseases, the animal control officer shall be authorized to quarantine an animal, premises or any area when it is determined: 
(1)  The animals are infected with a contagious or infectious disease. 
(2)  The place is in an unsanitary condition, which might cause the spread of disease. 
(3)  An animal has or has been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease. 
(b)  The animal control officer is authorized to issue and enforce stop sale, stop use or stop movement orders to the owners or custodians of any animals, ordering them to hold animals at a designated place, when the animal control officer finds such animals to: 
(1)  Be infected with or to have been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease. 
(2)  Be held by a person whose license has expired. 
(3)  Be held by a person who has failed to obtain a license within ten days of the date on which written notice of the need to obtain a license was given by the animal control officer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, use or move any animal in violation of any quarantine or stop sale, stop use or stop removal order issued under this section. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-63. - Inspections; impoundment of animals; exceptions. 
(a)  The animal control officer is authorized to enter upon any public or private property for the purpose of inspecting the business premises of any pet dealer, animal shelter, kennel or stable to determine if such facility is licensed and for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  At any time, there is probable cause to believe that a violation of this article or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article has occurred; a law enforcement officer may apply to the appropriate court for an inspection warrant. 
(c)  The animal control officer is authorized to impound any animal: 
(1)  That has not received humane care. 
(2)  That has been subjected to cruelty in violation of section 10-47 (cruelty to animals) 
(3)  That is used or intended for use in any violation of section 10-48 (dog fighting). 
(4)  If it is determined that consent order or other order concerning the treatment of animals issued pursuant to this article is being violated. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-64. - Notification of owner; custody of animal. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person impounding an animal under this article to immediately serve the owner, if known, of such animal with a notice of impoundment. Such notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and business address of the person impounding the animal. 
(2)  The name and address of the agency retaining custody of the animal. 
(3)  A description of the animal. 
(4)  The reason the animal was impounded. 
(5)  A statement regarding the time limitations for the owner to request a hearing as provided in for section 10-65. 
(b)  The notice shall be provided by certified mail sent to the last known address of the owner. 
(c)  Whenever under this chapter service is required or permitted to be made upon a party represented by an attorney, the service shall be made upon the attorney unless the court orders service upon the party. 
(d)  If the owner of such animal is unknown or cannot be found, service of the notice of impoundment shall be made by posting the notice in a conspicuous place at the location where the animal was found and impounded and by publishing a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(e)  An animal impounded pursuant to this article is deemed to be in the custody of the county. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-65. - Failure to respond; right to hearing; care; crime exception. 
(a)  If the owner of an impounded animal fails to respond in writing within five business days of the date the notice of impoundment was served or if the owner is unknown or could not be found within 30 days of publication of the notice of impoundment, the impounded animal shall be disposed of pursuant to section 10-30. 
(b)  If the owner of an impounded animal refuses to enter into a consent agreement ensuring that the animal will be given humane care and adequate and veterinary care, the owner may request, in writing, a hearing within five business days of the date the notice of impoundment was served. 
(c)  If no hearing is requested within the time limits specified and the failure to request such hearing is due in whole or in part to a reasonably avoidable fault of the owner, the right to a hearing shall have been waived. 
(d)  Within 30 days after receiving a written request for a hearing, the applicable governing body or animal control board shall conduct a hearing. The hearing shall be public and all testimony shall be received under oath. 
(e)  The scope of the hearing shall be limited to whether the impounding of the animal was authorized by section 10-63. 
(f)  The governing body or animal control board shall within five business days after such hearing forward a decision to the owner and the animal control officer. 
(g)  If the governing body or animal control board finds that the animal was improperly impounded, the animal shall be returned to the owner and the cost incurred shall be paid by the county. 
(h)  If the governing body or animal control board finds that the animal was lawfully impounded, the governing body or animal control board shall rule that: 
(1)  The animal be disposed of as provided herein. 
(2)  The animal be returned to the owner. 
(3)  If the owner has previously been found guilty of failure to provide humane care to an animal, committed cruelty to animals or engaged in dog fighting, the return may be conditioned on the following: 
a.  Such animal will be given humane care and adequate veterinary services. 
b.  Such animal not be subjected to mistreatment. 
c.  The owner complying with this article. 
(i)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to an animal that was an object or instrumentality of a crime nor shall any such animal be returned to the owner or disposed of without the approval of the prosecuting attorney. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-66. - Animals raised, kept or maintained for human consumption. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person who raises, keeps or maintains animals solely for the purposes of human consumption. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-67. - Injunctions and restraining orders. 
In addition to the remedies provided in this article or elsewhere in the laws of the state or the county and notwithstanding the existence of an adequate remedy at law, the county attorney is authorized to apply to the superior court for an injunction or restraining order. The court shall for good cause shown grant a temporary or permanent injunction or an ex parte or restraining order, restraining or enjoining any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity from violating and continuing to violate this article. Such injunction or restraining order shall be issued without bond and may be granted notwithstanding the fact that the violation constitutes a criminal act and notwithstanding the pendency of any criminal prosecution for the same violation. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-68. - Filing a report regarding animal cruelty; immunity. 
(a)  A licensed veterinarian having reasonable cause to believe that an animal has been subjected to animal cruelty or dog fighting may make or cause to be made a report of such violation to the animal control officer. 
(b)  Any person participating in the making of a report pursuant to this section or participating in any administrative or judicial proceeding pursuant to this article shall be immune from any civil or criminal liability that might otherwise be imposed, provided such participation is made in good faith. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-69. - Article cumulative; does not prohibit enactment and enforcement of local ordinances by municipal or county governing authority. 
The animal control officer shall be required to provide timely written notice to the commissioner of agriculture for enforcement action taken against an operator who is licensed by and who is alleged to be in violation of department of agriculture rules and regulations. The department shall be notified of the initiation of any such local enforcement action and of the conclusions or ultimate outcome of any such action. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-70. - Penalties. 
A person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). In the alternative, and in the discretion of the animal control officer, the person may be cited with a violation of state law, and be guilty of a misdemeanor if convicted. 
(1)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
ARTICLE VII. - HUMANE CARE FOR EQUINES 

Sec. 10-71. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any equine to: 
(1)  Commit a violation of section 10-47 (cruelty to animals) which involves an equine owned by, possessed by, or in the custody or control of such person. 
(2)  Fail to provide adequate food and water. 
(3)  Fail to provide humane care. 
(4)  Unnecessarily overload, overdrive, or beat an equine or to cause the death of an equine in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(5)  Interfere with or hinder the animal control officer in carrying out his/her duties under this article. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2006-35, 6-29-06) 
Sec. 10-72. - Inspection warrants; impoundment authorized; examination. 
(a)  If there is cause to believe that a violation of section 10-71 (prohibited acts) has occurred, the animal control officer may apply to the appropriate court for an inspection warrant for inspecting any equine found on such property to determine if a violation of section 10-71 (prohibited acts) has occurred. 
(b)  The animal control officer is authorized to impound an equine which has not been furnished with adequate food and water, which has not received humane care or which has been subjected to cruelty in violation of section 10-71 (prohibited acts). A licensed veterinarian following an examination shall make a determination as to the condition or treatment of the equine. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2006-35, 6-29-06) 
Sec. 10-73. - Duty to care for impounded equines; lien; return to owner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty the animal control officer to make reasonable and proper arrangements to provide an impounded equine with adequate and necessary shelter, food, water, veterinary services and humane care and to take such actions as to ensure the survival of the equine. If reasonable and proper arrangements cannot be made, the humane euthanasia of the equine and disposal thereof shall be necessary. 
(b)  Such arrangements may include: 
(1)  Providing shelter and care for the equine at any state, federal, county, municipal or governmental facility or shelter; 
(2)  Contracting with a private individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity to provide shelter, food, water, veterinary services and humane care for a reasonable fee; or 
(3)  Allowing a private individual, partnership, corporation, association or other entity to provide shelter, food, water, veterinary services, and humane care as a volunteer and at no cost. 
(c)  Any person impounding an equine or providing care for an impounded equine shall have a lien on such equine for the reasonable costs of caring for such equine. 
(d)  The lien acquired under subsection (a) of this section may be foreclosed in any court, which is competent to hear civil cases. Liens shall be foreclosed in magistrate courts only when the amount of the lien does not exceed the jurisdictional limits established by law for such courts. 
(e)  Any person impounding an equine is authorized to return the equine to its owner upon payment by the owner of all costs of impoundment and care and upon the entry of a consent order or receiving written assurances that: 
(1)  The equine will be given humane care, adequate food and water, adequate shelter and veterinary services. 
(2)  That such equine will not be subjected to cruelty. 
(3)  That the owner will comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-74. - Notice of impoundment. 
It shall be the duty of any person impounding an equine to notify the owner, if known, of such equine immediately upon impoundment. Such notice of impoundment shall state the name and address of the person impounding the equine, the location where the equine is being held and a description of the equine. If the owner of such equine is unknown or cannot be found, service of the notice on the owner shall be obtained by publishing a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-75. - Disposal of equine by sale or euthanasia. 
(a)  The animal control officer may dispose of the equine through sale at a public auction or by sealed bids. If the physical condition of the equine is such that euthanasia is the only reasonable course of action, the equine may humanely disposed of if the owner: 
(1)  Cannot be found; 
(2)  Refuses to enter into a consent order; 
(3)  Fails to provide written assurance that such equine will be given humane care and adequate food, water, shelter and veterinary care. 
(b)  Before disposing of an equine through sale or euthanasia, the animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner and, if the owner cannot be located after reasonable effort, the sale or euthanasia shall proceed. 
(c)  Any proceeds from the sale of such equine shall be used first to pay the costs of care given the equine. Funds remaining shall be paid into the animal control revenue account. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-76. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the remedies provided in this section or elsewhere in the laws of the state and notwithstanding the existence of an adequate remedy at law, the owner of an equine is authorized to apply to the superior court for an injunction or restraining order. Such court shall have jurisdiction and for good cause shown shall grant a temporary or permanent injunction or an ex parte or restraining order enjoining any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity from violating and continuing to violate this section or any rules and regulations promulgated under this section. Such injunction or restraining order shall be issued without bond and may be granted notwithstanding the fact that the violation constitutes a criminal act and notwithstanding the pendency of any criminal prosecution for the same violation. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-77. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
A person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). In the alternative, and in the discretion of the animal control officer, the person may be cited with a violation of state law, and be guilty of a misdemeanor if convicted. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Secs. 10-78—10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STERILIZATION OF DOGS AND CATS IN SHELTERS 

Sec. 10-81. - Policy. 
The board of commissioners finds that the breeding of dogs and cats acquired from animal shelters, animal control agencies, humane societies or public and private animal refuges results in the birth of thousands of animals who become strays, suffer privation and death, constitute a public nuisance and health hazard, and ultimately, are impounded and destroyed at great public expense. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-82. - Sterilization of dogs and cats required; exceptions; costs. 
(a)  Any public or private animal shelter, animal control agency, humane society or public or private animal refuge shall make provisions for the sterilization of all dogs or cats acquired from such shelter, agency, society or refuge by: 
(1)  Providing sterilization by a licensed veterinarian before relinquishing custody of the animal. 
(2)  Entering into a written agreement with the person acquiring such animal guaranteeing that a licensed veterinarian will perform sterilization within 30 days after acquisition of an adult animal or in the case of an immature animal within 30 days of the sexual maturity of the animal. 
(b)  All costs of sterilization pursuant to this section shall be the responsibility of the person acquiring such animal and, if performed before acquisition, may be included in any fees charged by the shelter, agency, society or refuge for such animal. 
(c)  Any person acquiring an animal which is not sterile from a public or private animal shelter, animal control agency, humane society or public or private animal refuge shall submit a signed statement from the licensed veterinarian performing the sterilization within seven days after such sterilization attesting that such sterilization has been performed. 
(d)  Every public or private animal shelter, animal control agency, humane society or public or private animal refuge offering for sale or exchange any dog or cat shall maintain a current list of veterinarians who have notified the shelter, agency, society, or refuge that they are willing to perform sterilizations and the cost for such procedures. 
(e)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to any privately owned animal which any such shelter, agency, society, or refuge may have in its possession for any reason if the owner of such animal claims or presents evidence that such animal is the property of such person. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 10-83. - Penalty for noncompliance. 
A person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). In the alternative, and in the discretion of the animal control officer, the person may be cited with a violation of state law, and be guilty of a misdemeanor if convicted. 
(Res. No. 2005-13, 7-5-05; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Secs. 10-84—10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NUISANCE ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2006-16, adopted April 4, 2006, repealed the former art. IX, §§ 10-91—10-96, and enacted a new art. IX as set out herein. The former art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 2005-13, adopted July 5, 2005. 

Sec. 10-91. - Definitions. 
A public nuisance animal is an animal which: 
(1)  Chases vehicles or molests passersby; or 
(2)  Runs at large upon public property or private property without the permission of the property owner; or 
(3)  Soils, defiles or defecates on public or private property, other than the property of the owner/keeper, unless it is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner/keeper; or 
(4)  Causes unsanitary or dangerous conditions to exist; or 
(5)  Is feral; or 
(6)  Habitually barks, howls, crows or makes any other loud noises in such a way as to at any time, day or night, causes annoyance or discomfort to people living in the neighborhood. 
(Res. No. 2006-16, 4-4-06) 
Sec. 10-92. - Public nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any animal to become a public nuisance animal as defined in section 10-91. 
(Res. No. 2006-16, 4-4-06) 
Sec. 10-93. - Owner or keeper violation; penalties. 
The owner or keeper of an animal exhibiting any behavior or engaging in any activity defined under section 10-91 shall be in violation of this article. The penalties for a violation of this article shall be in accordance with section 10-101. 
(Res. No. 2006-16, 4-4-06) 
Sec. 10-94. - Feral animals. 
Feral animals shall be humanely euthanized without the required minimum holding period required for stray animals. 
(Res. No. 2006-16, 4-4-06) 
Sec. 10-95. - Animal noise. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for any person to own, keep, possess or harbor an animal of any age which frequently or for a continued duration barks, howls, crows or makes any other loud noise disturbing, annoying or causing discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities across a residential real property boundary or through a common partition within a building. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Upon receiving a complaint of nuisance animal noise, the animal control officer will investigate. If a violation is evident, the animal control officer shall send a certified letter of notification to the animal's owner/keeper informing them of the complaint and asking for their support in resolving the complaint. 
(2)  If the complaint has not been resolved after two weeks from the date of the letter of notification, the animal control officer will notify the complainant that in order to process a citation, the complainant must provide two nuisance animal noise complaint forms stating that they: 
a.  Witnessed the violation; and 
b.  Are aware that the complaining party must testify in court and shall be subject to subpoena. 
(3)  Action under this section shall not occur unless at least two persons not of the same household complain of the alleged offense in writing. However, should there be only one household within one-half mile of the property line on which the source of the complaint is located, one written complaint shall be sufficient. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the nuisance animal noise complaint forms, the animal control officer shall serve a notice of violation to the animal's owner/keeper stating that the owner/keeper has 14 days to suppress the animal noise. 
(5)  After 14 days from the date the notice of violation there is still animal noise occurring, the animal control officer shall issue a citation on the animal's owner/keeper. 
(6)  If a violation occurs after issuance of the first citation and the complaining party has previously completed a nuisance animal noise complaint form report, the animal control officer may issue additional citations to the animal's owner/keeper for every day that the violation occurs. 
(Res. No. 2006-16, 4-4-06) 
Secs. 10-96—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2006-16, adopted April 4, 2006, repealed the former art. X, § 10-101, and enacted a new art. X as set out herein. The former art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 2005-13, adopted July 5, 2005. 

Sec. 10-101. - Penalty 
(a)  Any person(s) found guilty of any violation in chapter 10, animals, and cited pursuant to state law, and with the matter referred to the county superior court or county state court, is subject to punishment as provided in the Official Code of Georgia, and as determined by the county superior court or county state court. 
(b)  Any person(s) found guilty of any initial violation of chapter 10, animals, returnable to the county magistrate's court is subject to a fine of $1,000.00 or six months' imprisonment, or both, provided that the magistrate judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. The trial court may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, for performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(c)  Any person(s) found guilty of a second violation of chapter 10 animals returnable to the county magistrate's court shall have a minimum fine of $750.00, and may have a fine as much as $1,000.00, and minimum imprisonment in a county jail of 30 days, and up to six months' imprisonment in the discretion of the county magistrate's judge, provided that the county magistrate's judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed for six months. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. The trial court may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, or performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(d)  Any person(s) found guilty of a third or subsequent violation of chapter 10 animals, or a violation including the death or serious injury to a human being or a violation involving the death of an animal, returnable to the county magistrate's court shall have a minimum fine of $1,000.00, and minimum imprisonment in a county jail of 60 days, and up to four months' community service in the discretion of the county magistrate's judge. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. The trial court may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, or performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(e)  An owner of a dangerous dog that is convicted of section 10-58(c) or section 10-58(d) in the county magistrate's court shall be subject to the penalties set out and provided by section 10-101(d). 
(f)  Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve any person from resolution of the problem resulting in the violation. In addition, the applicable court may order reimbursement for the county's cost involved in prosecuting the case (including but not limited to attorney fees, impound charges and the hourly cost to the county of the time of the animal control officer) as a part of the court costs imposed by the court. 
(Res. No. 2006-16, 4-4-06; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Secs. 10-102—10-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 10-111. - Definitions. 
(a)  Vicious dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of an attack of such severity or intensity as to cause severe property or physical damage. 
(2)  Is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained or maintained for the purpose of fighting. 
(3)  Makes an unprovoked attack on animals or on human beings; or 
(4)  Intentionally attacks physical property in an effort to cause harm to a human or other animal. 
(5)  The term "vicious dog" shall not include a dog that inflicts an injury upon a person: 
a.  When the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; 
b.  Who had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or 
c.  Who, at the time was: 
1.  Committing a willful trespass or other tort; or 
2.  Tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; or 
3.  Committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(b)  Severe injury means any physical injury that results in any of the following: 
(1)  Broken bones; 
(2)  Puncture wounds; 
(3)  Lacerations with or without sutures; 
(4)  A medical procedure; or 
(5)  Death. 
(c)  Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a vicious dog. 
(d)  Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a vicious dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(Res. No. 2006-35, 6-29-06) 
Sec. 10-112. - Minimum standards; penalties. 
(a)  It is the intention of this article to establish minimum standards and requirements for the control of vicious dogs and to provide penalties for violations of such minimum standards and requirements. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are in addition to and supplementary of any previously existing codes and shall not be construed to repeal or supersede such previously existing laws. 
(Res. No. 2006-35, 6-29-06) 
Sec. 10-113. - Enclosures; confiscation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(b)  A vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if the vicious dog is: 
(1)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(2)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of costs. 
(d)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten days of the date the dog was confiscated, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Res. No. 2006-35, 6-29-06) 
Sec. 10-114. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person(s) found guilty of any violation in this chapter and cited pursuant to state law, and with the matter referred to the county superior court or county state court, is subject to punishment as provided in the Official Code of Georgia, and as determined by the county superior court or county state court. 
(b)  Any person(s) found guilty of any initial violation of this chapter returnable to the county magistrate's court is subject to a fine of $1,000.00 or six months' imprisonment, or both, provided that the magistrate judge shall not probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. The trial court may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, for performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(c)  Any person(s) found guilty of a second violation of this chapter returnable to the county magistrate's court shall have a minimum fine of $750.00, and may have a fine as much as $1,000.00, and minimum imprisonment in a county jail of 30 days, and up to six months' imprisonment in the discretion of the county magistrate's judge, provided that the county magistrate's judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. The trial court may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, or performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(d)  Any person(s) found guilty of a third or subsequent violation of this chapter returnable to the county magistrate's court shall have a minimum fine of $1,000.00, and minimum imprisonment in a county jail of 60 days, and up to four months' community service in the discretion of the county magistrate's judge. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. The trial court may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, or performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(e)  Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relief any person from resolution of the problem resulting in the violation. In addition, the applicable court may order reimbursement for the county's cost involved in prosecuting the case (including but not limited to attorney fees, impound charges, and the hourly cost to the county of the time of the animal control officer) as a part of the court cost imposed by the court. 
(Res. No. 2006-35, 6-29-06; Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-115. - Liability for damages. 
Under no circumstances shall a county employee or official who enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as a vicious dog or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a vicious dog or by a dog which has been identified as a vicious dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in subsection (a) of section 10-113. 
(Res. No. 2006-35, 6-29-06) 
Secs. 10-116-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ENFORCEMENT OF THE RABIES CONTROL RULES AND REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-121. - Title. 
The title of this article shall be the "White County Enforcement of the Rabies Control Rules and Regulations." 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-122. - Purpose. 
To prescribe procedures for the enforcement of rabies prevention and control in county by providing for the vaccination, tagging and certification of dogs and cats and the confinement, quarantine or destruction of animals suspected of exposure to rabies. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-123. - Authority. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. title 4, animals: 
(1)  Chapter 4, prevention and control of disease in livestock; article 1, control of infectious or contagious diseases in livestock; part 1, general provisions; section 6, penalty for introducing foreign animal disease-notice and reporting required for certain diseases-exception for bona fide research activities; subsection (b)(3)(UU), rabies; and 
(2)  Chapter 8, dogs: 
a.  Article 1, general provisions; section 5, cruelty to dogs-authorized killing of dogs; subsection (c); and 
b.  Article 2, dangerous dog control: 
1.  Section 22, jurisdiction of local governments-joint dog control services-dog control officer-animal control board or local board of health to hold hearings; subsection (c); and 
2.  Section 23, investigations by dog control officer-notice of classification as dangerous dog; subsection (a). 
(b)  O.C.G.A. Title 16, Crimes and Offenses: 
(1)  Chapter 12, offenses against public health and morals; article 1, general provisions; section 4, cruelty to animals; subsection (e); and 
(2)  Chapter 13, controlled substances; article 3, dangerous drugs; section 71, "dangerous drug" defined; subsection (b). 
(c)  O.C.G.A. title 27, game and fish; chapter 5, wild animals; section 5, wild animals for which license or permit required; subsection (b)(1)(k), order Carnivora (weasels, ferrets, cats, bears, wolves, etc.) 
(d)  O.C.G.A. title 31, health: 
(1)  Chapter 3, county boards of health; section 14, financing of expenses; and 
(2)  Chapter 19, control of rabies; sections 1 through 10. 
(e)  Georgia Rabies Control Manual, February 2001, Fourth Edition. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-124. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any domesticated or undomesticated animal including but not limited to dogs, cats, wild carnivores, cattle and other livestock, bats, rodents, rabbits and opossums. 
Animal control center means an area or facility used by the rabies control officer for the detention of animals confined in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Animal control officer means individuals appointed by the county board of commissioners to administer and enforce the provisions of chapter 10, animals, articles I thru XII of the County Code including but not limited to the animal control officer, assistant animal control officers, designated agents, sheriff's deputies or other county law enforcement officers. 
Bite (bitten) means any injury caused by an animal resulting in breakage of the skin. 
Cat means any member of the feline family three months or more of age. 
Certificate means a certification of vaccination on a form approved by the center for disease control and the state department of human resources and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine. 
Dog means any member of the canine family three months or more of age. 
Domesticated animal means animals kept as pets including but not limited to dogs and cats. 
Health department means the county department of health. 
Home quarantine means secure confinement and isolation of an animal from exposure to animals and humans at the owner's residence with access provided to the rabies control officer for monitoring the condition of the animal. 
Owner means any person having a right of property in a dog or other animal or any person who permits a dog or other animal to remain on the person's premises. 
Quarantine means the secure confinement and isolation of an animal from exposure to humans and other animals in the animal control center, veterinary hospital or approved boarding facility. 
Rabies control officer means the county animal control officer appointed by the county board of health to carry out the provisions of this article with the county board of commissioners' consent and affirmation of said appointment and its related duties. 
Suspected animal means an animal reasonably suspected to have rabies or to have been exposed to rabies. 
Tag means a tag approved by the state department of human resources and furnished by a veterinarian as evidence of the vaccination of an animal against rabies. 
Undomesticated animal means horses, mules, cattle, goats, swine and other animals which are not domesticated. 
Vaccinate or inoculate means the injection of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian into an animal. 
Vaccine means anti-rabies vaccine approved by the state department of human resources. 
Veterinarian means a person holding a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-125. - Duties. 
(a)  Duties of the county animal control officer serving as the county rabies control officer shall include: 
(1)  Investigate and maintain a record of animal bites in the county; and 
(2)  Report animal bites to the county department of health; and 
(3)  Seek the advice of the department of health with respect to further proceedings in connection with such cases; and 
(4)  Provide for proper confinement of an animal involved in a bite; and 
(5)  If the animal is dead, prepare and submit the head for laboratory examination; and 
(6)  Enforce proper disposition of animals exposed to known rabid animals; and 
(7)  Assist in county-sponsored rabies vaccination clinics; and 
(8)  Other duties as stated in the rabies control regulations or as recommended by the board of health after collaboration with the county manager. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 2. - VACCINATION 

Sec. 10-126. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
(a)  A person, who owns, keeps, maintains or harbors a dog or cat shall be responsible for a rabies vaccination. 
(b)  If the dog or cat is: 
(1)  Less than one year old upon vaccination, it shall be revaccinated within one year from the date of the original vaccination. 
(2)  More than one year old and vaccinated with a vaccine approved by the department of agriculture providing three years' protection, such animals shall be revaccinated within three years. When other approved vaccines are used, yearly inoculations shall be required. 
(c)  All persons owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a dog or cat brought into the county shall obtain evidence of a rabies vaccination within 14 days from the date of entry into the county. 
(d)  No person shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies unless licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-127. - State-issued tag, certificate of inoculation. 
(a)  Anyone who owns, keeps, maintains or harbors a dog or cat shall obtain a state department of human resources issued certificate of inoculation signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine and a vaccination tag. 
(b)  Upon administering anti-rabies vaccines, the veterinarian administering the vaccine shall issue a certificate of vaccination with one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the rabies control officer within 45 days and one copy retained by the veterinarian. 
(c)  Dogs and cats shall wear the vaccination tag issued for the current year at all times in a clearly visible location. 
(d)  Exemptions: 
(1)  Dogs and cats participating in organized and controlled competitions or performances for the duration of the competition or performance; and 
(2)  Dogs and cats entering the county for a temporary stay of 14 days or less and which will be kept under direct control by the owners or handlers. 
(e)  No person who owns, keeps, maintains or harbors a dog or cat shall refuse to show evidence of a certificate of inoculation upon demand of the rabies control officer, health department representative or other authorized county official. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-128. - Vaccines. 
(a)  All dogs and cats owned, possessed, harbored or residing within the county shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the department of human resources. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or to permit the keeping or maintaining of any dog or cat within the county unless such dog or cat has been inoculated against rabies. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 3. - SURRENDER 

Sec. 10-129. - Surrender of animal; redemption. 
(a)  Upon demand by the rabies control officer, an owner shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies. 
(b)  The expense of such confinement or quarantine shall be borne by the owner or if deemed uncollectible by the rabies control officer the department of health shall be responsible for such costs. 
(c)  An owner may reclaim an animal if it is adjudged by the rabies control officer to be free of rabies, in compliance with licensing provisions and upon receipt of evidence that all impoundment and boarding fees have been paid. 
(d)  The carcass of a dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the rabies control officer. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 4. - QUARANTINE 

Sec. 10-130. - General. 
(a)  This section shall apply to any biting dog, cat or other animal and does not exempt a vaccinated or inoculated animal. 
(b)  The owner of any animal ordered quarantined under this section shall not refuse to comply with a quarantine order or remove the animal from county without the approval of the rabies control officer. 
(c)  Home quarantine may be permitted at the discretion of the rabies control officer in lieu of quarantine except during declaration of an area of infection. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-131. - Confinement of animals bitten by a rabid animal or an animal suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Currently vaccinated dogs and cats should be revaccinated immediately, kept under the owner's control and observed for 90 days for clinical signs of rabies. During the observation period, the animal should not be permitted to roam. 
(1)  At the first sign of illness or behavioral change in the animal, the department of health should be notified and the animal should be evaluated by a veterinarian. If clinical signs are suggestive of rabies, the animal should be immediately euthanized and tested for rabies. 
(2)  If at the end of the 90-day observation period there are no clinical signs of rabies, illness or behavioral change, the animal may be released. 
(b)  An animal not vaccinated and bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal shall be: 
(1)  Euthanized immediately; or 
(2)  If the owner is unwilling to have this done, the animal shall be placed in strict isolation for six months and vaccinated one month before being released. Isolation may at the discretion of the rabies control officer take place in an animal control center or a double-walled isolation pen at the owner's home. At the first sign of illness or behavioral change in the animal, the department of health should be notified and the animal should be evaluated by a veterinarian. If clinical signs are suggestive of rabies, the animal should be immediately euthanized and tested for rabies. 
(3)  In the event the owner of the bitten animal cannot be found, the animal control center may, at any time during the period of confinement, humanely dispose of the bitten animal. 
(c)  Animals with expired vaccinations need to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Strict isolation should be conducted under the authority of the department of health and the place, manner and provisions of the confinement are specified. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-132. - Reclaiming an animal impounded due to no rabies tag. 
(a)  An owner may reclaim any dog or cat impounded because of lack of rabies vaccination tag as follows: 
(1)  A vaccinated animal may be reclaimed by furnishing proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all impoundment fees; or 
(2)  An unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed by payment of fees and by providing satisfactory assurances of compliance with the rabies vaccination requirements of this article within 72 hours of release. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-133. - Impoundment of dogs and cats not having numbered tags; not wearing tags; no certificate or expired certificate; or not vaccinated. 
(a)  Dogs and cats shall wear the numbered metal tag provided by the veterinarian performing rabies vaccination at all times. 
(b)  Any dog or cat not displaying a numbered tag or whose owner does not possess a certificate of vaccination that is not confined on the premises of the owner shall be impounded and disposed of as permitted in this article. 
(c)  The rabies control officer shall give notice to the owner if known and the owner shall obtain the vaccination, pay the impounding, board and other fees to secure release of the dog or cat. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-134. - Animals entering the county. 
(a)  Any dog or cat brought into the county for a: 
(1)  Permanent stay (exceeding 14 days) shall be: 
a.  Confined or kept on a leash until vaccinated; or 
b.  If the owner or custodian submits satisfactory evidence of vaccination, a certificate of vaccination and a vaccination tag may be issued for the current vaccination year and the rabies control officer may waive the requirement that said dog be confined or on a leash. 
(2)  Temporary stay not exceeding 14 days shall be confined or kept on a leash at all times. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-135. - Confinement of puppies. 
Dogs and cats under the age of three months shall be confined to their owner's premises and not allowed to roam at large. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-136. - General quarantine of animals within an area of infection; epidemic measures. 
(a)  In the event rabies is known to exist in the county, the health department: 
(1)  Shall determine the area of infection; and 
(2)  Provide for immunizations needed for the prevention and control of the disease; and 
(3)  Give public notice of such quarantine or confinement by publication in the local newspaper, posting of notice in a public place or both. 
(b)  When a report indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the health department may order an area-wide quarantine for a period up to 60 days. In the event there are additional cases of rabies occurring during the period of area-wide quarantine, such period may be extended for an additional period at the discretion of the health department. 
(c)  During the period of area-wide quarantine and as long afterward as the period deems necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the rabies control officer may: 
(1)  Require that all domesticated animals, three months of age or older be vaccinated against rabies. 
(2)  Confine animals found on public highways or streets or off the premises of the owner except on a leash. 
(3)  Provide for a program of mass immunization. 
(4)  Prohibit the transportation of animals from the county. 
(5)  Prevent the adoption of animals which have been impounded because of being a stray. 
(6)  Confine animals, not exposed to other animals, for not less than 90 days from the date of the last occurrence. 
(7)  Quarantine or confine animals vaccinated or inoculated. 
(8)  Restrict (leashed or confined in an enclosed premises) vaccinated domesticated animals for 30 days after vaccination. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 5. - NOTIFICATION 

Sec. 10-137. - Notification by owner of a biting animal or animal exhibiting signs of rabies. 
It shall be the duty of persons owning, keeping, maintaining, harboring or who have knowledge of any animal that has bitten any person or animal or any animal exhibiting signs of rabies to notify the rabies control officer. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-138. - Notification when person bitten. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person bitten by an animal to immediately notify the rabies control officer. 
(b)  Parents or guardians are responsible for notification when a minor has been bitten. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the health department to notify any person bitten by an animal which tests positive for rabies. 
(d)  When rabies has been diagnosed or suspected and the animal dies while under observation, the rabies control officer shall notify the owner of such circumstances. 
(e)  The rabies control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health regional laboratory for pathological examination and notify any persons having contact with the animal in question. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-139. - Reporting. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the health department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as the health department shall require. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the health department any diagnosis of any animal suspected of rabies. 
(c)  The owner or custodian of any animal having signs suggestive of rabies shall confine the animal and immediately notify the health department, reporting any information regarding persons bitten or attacked by such animal. 
(d)  The rabies control officer shall report accumulated data relating to rabies in the county to the health department when rabies is prevalent or likely to become prevalent to the extent that quarantine procedures are indicated. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 6. - DISPOSITION 

Sec. 10-140. - Disposition of bitten cattle and other livestock. 
Cattle or other livestock known to have been bitten by a rabid animal shall be slaughtered immediately or at the request of the owner, placed in strict confinement for six months, after which the animal if normal may be released by order of the rabies control officer or slaughtered, if rabid. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-141. - Killing, removal of rabid animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, an animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal which has bitten a human, except as, provided in this article. 
(b)  Nor shall any person remove such animal from the county without the written permission of the rabies control officer. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-142. - Destruction, isolation of bitten animals. 
(a)  If the animal was vaccinated at least one month before the exposure, it shall be revaccinated immediately and placed in strict confinement for at least 30 days by the owner or at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Unvaccinated animals that are bitten by an animal proven to be rabid shall be destroyed immediately or if the owner is unwilling to have the animal destroyed, the animal shall be quarantined for six months by the owner or at the owner's expense. 
(c)  One month before release, the animal shall be vaccinated against rabies. 
(d)  No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove such animal from the county without written permission from the rabies control officer. 
(e)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when the rabies control officer makes demand thereof. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 7. - EXAMINATION 

Sec. 10-143. - Examination of specimens. 
(a)  Any animal that has bitten a person or that is suspected of having rabies shall be destroyed and the head submitted for examination to a public health laboratory operated by the state department of human resources. 
(b)  A bat, which bites a person or domestic animal, shall be destroyed and the entire bat shall be submitted for examination to a public health laboratory operated by the state department of human resources. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-144. - Laboratory results. 
(a)  The department of health shall furnish the rabies control officer with a copy of any laboratory results obtained on specimens submitted under sections 10-125, 10-133, 10-140 and 10-146. 
(b)  Animals known to transmit rabies that escape or are otherwise unavailable for examination shall be presumed rabid. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-145. - Interference with rabies control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any rabies control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county vehicle used to transport the animal or to take or attempt to take any animal from an animal control center. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-146. - Liability of the county, animal control unit, officers and employees. 
(a)  The county, board of health, sheriff's department, animal control and rabies control officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at any facility designated by the rabies control officer to house such animals. 
(b)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any type of animal in possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 10-147. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The rabies control officer acting on behalf of the board of health and the board of commissioners shall have the authority to enforce the regulations found in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to any animal for which it was not issued or remove such tags from any animal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a tag from any dog or cat or to alter, disfigure or tamper with any such tag or to procure a tag by misrepresentation. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 10-148. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
DIVISION 9. - EXPIRATION 

Sec. 10-149. - Failure to appoint. 
In the event the county board of health fails to appoint the county animal control officer as the county rabies control officer, this article shall automatically be deleted from the County Code. 
(Res. No. 2007-29, 8-7-07) 
Secs. 10-150—10-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ATTACK OR GUARD DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2007-33, adopted October 2, 2007, amended the Code by adding a new art. XII, §§ 10-121—10-127. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the provisions have been redesignated as art. XIII, §§ 10-161—10-167 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10-161. - Definition. 
Attack dog or guard dog means any dog trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal command and any dog which, while not so trained, is expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which the animal is located. 
(Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-162. - Notice to the public of attack dogs or guard dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant or custodian of an enclosure, residential or commercial property within which an attack dog or guard dog is located to post a notice in a prominent and conspicuous location on the outside of the enclosure or building. 
(b)  Said notice shall have six-inch red letters on a white background and shall contain the words: 
"WARNING: GUARD DOG" or 
"WARNING: ATTACK DOG" or 
"WARNING: BEWARE OF DOG." 
(c)  Such letters shall be not less than one inch in width and six inches in height. 
(d)  If an attack dog or guard dog is confined within a fenced area or in a building, such notice shall be posted at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart as well as upon each entrance and exit. 
(e)  In the case of apartments, condominiums or businesses located within a larger building, such notice shall be posted on or about every doorway. 
(Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-163. - Requirements for possessing an attack dog or guard dog. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess an attack dog or guard dog without a certificate of registration. 
(b)  The county animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such attack dog or guard dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the attack dog or guard dog; and 
(2)  The owner of a attack dog or guard dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold or donated. If the dog is sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(3)  The owner of an attack dog or guard dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving from the animal control officer's jurisdiction. 
(4)  The owner of an attack dog or guard dog who is a new resident of the county shall register the dog as required in this article within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(5)  The animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Law enforcement agencies located in the county are authorized to cooperate with animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(7)  The animal control officer may charge an annual fee to register an attack dog or guard dog as required in this article. 
(8)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. 
(9)  At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration, the animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the attack dog or guard dog is confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(10)  The issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this article are maintained on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-164. - Financial responsibility. 
(a)  Insurance policy. 
(1)  The owner must obtain an insurance policy for a minimum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with a maximum deductible of one hundred dollars ($100.00) issued by an insurer authorized and approved by the state insurance commissioner to transact business in the state. Such policy shall insure the owner of the attack dog or guard dog against liability for any personal injuries including but not limited to death and property damage inflicted by the attack dog or guard dog. 
(2)  An attack dog or guard dog has the potential of deadly force. Therefore, a liability insurance policy that unduly restricts coverage as to any personal injuries and property damage shall not meet the insurance requirements of this subsection. The determination as to whether the exclusion unduly restricts the liability coverage shall be based upon the following facts: 
a.  An attack dog or guard dog is capable of deadly force; and 
b.  The intent of this subsection is that there is liability coverage for any personal injuries including death and any property damage inflicted by the attack dog or guard dog; and 
c.  The nature of the exclusions contained within the policy; and 
d.  Any other reasonable factor that may be considered in achieving the intent of this subsection that there be liability insurance coverage for any personal injuries including death and any property damage inflicted by the attack dog or guard dog. 
(3)  Insurance coverage provided by a surplus line insurance carrier shall be accompanied by a certification from the state insurance commissioner stating that the specific surplus line insurance carrier, including but not limited to any specific group or subgroup of Lloyd's of London, is on the approved list for surplus line insurance carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-5-25. 
(b)  In lieu of an insurance policy: 
(1)  The owner may obtain a surety bond in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. The bond shall be issued to the attack dog or guard dog's owner and shall be payable to any person or persons that have suffered any personal injuries including but not limited to death and property damage inflicted by the attack dog or guard dog. 
(2)  An attack dog or guard dog has the potential of deadly force. Therefore, surety bonds that unduly restrict coverage as to personal injuries and property damage shall be deemed to not meet the liability bond requirements of this subsection. The determination as to whether the exclusion unduly restricts the liability bond coverage shall be based upon the following facts: 
a.  An attack dog or guard dog is capable of deadly force; and 
b.  The intent of this subsection that there be liability bond coverage for any personal injuries and any property damage inflicted by the attack dog or guard dog; and 
c.  The nature of the exclusions contained within the bond; and 
d.  Any other reasonable factor that may be considered in achieving the intent of this subsection that there be liability bond coverage for any personal injuries and any property damage inflicted by the attack dog or guard dog; and 
(c)  A copy of the surety bond or insurance policy and not a binder must be received prior to approval. 
(d)  Dogs owned by or used by law enforcement agencies are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-165. - Restraint and confinement. 
(a)  No owner of an attack dog or guard dog shall allow such animal to be at large; and 
(b)  No owner of an attack dog or guard dog shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance animal; and 
(c)  Every owner of an attack dog or guard dog shall keep such dog confined in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at least three strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them. All anti-climbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of not less than 45 degrees or more than 90 degrees when measured from the perpendicular. 
(d)  The areas of confinement shall have all gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked with all fences properly maintained and escape proof. 
(e)  Every attack dog or guard dog in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that the animal cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding purposes as allowed by either state law or rules and regulations promulgated by the department of agriculture. 
(f)  When off the owner's premises, an attack dog or guard dog shall be caged or securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not more than three feet in length. 
(g)  Every person harboring an attack dog or guard dog is charged with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such a way that children do not have access to such animal. 
(Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-166. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  An attack dog or guard dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the attack dog or guard dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by this article; or 
(2)  Attack dog or guard dog has not been issued a certificate of registration; or 
(3)  Attack dog or guard dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  Attack dog or guard dog is outside a proper enclosure. 
(b)  An attack dog or guard dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten days of the date the attack dog or guard dog was confiscated, said attack dog or guard dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 10-167. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties as hereinafter set out in section 10-101 (penalties). In the alternative, and in the discretion of the animal control officer, the person may be cited with a violation of state law and if convicted shall be subject to the penalties for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon a second conviction for a violation of this article such owner shall be guilty of a felony under state law and may be cited pursuant to state law if the owner's attack or guard dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting violation of this article. 
(Res. No. 2007-33, 10-2-07) 
Chapter 12 - BODY ART CODE AND REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BODY ART 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Aftercare means written instructions given to the client, specific to the body art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding area. These instructions will include information about when to seek medical treatment, if necessary. 
Antiseptic means an agent that destroys disease-causing micro-organisms on human skin or mucosa. 
Body art means the practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and operators using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by a state medical board, such as implants under the skin, which shall not be performed in a body art establishment. Nor does this definition include, for the purposes of this Code, piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized single use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing systems. 
Body art establishment means any permanent place or premise, whether public or private, in nature or location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed. 
Body piercing means puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person with pre-sterilized single use needles and the insertion of pre-sterilized jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening, except that puncturing the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized single use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system shall not be included in this definition. 
Client means any person 18 years of age or older receiving body art services. 
Biomedical waste means any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 C.F.R. Part 1910.1030 (latest edition), known as "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens." 
Cosmetic tattooing . See Tattooing . 
Department means the agency, or its authorized representatives, having jurisdiction to promulgate, monitor, administer, and enforce these regulations. 
Disinfection means the destruction of disease-causing micro-organisms on inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use or handling. 
Ear piercing means the puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized single use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following manufacturer's instructions. Under no circumstances shall ear piercing studs and clasps be used anywhere on the body other than the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear. 
Equipment means all machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body art establishment. 
Hand sink means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body. 
Hot water means water that attains and maintains a temperature of at least 110 degrees F. 
Instruments used for body art means hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during body art procedures. 
Invasive means entry into the body either by incision or insertion of an instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means intended to puncture, break, or compromise the skin or mucosa. 
Jewelry means any personal ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must be made of surgical implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k white or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and which has been properly sterilized prior to use. 
Liquid chemical germicide means a disinfectant or sanitizer registered with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or an approximately 1:10 dilution of household chlorine bleach made fresh daily and dispensed from a spray bottle (500 ppm, ¼ cup per gallon or two tablespoons per quart of tap water). 
Mobile body art establishment/unit means a mobile establishment or unit which is self-propelled or otherwise movable from place to place and is self-sufficient for utilities such as gas, water, electricity, and liquid waste disposal which operates at a fixed location where a permitted operator performs body art procedures for more than 14 days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. NOTE: MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS/UNITS ARE NOT ALLOWED IN WHITE COUNTY. 
Operator/technician means any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts or practices body art activities at a body art establishment and who is responsible for compliance with these regulations, whether actually performing body art activities or not. The term includes technicians who work under the operator and perform body art activities. 
Permit means written approval by the department to operate a body art establishment. Approval is given in accordance with these regulations and is separate from any other licensing requirement that may exist within communities or political subdivisions comprising the jurisdiction. 
Person means an individual, any form of business or social organization or any other non-governmental legal entity, including but not limited to corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, trusts or unincorporated organizations. 
Physician means a person licensed by the state to practice medicine in all its branches and may include other areas such as dentistry, osteopathy, or acupuncture, depending on the rules and regulations particular to that state. 
Procedure surface means any surface of an inanimate object that contacts the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associated work area which require sanitizing. 
Sanitization procedure means a process of reducing the number of micro-organisms on cleaned surfaces and equipment to a safe level as judged by public health standards and which has been approved by the department. 
Sharps means any object (sterile or contaminated) that may purposefully or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited to, pre-sterilized single use needles; scalpel blades; and razor blades. 
Sharps container means a puncture resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is labeled with the international biohazard symbol. 
Single use means products or items that are intended for one-time one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves. 
Sterilization means a very powerful process resulting in the destruction of all forms of microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial spores. 
Tattooing means any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
Temporary body art establishment means any place or premise operating a fixed location where an operator performs body art procedures for no more than 14 days consecutively in conjunction with a single event or celebration. NOTE: TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS ARE NOT ALLOWED IN WHITE COUNTY. 
Universal precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health Care and Public Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Prone Invasive Procedures", in MMWR , July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include handwashing, gloving, personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid contaminated products. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 2. - BODY ART OPERATOR/TECHNICAN REQUIREMENTS AND PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 12-27. - Information available for inspection. 
The following information shall be kept on file on the premises of a body art establishment and available for inspection by the department: 
(1)  Employee information: 
a.  Full names and exact duties; 
b.  Date of birth; 
c.  Gender; 
d.  Home address; 
e.  Home/work phone numbers; 
f.  Identification photos of all body art operator/technicians. 
(2)  Establishment information: 
a.  Establishment name; 
b.  Hours of operation; 
c.  Owner's name and address. 
(3)  A complete description of all body art procedures performed. An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps, and all inks used for any and all body art procedures, including names of manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if applicable. Invoices or orders shall satisfy this requirement. 
(4)  A copy of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-28. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art establishment with a current permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-29. - Minimum age of operator/technician. 
The body art operator/technician must be a minimum of 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-30. - Prohibited acts. 
Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body art is performed. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-31. - Refusal of service. 
Operator/technicians shall refuse service to any person who, in the opinion of the operator/technician is under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-32. - Personal cleanliness of operator/technician. 
The operator/technician shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art procedures, operators/technicians must thoroughly wash their hands in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to remove contaminants. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-33. - Disposable gloves. 
In performing body art procedures, the operator shall wear a disposable medical glove on each hand. Gloves must be changed if they become contaminated by contact with any non-clean surfaces or objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded, at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual client, and hands shall be washed before the next set of gloves is donned. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use of disposable medical gloves does not preclude or substitute for handwashing procedures as part of a good personnel hygiene program. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-34. - Contamination of supplies. 
If, while performing a body art procedure, the operator's/technician's glove is pierced, torn, or otherwise contaminated, the procedure delineated in section 12-32 shall be repeated immediately. The contaminated gloves shall be immediately discarded, and the hands washed thoroughly (see section 12-32 above) before a fresh pair of gloves is applied. Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the procedure resumes. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-35. - Contaminated waste. 
Contaminated waste, as defined in this Code, that may release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body fluids when handled must be placed in an approved "red" bag marked with the international biohazard symbol. It must then be disposed of by a waste hauler approved by the department or, at a minimum, in compliance with 29 CFR Part 1910.1030, "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens." Sharps ready for disposal shall be disposed of in approved sharps containers. Contaminated waste that does not release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or does not release dried blood or body fluids when handled may be placed in a covered receptacle and disposed of through normal, approved disposal methods. Storage of contaminated waste onsite shall not exceed the period specified by the department or more than a maximum of 30 days, as specified in 29 CFR Part 1910.1030, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-36. - Proof of age. 
No person shall perform any body art procedure upon a person under the age of 18 years. Nothing in this section is intended to require an operator to perform any body art procedure on a person under 18 years of age with parental or guardian consent. Client must present photo ID with date of birth. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-37. - Skin condition of client. 
Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall be free of rash or any visible infection. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-38. - Skin condition of operator/technician. 
The skin of the operator/technician shall be free of rash or infection. No person or operator affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, keloids, weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood that person could contaminate body art equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-39. - Hepatitis B vaccination. 
Proof shall be provided to the department that all operators/technicians have completed, within seven months from the date of employment, the Hepatitis B vaccination series. This vaccination should be included as a pre-employment requirement. Failure to complete this series will result in the operator/technician's license being revoked. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 12-40. - Physician treatment of patient. 
Physicians licensed by the state who perform either independent of or in connection with body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-41. - Ear piercing. 
Individuals who pierce only the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized single use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from these regulations. Individuals who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the manufacturer's directions on use and applicable to U.S. Food and Drug Administration requirements. The department retains authority to investigate consumer complaints relating to alleged misuse or improper disinfection of ear piercing systems. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 12-42. - Educational information. 
Verbal and written public educational information, approved by the department, shall be required to be given to all clients wanting to receive body art procedure(s). Verbal and written instructions, approved by the department, for the aftercare of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection or swelling and shall contain the name, address, and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. In addition, all establishments shall prominently display a disclosure statement, provided by the department, which advises the public of the risks and possible consequences of body art services. The facility permit holder shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the local/state department that has jurisdiction over this program and the procedure for filing a complaint. The disclosure statement and notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment permit application packet. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-43. - Reporting of complications. 
All infections, complications, or diseases resulting from any body art procedure that become known to the operator shall be reported to the department by the operator within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 5. - CLIENT RECORDS 

Sec. 12-44. - Disclosure of personal information. 
So that the operator/technician can properly evaluate the client's medical condition for receiving a body art procedure and not violate the client's rights or confidential medical information, the operator or technician shall ask for the information as follows: 
So your body art procedure heals properly, we ask that you disclose if you have or have had any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Diabetes; 
(2)  History of hemophilia (bleeding); 
(3)  History of skin disease, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to soaps, disinfectants, etc.; 
(4)  History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or other skin sensitivities; 
(5)  History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy; 
(6)  Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the blood and/or interfere with blood clotting; 
(7)  Copy of photo ID with proof of date of birth. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-45. - Release form. 
The operator/technician should ask the client to sign a release form confirming that the above information was obtained or that the operator/technician attempted to be obtained. The client should be asked to disclose any other information that would aid the operator/technician in evaluating the client's body art healing process. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-46. - Record of procedure. 
Each operator shall keep records of all body art procedures administered, including date, time, identification and location of the body art procedure(s) performed, and operator's name. All client records shall be confidential and be retained for a minimum of three years and made available to the department upon notification. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-47. - Intent of section. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the operator to perform a body art procedure upon a client. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 6. - RECORD RETENTION 

Sec. 12-48. - Content of records. 
The body art establishment shall keep a record of all persons who have had body art procedures performed. The record shall include the name, date of birth, and address of the client, the date of the procedure, the name of the operator who performed the procedure(s), type and location of procedure performed, signature of client, and copy of photo ID with date of birth. Such records shall be retained for a minimum of three years and shall be available to the department upon request. The department and the body art establishment shall keep such records confidential. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 7. - PREPARATION AND CARE OF THE BODY ART AREA 

Sec. 12-49. - Skin preparation. 
Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area and the areas of skin surrounding where the body art procedure is to be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved surgical skin preparation, depending on the type of body art to be performed. If shaving is necessary, single use disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable holders shall be autoclaved after use. Following shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-50. - Blood flow. 
In the event of blood flow, all products used to check the flow of blood or to absorb blood shall be single use and disposed of immediately after use in appropriate biomedical containers (see definition). 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 8. - SANITATION AND STERILIZATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 12-51. - Non-disposable instruments. 
All non-single use, non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be cleaned thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap or disinfectant solution and hot water or by following the manufacturer's instructions, to remove blood and tissue residue, and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit also operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-52. - Peel-packs. 
After being cleaned, all non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be packed individually in peel-packs and subsequently sterilized (see section 12-53). All peel-packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator. Peel-packs must be dated with an expiration date not to exceed six months. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-53. - Steam autoclave. 
All cleaned, non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be sterilized in a steam autoclave or dry heat sterilizer (if approved by the department). The sterilizer shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for the operation of the sterilization unit must be available for inspection by the department. Sterile equipment may not be used if the package has been breached or after the expiration date without first repackaging and re-sterilizing. Sterilizers shall be located away from work stations or areas frequented by the public. If the body art establishment uses only single use, disposable instruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an autoclave shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-54. - Monthly spore destruction tests. 
Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall demonstrate that the sterilizer used is capable of attaining sterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall be verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not be issued or renewed until documentation of the sterilizer's ability to destroy spores is received by the department. These test records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and made available to the department upon request. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-55. - Storage of sterilized instruments. 
All needles used in tattooing and cosmetic tattooing shall be single use and disposable. After sterilization, the instruments used for tattooing/body piercing shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-56. - Prevention of contamination of sterilized instruments. 
All instruments used for tattooing/body piercing shall remain stored in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body art procedure. When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically recognized techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves are not contaminated. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-57. - Procedure for using dyes. 
All inks, dyes, pigments, needles, and equipment shall be specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions. The mixing of approved inks, dyes, or pigments or their dilution with potable water is acceptable. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single use paper cups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 9. - REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE USE ITEMS 

Sec. 12-58. - Single use items. 
Single use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. After use, all single use needles, razors, and other sharps shall be immediately disposed of in approved sharps containers. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-59. - Reuse of acetate stencils. 
All products applied to the skin, including body art stencils, shall be single use and disposable. If the department approves, acetate stencils shall be allowed for reuse if sanitization procedures (see sections 12-51—12-53) are performed between uses. Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to be tattooed with sterile gauze or in a manner to prevent contamination of the original container and its contents. The gauze shall be used only once and then discarded. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 10. - REQUIREMENTS FOR PREMISES 

Sec. 12-60. - Plan review by department. 
Body art establishments applying after adoption of this Code shall submit a scale drawing and floor plan of the proposed establishment for a plan review by the department, as part of the permit application process. The department may charge a reasonable fee for this review. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-61. - Wall, floor, ceiling, and procedure surface requirements. 
All walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces of a body art establishment shall be smooth, free of open holes and cracks, light colored, washable, and in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained in a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and sanitized after each client. All body art establishments shall be completely separated by solid partitions or by walls extending from floor to ceiling, from any room used for human habitation, any food establishment or room where food is prepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-62. - Protection against insects, vermin, and rodents. 
Effective measures shall be taken by the body art operator to protect against entrance into the establishment and against the breeding or presence on the premises of insects, vermin, and rodents. Insects, vermin, and rodents shall not be present in any part of the establishment, its appurtenances, or appertaining premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-63. - Space and privacy requirements. 
There shall be a minimum of 45 square feet of floor space for each operator in the establishment. Each establishment shall have an area that may be screened from the public view for clients requesting privacy. Multiple body art stations shall be separated by dividers, curtain, or partitions, at a minimum. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-64. - Ventilation and lighting. 
The establishment shall be well ventilated and provided with an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 foot candles three feet off the floor, except that at least 100 foot candles shall be provided at the level where the body art procedure is being performed, and where instruments and sharps are assembled. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-65. - Animals prohibited; exceptions. 
No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g., seeing eye dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting rooms and non-procedural areas. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-66. - Hand sinks. 
A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running water, under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist or foot operated controls and supplied with liquid soap, and disposable paper towels shall be readily accessible within the body art establishment. One hand sink shall serve no more than three operators. In addition, there shall be a minimum of one lavatory, excluding any service sinks, and one toilet in a body art establishment. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-67. - Waste receptacles. 
At least one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be emptied daily, and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly. All refuse containers shall be lidded, cleanable, and kept clean. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-68. - Storage of instruments and supplies. 
All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and covered containers. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-69. - Reusable cloth items. 
Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent and dried after each use. The cloth items shall be stored in a dry, clean environment until used. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 11. - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
Subdivision I. - Establishment Permit 

Sec. 12-70. - Permit required. 
No person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, business trust, corporation or organized group or persons may operate a body art establishment except with a body art establishment permit from the department. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-71. - Annual permit. 
Any person operating a body art establishment shall obtain an annual permit from the department. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-72. - Permit fee. 
The applicant shall pay a reasonable fee as set by the department for each body art establishment permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-73. - Permit not transferable. 
A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one place or person to another. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-74. - Posting of permit. 
A current body art establishment permit shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where it may be readily observed by clients. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-75. - Hiring of operators. 
The holder of a body art establishment permit must only hire operators who have complied with the operator permit requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Subdivision II. - Operator Permit 

Sec. 12-76. - Operator permit required. 
No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator permit from the department. The department shall set a reasonable fee for such permits. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-77. - Expiration of permit. 
The operator permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year from the date of issuance unless revoked sooner by the department in accordance with division 14. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-78. - Permit application information. 
Application for an operator permit shall include: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Sex; 
(4)  Residence address; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Phone number; 
(7)  Place(s) of employment as an operator; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Proof of attendance at a bloodborne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the department; and 
(10)  Photo I.D. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-79. - Knowledge required. 
Applicant shall demonstrate knowledge of the following subjects: 
(1)  Anatomy. 
(2)  Skin diseases, disorders and conditions (including diabetes). 
(3)  Infectious disease control, including waste disposal, handwashing, techniques, sterilization equipment operation and methods, and sanitization/disinfection/sterilization methods and techniques. 
Facility safety and sanitation knowledge of the above subjects may also be demonstrated through submission of documentation of attendance/completion of courses or completion of an examination approved, or given by the department with a passing grade of 85 percent, attained prior to issuance of the operators permit. Examples of courses approved by the department include courses as "Preventing Disease Transmission" (American Red Cross) and "Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (U.S. OSHA). Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations or associations or by equipment/manufacturers may also be submitted to the department for approval. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-80. - Compliance with provisions. 
No operator permit shall be issued unless, following reasonable investigation by the department, the body art operator has demonstrated compliance with the provisions of this section and all other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-81. - Permit conditions. 
All operator permits shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the provisions of this section as well as all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-82. - Posting of permits. 
All operator permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 12. - PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 12-83. - Under the age of 18. 
It is prohibited to perform body art on any body part of a person under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-84. - Under the influence. 
It is prohibited to perform body art on a person who, in the opinion of the operator, is inebriated or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-85. - Operating without permits and approvals. 
It is prohibited to own, operate, or solicit business as a body art establishment or operator without first obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from the department, unless specifically exempted by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-86. - Fraud. 
It is prohibited to obtain or attempt to obtain any body art establishment or operator permit by means of fraud, misrepresentation, or concealment. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-87. - Temporary establishments/operators. 
Temporary body art and mobile body art establishments/operators are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 13. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12-88. - Establishments operating prior to enactment of Code. 
Establishments operating at the time of the enactment of this Code shall be given up to 90 days to make application to the department and comply with these regulations. Establishments that continue to operate without proper permits from the department or operate in violation of these regulations will be subject to legal remedial actions and sanctions as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-89. - Inspection of establishment. 
A representative of the department shall properly identify him or herself before entering a body art establishment to make an inspection. Such inspections must be conducted at least twice annually. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-90. - Interference with department duties. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the department in the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-91. - Inspection report. 
A copy of the inspection report must be furnished to the permit holder or operator of the body art establishment, and posted for public view, with the department retaining possession of the original. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-92. - Violation of Code. 
If, after investigation, the department should find that a permittee or operator is in violation of this Code, the department may advise the permittee or operator, in writing, of its finding and instruct the operator to take specific steps to correct such violations within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-93. - Suspicion of communicable disease. 
If the department has reasonable cause to suspect that a communicable disease is or may be transmitted by an operator, by use of unapproved or malfunctioning equipment, or by unsanitary or unsafe conditions that may adversely affect the health of the public, upon written notice to the owner or operator, the department may do any or all of the following: 
(1)  Issue an order excluding any or all operators from the permitted body art establishment who are responsible, or reasonably appear responsible, for the transmission of a communicable disease until the department determines there is no further risk to public health. 
(2)  Issue an order to immediately suspend the permit of the licensed establishment until the department determines there is no further risk to the public health. Such an order shall state the cause for the action. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 14. - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS 

Sec. 12-94. - Failure to comply with Code. 
Permits issued under the provisions of the Code may be suspended temporarily by the department for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-95. - Written notice of suspension. 
Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of this Code, the operator must be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of this notice, immediately suspended. The notice must also contain a statement informing the permit holder or operator that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the department within the time specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-96. - Reinstatement of permit. 
Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make application for reinstatement of the permit. Within ten days of receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his or her opinion the conditions causing the suspension have been corrected and submission of the appropriate re-inspection fees, the department shall re-inspect the body art establishment or evaluate documentation provided by the operator. If the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this Code, the permit will be reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-97. - Repeated or serious violations. 
For repeated or serious (any Code infraction that threatens the health of the client or operator) violations of any of the requirements of this Code or for interference with department personnel in the performance of their duties, a permit may be permanently revoked after a hearing. Before taking such action, the department shall notify the permit holder or operator in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising the permit holder or operator of the requirements for filing a request for a hearing. A permit may be suspended for cause, pending its revocation or hearing relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-98. - Service of notice; request for hearing. 
The department may permanently revoke a permit after five days following service of the notice unless a request for a hearing is filed within the five-day period with the department by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-99. - Hearings conducted by department. 
The hearings provided for in this section must be conducted by the department at a time and place designated by the department. On the basis of the record of the hearing, the department shall make a finding and may sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision must be furnished to the permit holder or operator by the department. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
DIVISION 15. - INTERPRETATION AND SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 12-100. - Interpretation of Code. 
In the interpretation of this Code, the singular may be read as the plural, the masculine gender as the feminine or neuter, and the present tense as the past or future, where the context so dictates. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 12-101. - Severability. 
In the event any particular clause or section of this Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect. Toward that end, the provisions of these regulations are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 08-06-02, 6-17-08) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Business regulations authorized, §§ 1.12, 1.13(3). 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; taxation, ch. 62; horse-drawn carriages for hire, ch. 67. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Business means any person who within the corporate limits of the city engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents himself to be engaged in, any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly. Any person advertising by any means, including but not limited to signs, cards, circulars, newspapers, etc., that he is engaged in business of any kind shall be liable for the license required by this article and the payment of the fee therefor. No business required by this article to secure an occupation tax certificate shall be exempt from payment of the occupation tax on the ground that the business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to the purpose. 
City means the City of Helen. 
Date of commencing operations means the date on which a business heretofore not engaged in commercial transactions within the city becomes engaged in business as hereinafter defined. 
Employee shall mean an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Engaged in business means that any person shall be deemed engaged in business and thus subject to the requirements of this article when real property owned by the person is offered for rent or rented, when the person performs any act of selling any goods or services or solicits business or represents himself to be engaged in business or offers goods or services for sale for payment primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer, or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, all of the foregoing either as an owner, operator, or agent in any business, trade, profession or occupation within the city. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession,or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle is used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for the revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the City of Helen. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the City of Helen acknowledging payment of the occupation tax. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations are those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the City of Helen acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 95-10-01, 11-21-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-27. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, an occupation tax based upon number of employees in the State of Georgia is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more location or offices within the corporate limits of the city. The number of employees of the business or practitioner and computed on a full-time position basis or full-time equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time equivalents in the State of Georgia in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this chapter shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner which has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax shall only be subject to occupation tax by the City of Helen for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portions of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than February 1 of the following year the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owning to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city manager. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to the occupation tax pursuant to this chapter only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(g)  The occupation tax shall be levied for each calendar year on all occupations and businesses in the city which, under the laws of the state and city, the city has the authority to license and collect a fee therefor. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 95-10-01, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 97-01-01, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 98-06-01, 6-25-98) 
Sec. 14-28. - Separate businesses. 
Where business is conducted at more than one location or place, each location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this article; and a separate occupation tax shall be levied and paid. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-29. - Payment of occupation tax. 
All occupation taxes assessed and fixed in accordance with this division shall be due on January 1 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-30. - Occupation tax certificate to be displayed. 
All persons shall exhibit and display the occupation tax certificate issued to them in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at which address the occupation tax certificate was issued. Any nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry the occupation tax certificate or an unaltered copy either upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the businesses and the person shall exhibit it to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-31. - Change of address. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the city manager of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the city not later than the day of moving. The occupation tax certificate will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-32. - Occupation tax certificate transferable. 
Occupation tax certificates shall be transferable, and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the continuation of the business, provided by the name, location and business activity remain unchanged. The new owner shall notify the city manager of the change in ownership in writing on a form provided by the city not later than ten days following the date of such change. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-33. - Penalties for failure to make timely payment; interest on unpaid taxes and fees. 
Should any occupation tax imposed by this chapter remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the tax, the person liable for the tax or fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. All taxes and fees if not paid on or before the date due, as provided for in this division, shall be considered delinquent and shall, from the due date, bear interest at the rate of one percent per month. The above enumerated penalties and interest shall apply independent of any sentences imposed in accordance with section 14-40. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 95-10-01, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 14-34. - Exceptions enumerated, regulated. 
(a)  Personal investments. Any individual, association, estate or trust holding stocks, bonds or any other type of securities for personal investment purposes is hereby declared not subject to the provisions of this division provided that the principal occupation of the individual, estate, association or trust is not the trading, holding of exchange of stocks, bonds or securities. 
(b)  Professional. "Practitioners of professions" are: (1) Lawyers; (2) Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; (3) Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; (4) Chiropractors; (5) Podiatrists; (6) Dentists; (7) Optometrists; (8) Psychologists; (9) Veterinarians; (10) Landscape architects; (11) Land surveyors; (12) Practitioners of physiotherapy; (13) Public accountants; (14) Embalmers; (15) Funeral directors; (16) Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; (17) Architects; and, (18) Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
Such term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(c)  Insurance companies. Insurance companies shall pay a license fee as levied by Division 3 of this article, and applicable state law. 
(d)  Financial institutions. Financial institutions shall pay a license fee as levied by Division 4 of this article, and applicable state law. 
(e)  Performances, expositions and similar events of limited duration. There is hereby levied and assessed an occupation tax of $100.00 upon the performance of any concert, exposition, show or event similar to the foregoing, or upon any cultural, athletic or similar event, for which admission is charged and when the promoter thereof is otherwise certified for such business activity by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-35. - Administration. 
The city manager shall administer and enforce the division for the levy, assessment and collection of occupation taxes and penalties imposed herein. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 95-10-01, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 14-36. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of this State or United States, for the administration and enforcement of this division and the collection of the regulatory fees and occupation taxes hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-37. - Duties of city manager. 
The city manager or his authorized representative shall, among other duties: 
(a)  Prepare and provide the necessary forms for taxing a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce this division. 
(b)  Issue to each person an occupation tax certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the occupation tax assessed and levied in this division; provided, however, where under other ordinances of the city, permits, certifications and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the city manager shall not issue occupation tax certificate until the applicant exhibits to him those obtained permits, certification and compliances; in those cases where an applicant has applied for necessary permits, certifications and compliances with enumerated conditions, and the applicant is permitted to operate a business while his application is pending, the city manager may consider that provisional approval has been granted and issue an occupation tax certificate; provided, however, that at least 60 days have elapsed since the applicant has made application for the required permits, certifications and compliances. 
(c)  Issue executions for the collection of all outstanding taxes and fees levied and assessed under the terms of this division, together with penalties and interest; the executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes and fees due the city. 
(d)  Issue in any year an occupation tax certificate when an applicant exhibits to the city manager such permits, certifications and compliances which, under the laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States, would entitle the applicant to it. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 95-10-01, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 14-38. - Duration of occupation tax certificate. 
The occupation tax certificate referred to in this division shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-39. - Casual and isolated activity. 
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted as to require any person who may engage in causal or isolated activity and commercial transactions involving personal assets and not the principal occupation of the individual to obtain an occupation tax certificate and pay a fee therefor. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-40. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division; any person committing any offense made unlawful herein; and, any person engaging in business within the city without having first obtained the occupation tax certificate as herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation. 
(b)  The failure of any person required by the occupation tax ordinance to pay the occupation tax shall be occasion to have the tax collected by the issuance of execution, which shall be levied and collected by the city manager or his authorized representative, and the offender shall also be subject to be convicted of an offense if he carries on a business required to be licensed, unless he first pays the required occupation tax thereon. For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, a person/offender who is an employee acting in a capacity of "apparent authority" shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-41. - Subsequent amendments. 
This division shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time; and, no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess, levy and collect any of the occupation tax prescribed. The payment of the occupation tax herein provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment, levy or collection of additional fees and taxes upon the same person. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-42. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  An annual regulatory fee in the amount shown below is imposed on persons engaged in the following businesses: 

 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this chapter shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-43. - Practicing attorneys exempt from application of chapter. 
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, any person lawfully authorized to, and engaging in, practice of law within the boundaries of the city is exempt from the application and operation of this chapter. Any reference within this chapter to "lawyer" or any similar term indicating or identifying a person lawfully authorized to, and engaging in, practice of law, shall be deleted whenever and wherever such term imposes: 
(a)  An obligation or duty upon such person or profession; or 
(b)  a penalty for the violation of the provisions or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-01-01, 2-10-98) 
Secs. 14-44—14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROFESSIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Limitations on taxing of professionals, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-4 et seq. 

Sec. 14-51. - Taxation of professionals. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions, as defined in section 14-34(b), shall elect for their occupation tax either: 
(1)  The occupation tax as set forth in section 14-27; or, 
(2)  A tax of $400.00 for each practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. 
(b)  Such election shall be made on or before January 1, 1995. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by written request filed by the professional on or before January 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-52. - Scope of levy. 
The professional occupation tax herein levied shall be levied and assessed upon practitioners of the following professions, as defined by laws of the state: (1) Lawyers; (2) Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; (3) Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; (4) Chiropractors; (5) Podiatrists; (6) Dentists; (7) Optometrists; (8) Psychologists; (9) Veterinarians; (10) Landscape architects; (11) Land surveyors; (12) Practitioners of physiotherapy; (13) Public accountants; (14) Embalmers; (15) Funeral directors; (16) Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; (17) Architects; and, (18) Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-53. - Due date, payment of tax. 
The professional occupation tax shall be due and payable to the city annually on January 1. If any person commences practice within the city of a profession enumerated in section 14-52 on any date after January 1 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the practice. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-54. - Duty to pay tax, other license or occupation taxes due. 
Every person practicing any of the professions, as set forth in this division, shall pay the indicated professional occupation tax levied upon those professions for the privilege of practicing those professions, which shall not relieve the person paying it from the payment of any other license and/or occupation tax imposed on any business operated by that person. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-55. - Penalty for failure to make timely payment. 
Any person subject to the terms of this division failing to pay the professional occupation tax by the due date of the tax, as set forth in section 14-54, shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the professional occupation license tax assessed. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-56. - City manager to administer and enforce division, make and publish rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall administer and enforce this division for the levy, assessment and collection of occupation taxes, the registration of professions and penalties imposed herein, and may make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of this state of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of this division and for the collection of the occupation taxes levied and assessed hereunder and shall issue executions for the collections of all outstanding fees and taxes levied and assessed under the terms of this article. The executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes and fees due the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-57. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division with regard to registration, or any person engaging in the practice of one or more of the professions enumerated in section 14-51, within the city, without having first registered that profession and paying the tax therefor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-01, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-58. - Practicing attorneys exempt from application of chapter. 
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, any person lawfully authorized to, and engaging in, practice of law within the boundaries of the city, is exempt from the application and operation of this chapter. Any reference within this chapter to "lawyer" or any similar term indicating or identifying a person lawfully authorized to, and engaging in, practice of law, shall be deleted whenever and wherever such term imposes: 
(a)  An obligation or duty upon such person or profession; or 
(b)  A penalty for the violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-01-01, 2-10-98) 
Secs. 14-59—14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 14-91. - License fee. 
There is hereby levied and assessed upon each insurance company engaged in the business of insurance within the city an annual license fee in the amount of $15.00. This license fee shall be due and payable on January 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 6-401, 4-16-91) 
State Law reference— Fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 14-92. - Tax—Life, accident and sickness insurance. 
There is hereby levied and assessed upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city an annual tax based upon gross direct premiums in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fee imposed in section 14-91. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 6-402, 4-16-91) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 14-93. - Same—Other insurance. 
There is hereby levied and assessed upon each insurer, writing other than life, accident, or sickness insurance, an annual tax in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums on such other insurance received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fee imposed in section 14-91. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 6-403, 4-16-91) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 14-94. - Enforcement. 
The tax levied by this division may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 6-404, 4-16-91) 
Secs. 14-95—14-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTION LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 14-111. - Levy, amount. 
There is hereby levied and assessed on depository financial institutions located within the city, an annual license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each of such institutions, or in the amount of $1,000.00 per institution, whichever is greater. The annual license tax shall be paid by each state or national banking association, federal savings and loan association, state building and loan association, federal credit union and other depository financial institution located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 6-501, 4-16-91) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 14-112. - Due date, payment of tax, required report. 
Each depository financial institution shall file a return of its annual gross receipts with the city by March 1, succeeding the calendar year in which such gross receipts were accumulated. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of the Department of Banking, and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-1 et seq. The tax levied by this section shall be assessed and paid based upon the information provided in said return. The tax shall be paid on or before April 1. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 6-502, 4-16-91) 
Sec. 14-113. - Enforcement. 
The tax levied by this division may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 6-503, 4-16-91) 
Secs. 14-114—14-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAY PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 14-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
The terms "pay parking lot" and "parking lot" shall be construed to be synonymous. The words "used" or "occupied" when applied to land or buildings shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." Other words are defined as follows: 
Adjunct parking lot means a pay parking lot operated in association with another business enterprise. An adjunct parking lot may extend gratis parking or reduced rates to customers of the associated business. 
Pay parking lot/parking lot means an enterprise involving the collection of money for the privilege of parking a vehicle. The collection of money may be for profit or nonprofit purposes. This definition shall not be construed to apply to vehicle impound lots or storage yards. This definition shall not be construed to apply to churches or any other non-profit organizations who are the record holders of title to real property within the city limits of Helen, and who utilize their own real property for 30 days a year or less for the collection of money to further their own nonprofit purposes. This exemption shall only apply to churches or other non-profit organizations who are the record holder of title to their own real property. This exemption may not be utilized to lease the record title holder's parking lot to another church or non-profit organization. 
Principal parking lot means a pay parking lot operated in excess of 120 days per annum. An adjunct or stand-alone parking lot may also be a principal parking lot. 
Residential parking lot means a pay parking lot operated upon the yard of a full-time, single-family residence by the landowner/resident for less than 90 days per annum. 
Secondary parking lot means a pay parking lot adjoining and operated in association with a principal parking lot upon the occasion of the associated principal lot being filled, i.e., an overflow lot. 
Stand-alone parking lot means a pay parking lot operated as a business enterprise in and of itself. 
Temporary parking lot means a pay parking lot operated for 120 days or less per annum. An adjunct, residential or stand-alone parking lot may also be a temporary parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-102, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 12-09-01, 9-18-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-162. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-115, 7-19-88) 
Sec. 14-163. - Scope. 
No parking lot shall hereafter be used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-103, 7-19-88) 
Sec. 14-164. - Development standards. 
The following standards are in addition to those provided elsewhere in this Code, and should be viewed as the minimum performance acceptable to the city: 
(1)  Nonresidential temporary parking lot requirements. 
a.  Base: gravel. 
b.  Boundaries: staked and roped. 
(2)  Secondary parking lot requirements. 
a.  Base: gravel. 
b.  Boundaries: cross-tie bordered. 
(3)  Principal parking lot requirements. 
a.  Base: gravel. 
b.  Boundaries: cross-tie bordered. 
c.  Structure: ticket booth or attendant building. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-106, 7-19-88) 
Sec. 14-165. - Sign requirements. 
At the entrance to every parking lot a sign shall be erected clearly displaying the rates charged. Such sign shall not exceed six square feet in size; and be limited to the colors red, white and blue if for a city-operated parking lot, and brown, white and green if for a parking lot operated by other than the city. Additionally, for parking lots operated by other than the city, a second sign of identical size and color shall be erected at the exit so that it may be easily read by drivers leaving the lot. Such sign shall display these words "Private Parking Lot/ (Name) , Owner." 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-109, 7-19-88) 
Cross reference— Signs, § 34-1001 et seq. 
Sec. 14-166. - Attendants' identification and dress. 
Every person attending a parking lot shall wear a badge which, at a minimum, identifies such attendant by name. Additionally, attendants in parking lots operated by the city shall be dressed in blue aprons, and those in lots operated by other than the city, in brown aprons. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-111, 7-19-88) 
Sec. 14-167. - Security. 
In the interest of public safety, the police chief may stipulate that the operators of parking lots retain uniformed security guards from a licensed, private security agency to patrol the lots at certain times on certain dates. Such stipulations by the police chief shall most likely involve, but not be limited to, holidays and local festivals when tourism is extraordinary. The police chief is empowered to suspend the operation of any parking lot upon failure to comply with his security stipulations. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-112, 7-19-88) 
Sec. 14-168. - Maintenance bond required of certain temporary parking lots. 
The operator of a temporary parking lot other than residential parking lot shall post with the city prior to commencing operation, a performance bond in the amount of $500.00, guaranteeing that the involved property and abutting public rights-of-way shall be kept clean of litter. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-113, 7-19-88) 
Sec. 14-169. - Liability insurance required. 
Liability insurance shall be maintained in force for every parking lot operation. The police chief, at his discretion, can require demonstration of proof of coverage. He is empowered to suspend the operation of any parking lot upon failure to demonstrate proof of coverage. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 35-114, 7-19-88) 
Secs. 14-170—14-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Licensee means the person authorized pursuant to a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Specified sexual activities means the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Special anatomical areas includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-20, 9-14-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-202. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
Furthermore, the board of commissioners finds that it is the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult establishments by imposing regulations prohibiting the sale of alcohol sale or consumption as set forth in this ordinance, and it is therefore the purpose of section 14-216 of this article to enact such a prohibition. 
Among the undesirable community conditions identified with live nude entertainment and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for the allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior, and acceleration of community blight; Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); 5634 East Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4279670 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curium); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Flanigans Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, Georgia, 2010 WS 520542 (11th Cir. 2010). Largely as a result of these concerns, The Supreme Court of Georgia has upheld a municipal ordinance prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments. 
Section 14-216 therefore serves the purpose of furthering important governmental interests of reducing crime and protecting property values which are unrelated to the suppression of speech. It is the intent of the board of commissioners to enact an ordinance, narrowly tailored, sufficient to combat the undesirable secondary effects of the serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment facilities. It is not the intent of the board of commissioners, in enacting this ordinance to deny to any person the right to speech or expression protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, but to adopt a content neutral ordinance to combat the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment where alcoholic beverages are served or consumed. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-10, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 11-3-01, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 14-203. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. In addition, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-250, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-204. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. Further, operating conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-260, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-205. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-60, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-206. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-150, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-207. - Erotic dance establishments. 
(a)  No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued by the city manager pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than June 30 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating beer, wine, liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-30, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-208. - Public exposure. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-40, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-209. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-70, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-210. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-80, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-211. - Location. 
(a)  No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-90, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-212. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city manager of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city manager and shall receive approval of such employment from the city manager. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city manager requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the city manager for a hearing. The decision of the city manager after hearing may be appealed to the city commission which may issue such order as is proper in the circumstances. An investigation fee of $100.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city manager evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of such employee's license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-100, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-213. - Cleaning licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-270, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-214. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city manager on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city manager shall have served on the licensee, by personal service on the licensee or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city manager may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of the use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city manager. The city manager shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-280, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-215. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-290, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-216. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, possessed or consumed on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 11-3-01, 3-15-2011) 
Secs. 14-217—14-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 14-231. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. Permits shall be issued, pursuant to this article, for a period of one year beginning January 1, 12:00 a.m. through December 31, 12:00 midnight. The annual permit fee or renewal fee shall be $5,000.00 and shall be paid to the city clerk no later than November 30 of the year preceding the permit year. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-50, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-232. - Application—Generally. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee of $2,000.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-110, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-233. - Same—Contents. 
(a)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous address of the applicant, if any, for a period of ten years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension of revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, and of directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and the last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal ordinance violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city manager shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(b)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner. 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
(4)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-120, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-234. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee of $2,000.00 has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in section 14-233. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-130, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-235. - Investigation of applicant. 
The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city manager may grant the permit if it is found that: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder. 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-140, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-236. - Transferability. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-160, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-237. - Change of licensed location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee of $2,000.00 has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-170, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-238. - Notice of appeal. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city manager. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city commission, with a certified mail copy to the city manager, and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of appeal, the action requested of the city commission and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The city manager shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for commission action. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-180, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-239. - Alternative hearing procedures. 
(a)  When an appeal is placed on the city commission agenda, the city commission may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city manager to give such notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city manager shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(b)  If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-190, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-240. - Conduct of city commission hearing. 
Whenever the city manager has scheduled an appeal before the city commission at the time and date set therefor the commission shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from the city staff. The city commission may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-190, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-241. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedures set out in his article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-210, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-242. - Rules of evidence inapplicable to hearings. 
The city commission and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-220, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-243. - Hearing officer's report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the city commission. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and chief of police. 
(b)  The city manager shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city commission meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates in writing to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-230, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-244. - Action by city commission on hearing officer's recommendation. 
The city commission may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the city commission does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 93-8-1, § 34-240, 9-14-93) 
Secs. 14-245—14-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GAMBLING, SWEEPSTAKES CAFES, ETC. 
DIVISION 1. - SWEEPSTAKES CAFES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-09-01, adopted Oct. 18, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion within Code. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been codified herein as Art. V, Div. 1, § 14-251. 

Sec. 14-251. - Moratorium on internet or phone card sweepstakes cafes. 
(1)  a.  A 365-day moratorium starting from the effective date of this division on the establishment or expansion of any "internet sweepstakes cafes" or "phone card sweepstakes cafes" or any variation thereof, whether independent or incidental to or accessory to any other permitted use. As part of this moratorium the city shall not accept or process any applications for zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, occupational tax certificates, or any other city licensing for "internet sweepstakes cafes" or "phone card sweepstakes cafes" or any variation thereof. This moratorium shall apply to all applications currently pending or under review by the city and staff as of the effective date of this division. 
b.  This moratorium shall be effective in the corporate and municipal boundaries of the City of Helen, Georgia. 
c.  The mayor and city commission may extend the moratorium established by this division two times for a period not to exceed 365 days upon a finding by the mayor and city council that the problems that gave rise to the original moratorium continue to exist and that progress is being made by the city but that additional time is necessary to adequately address the issues facing the city. 
(2)  The devices used in "internet sweepstakes cafes" or "phone card sweepstakes cafes" or any variation thereof which shall fall under this moratorium shall be labeled "sweepstakes devices" and shall be defined, but not limited to, computers, mechanical devices or electronic devices which may be operated by the public generally for gaming purposes using no skill and include anything that uses energy and is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism that can be viewed by a person in order to enter a sweepstakes, or like contest, and engage in any activity or process associated with the sweepstakes, or like contest, including viewing information which would notify the person that the person is eligible, will receive, or is entitled to receive a prize. Machines designated for use by the state lottery commission and machines falling under the definition of "bona fide coin operated amusement machines" under state law shall not fall under the definition of "sweepstakes devices". 
(3)  For purposes of this moratorium "internet sweepstakes cafes" or "phone card sweepstakes cafes" or any variation thereof is defined as any business premises upon which patrons may use sweepstakes devices which provide the ability of a player to win a cash or non-cash prize for participation in a no skill game after the payment of cash or other consideration or the payment for merchandise, including, but not limited to, phone cards or internet time or payment for time to use such sweepstakes devices, even if others can participate for free. 
(4)  This moratorium has been placed into effect as an emergency measure by the mayor and city commission as a reasonable measure deemed necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its residents and property owners. 
(5)  a.  The mayor and city commission may authorize exceptions to the moratorium imposed by this division when it finds, based upon substantial competent evidence presented to it, that the deferral of action on an application for a zoning permit or any city issued license for the duration of the moratorium would impose an extraordinary hardship on a landowner or petitioner. 
b.  Any request for an exception from the moratorium imposed by this division shall be filed in writing with the city manager or designee and shall include the name of the requester, the name and address of the proposed location, the relationship of the requester to the proposed business and location, a recitation of the facts which are alleged to support a claim for an extraordinary hardship, any other information the city manager deems necessary for the mayor and city commission to be informed with respect to the request, and shall be signed and notarized. 
c.  At least one public hearing on any request for an exception for an extraordinary hardship under the moratorium shall be held by the mayor and city commission before the mayor and city commission may take action on such request. 
d.  When the mayor and city commission is tasked with reviewing a written application for an exception from the moratorium imposed by this division due to a claim of an extraordinary hardship they shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria, but final discretion shall remain with the mayor and city commission: 
1.  Whether, prior to the effective date of this division, the applicant has received any permits or licenses from the city for such business location; and 
2.  Whether, prior to the effective date of this division, the applicant has made substantial expenditures of money or resources in reliance of those permits or licenses which may have been issued by the city; and 
3.  Whether, prior to the effective date of this division, the applicant has contractual commitments in reliance of those permits or licenses which many have been issued by the city; and 
4.  Whether, prior to the effective date of this division, the applicant has incurred any financial obligations to a lending institution which, despite a thorough review of alternative solutions, the applicant cannot meet those financial obligations unless granted an exemption and the opportunity to conduct business; and 
5.  Whether the moratorium will expose the applicant to substantial monetary liability to third parties or would leave the applicant unable to earn a reasonable return on any investment made on the real property affected by this division; and 
6.  The history and location of the property, including past commercial business uses of the property, if any; and 
7.  Any staff report which may have been created based upon the application for an exemption from the moratorium imposed by this division; and 
8.  Any other criteria the mayor and city commission deems pertinent to deciding whether such exemption from the moratorium imposed by this division should be granted. 
(6)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to legalize, license or authorize any operation of a device which is unlawful to operate under the laws of the state. 
(7)  This moratorium may be terminated by the mayor and city commission prior to the expiration of 365 days upon the adoption by the commission of appropriate zoning and licensing ordinances. 
(8)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 11-09-01, 10-18-11) 
Editor's note— The provisions of § 14-251, as per Ord. No. 11-09-01, expire on Oct. 18, 2012. 
Chapter 18 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, art. IV. 
Cross reference— General penalty for violations of code, § 1-7. 
State Law reference— Municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-26. - Compensation of judge and associate judge. 
The compensation of the municipal court judge shall be $1.00 annually, and such other compensation as may be provided by resolution, and any associated judge appointed by the Helen city commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $1.00 annually, and such other compensation as may be provided by resolution. 
(Code 1987, § 5-103; Ord. No. 95-05-01, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 96-08-04, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 18-27. - Convening municipal court. 
The municipal court shall be convened on the second and fourth Wednesday of each calendar month beginning at 9:00 a.m., or any other dates and times as deemed necessary by the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1987, § 5-104; Ord. No. 95-05-01, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 98-06-02, 6-25-98) 
Sec. 18-28. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the clerk of the municipal court. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 1987, § 5-106) 
Sec. 18-29. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as herein provided. Such summons may be issued by the city manager, the city clerk, the building inspector, or any police officer of the city. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged; the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged; and the day, hour, and place of trial; requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by a police officer of the city either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1987, § 5-107) 
Charter reference— Summons authorized, § 4.14(h). 
Sec. 18-30. - Subpoenas. 
The city clerk shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the municipal court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Code 1987, § 5-108) 
Charter reference— Subpoenas authorized, § 4.14(h). 
Sec. 18-31. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for same. 
(Code 1987, § 5-109) 
Sec. 18-32. - Collection of fines. 
When directed by the judge of the municipal court, the city clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by the court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods, chattels, lands or tenements of the person so fined. 
(Code 1987, § 5-113) 
Sec. 18-33. - Additional costs for law library. 
The municipal court of the city, by and through its chief judge or other authorized presiding judge, shall have the authority in all criminal cases adjudicated before such court, and in which cases costs and fines are ordered, to levy or charge an additional $3.00 to be designated and collected as a fee for the county law library fund. The city clerk shall remit monthly the law library fees to the treasurer of the board of trustees, or other authority designated by the chief judge of the Enotah Judicial Circuit as an appropriate recipient of the sums collected for the county law library. 
(Ord. No. 93-2-1, § 5-112(a), 3-9-93) 
Sec. 18-34. - Technology surcharge. 
There shall be imposed by the municipal court a technology surcharge in the amount of ten percent per offense for all offenses except O.C.G.A. 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1, said surcharge to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city to provide technology support for the police department and municipal court functions. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-01, 6-17-08) 
Chapter 22 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, art. V. 
Cross reference— City commission, § 2-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Election districts. 
The area comprising the corporate limits of the city, as the same is now or shall hereafter exist, shall constitute the sole election district of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 2-402) 
State Law reference— Precincts, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-160 et seq. 
Sec. 22-2. - Polling places. 
The polling place within the city shall be the city hall. 
(Code 1987, § 2-403; Ord. No. 15-09-02 , 10-20-15) 
State Law reference— Polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163 et seq. 
Sec. 22-3. - Candidate qualification fee. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be $35.00 for the office of city commissioner, which fee shall be paid to the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing such notice of candidacy. 
(Ord. No. 87-5, § 2-302, 11-10-87) 
State Law reference— Qualification fee and alternative thereto, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-90. 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers of city, §§ 1.12, 1.13. 
Cross reference— Land development code, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 54; sewers and sewage disposal, § 70-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq.; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1987, § 15-109) 
Secs. 26-2—26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR POLLUTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate air pollution, § 1.13(19). 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for air quality control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(13); air pollution generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; motor vehicle emissions, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-130 et seq. 

Sec. 26-26. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Code 1987, § 12-104) 
Sec. 26-27. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the fire marshal and such subordinate officers of the fire department as are necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 1987, § 12-103) 
Sec. 26-28. - Open burning. 
(a)  General prohibition. Except as hereinafter provided in subsection (b), no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the person responsible for same upon notice by the fire department officer in charge. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open burning may be done under permit as follows: 
a.  Application for burning permits shall be on forms provided by the fire department officer in charge. 
b.  No permit shall be issued unless the issuing officer is satisfied that: 
1.  There is no practical available alternate method for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
2.  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning; 
3.  No salvage operation by open burning will be conducted; 
4.  No leaves will be burned in those areas where provision is made for public collection thereof; and 
5.  Conditions are not too dry to declare a dangerous or no burn situation. 
c.  Any permit issued may be limited by the imposition of conditions to: 
1.  Prevent the creation of excessive smoke; or 
2.  Protect property and the health, safety and comfort of persons from the effects of the burning. 
d.  If it becomes apparent at any time to the fire officer in charge that limitations need to be imposed for any of the reasons stated in subsection (b)b. above, the fire officer in charge shall notify the permittee in writing and any limitations so imposed shall be treated as conditions under which the permit is issued. 
e.  No permit issued shall authorize the burning of tires or other large rubber or synthetic rubber commodity. 
(2)  Open burning may be done without a permit as follows: 
a.  Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
1.  For the prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means. 
2.  For the instruction of public firefighters or industrial employees under supervision of the fire chief. 
3.  For the protection of public health. 
b.  Fires may be used for the cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
c.  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
d.  Fires may be set in the course of agricultural operations in growing crops or raising fowl or animals, except when conditions are dry such that a no burning situation has been declared by local, state or federal fire officials, and provided no nuisance is created. 
e.  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(Code 1987, § 12-102) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Secs. 26-29—26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Nuisance abatement authorized, § 1.13(25). 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; unsafe buildings, § 34-1201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others. 
(2)  Offends decency. 
(3)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage. 
(4)  Is offensive to the senses. 
(5)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property. 
(6)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
(Code 1987, § 15-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-52. - Illustrative enumeration. 
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions is hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation. 
(2)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things. 
(3)  Weeds and vegetation grown in excess of 15 inches in height or any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
(4)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
(5)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises. 
(6)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the mission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(7)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(8)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(9)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(10)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(11)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(12)  Any dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle parked or placed in and upon any public street, thoroughfare, parking, curbing or other public property, or in and upon any private property unless such dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle is stored in a garage or other fully enclosed structure, or in an area sufficiently fenced in to conceal it from public view. 
(13)  Accumulation of litter swept or deposited in any gutter, street, or other public or private place. 
(Code 1987, § 15-102) 
Sec. 26-53. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Code 1987, § 15-103) 
Sec. 26-54. - Notice to abate—Issuance. 
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city, the police chief or some other duly designated officer of the city shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(Code 1987, § 15-104) 
Sec. 26-55. - Same—Contents. 
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this article shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary. 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance. 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate the nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(Code 1987, § 15-105) 
Sec. 26-56. - Same—Service. 
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served personally or by certified mail. 
(Code 1987, § 15-106) 
Sec. 26-57. - Abatement by city. 
Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance is served pursuant to the provisions of this article to abate the same, the police chief or other duly designated officer of the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
(Code 1987, § 15-107) 
Sec. 26-58. - City's costs declared lien. 
Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(Code 1987, § 15-108) 
ARTICLE IV. - TREE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 26-59. - Intent. 
The intent of this ordinance is to establish protective regulations for trees in the public areas of the city in order to better control problems with flooding, soil conservation, air pollution and noise in the city, and to regulate trees on private property where necessary to make the city a healthier and safer place in which to live. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-60. - Creation and establishment of a city tree board. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city, which shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-61. - Term of office. 
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the city commission shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for only two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-62. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-63. - Duties, responsibilities, and operation. 
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, and council for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. The board, when requested by the city commission, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-64. - Definitions; kinds of trees. 
Crown spread. The distance measured across the greatest diameter of a plant. 
Park trees. Either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs on land designated as public park land, owned by the city or land to which the public has free access as a park. 
Shade trees. Any self-supporting woody plant of a species that is well shaped, well branched and well foliated which normally grows to an overall height of at least 35 feet and normally develops an average mature crown spread greater than 30 feet in the city. 
Small tree. Either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs, which do not normally exceed 12 feet in height at maturity. No small tree shall be permitted to exceed 12 feet in height. 
Street trees. Either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs growing on land lying within the public right-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
The city tree board of the city shall maintain a list of street, park, shade and small trees approved by the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-65. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
No tree (whether street tree, park tree, shade tree or small tree) shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured from point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. However, shrubs maintained less than three feet in height are permitted. No tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fire hydrant. This section shall apply only to the planting of new trees and shall not be interpreted to require the removal of trees in the ground on the date this ordinance is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-66. - Utilities. 
No street trees other than those species meeting the definitions of small trees as set forth in this article may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, power line, or other utility. This section shall apply only to the planting of new trees and shall not be interpreted to require the removal of trees in the ground on the date this ordinance is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-67. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of the streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety and to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
The city shall have the right to remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof within a public area or right-of-way which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-68. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires where other pruning practices are impractical shall be exempted from this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-69. - Pruning, corner clearance of trees on private property. 
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of lights along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-70. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city shall have the authority to take such action whenever necessary in cases of emergencies presenting a clear and immediate danger if irreparable harm to persons or property. otherwise, the city tree board shall initiate action to have the tree removed by the provisions of the nuisance ordinance of the city, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-71. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-72. - Interference with city tree board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, small trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-73. - Review by city commission. 
The city commission shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city commission, who may hear the matter and make final decision. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-74. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to violate any provision of this article. Any person violating the terms of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-02, 11-20-01) 
Secs. 26-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-12-02, adopted January 20, 2004, amended the Code by repealing former art. V, §§ 26-76—26-84, and adding a new art. V to read as herein set out. Former art. V pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 00-10-03, adopted December 19, 2000. 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, § 34-901 et seq. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local ordinances relating to same, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4 et seq. 

Sec. 26-76. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "City of Helen Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-77. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subdivision (b). 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 26-78(a)(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purpose of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry our activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified Personnel : Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-78. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 26-79 of this article and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 26-79 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsections 26-79(c), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders: 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electric system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Construction of any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-79. - Minimum requirements using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 26-79(b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMP's. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsection 26-79(b) and (c) shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 2-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 26-79(b) and (c). 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-80. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 26-80(c). Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsection 26-79(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $45.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permitee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land-disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 26-79(b) and (c) and bonding, if required as per section 26-79(b)(5)b, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 26-79(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approval plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 26-79(b) and (c), are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 26-80(b)(5)b are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-81. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building administrator will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The building administrator shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The board, on or before December 31, 2003, shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as a local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-82. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order. 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action within a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 26-80(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-83. - Education and certification. 
After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-84. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city commission within 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 26-85. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-02, 1-20-04) 
Secs. 26-86—26-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 26-130. - Definitions. 
Generalized wetlands map. The current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Helen, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination. A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity. Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands included hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. No. 02-03-01, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 26-131. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National inventory maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The generalized wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands with the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 02-03-01, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 26-132. - Protection criteria. 
Requirement for local permit or permission: No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetland protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the city planning official using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. 02-03-01, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 26-133. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
Note: The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of this state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. No. 02-03-01, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 26-134. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 02-03-01, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 26-135. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site Plans. Application for a local development permit within the city wetlands protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(2)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two-feet and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(3)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic material. 
(4)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plans. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city planning official or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement from detailed site plans. 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevation, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the planning official and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 dollars per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the planning official. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the planning official. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the planning official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the planning official may be appealed to the city commission. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced with 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the planning official. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the city planning official. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city planning official. 
(3)  If the planning official discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city commission shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The planning official may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The planning official shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city commission or its designee may, within the time specified by the superior court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e. grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city commission. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the generalized city wetlands map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of competence jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-03-01, 4-16-02) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire prevention and protection powers, § 1.13(20), (36). 
Cross reference— Open burning, § 26-28; technical codes, § 34-801 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power to provide fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(1); fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Obstructing firefighting apparatus. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any firefighting apparatus. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire plug so as to obstruct approaches to the same by the fire department. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(8), (9)) 
State Law reference— Obstructing firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1. 
Sec. 30-2. - Persons permitted within vicinity of fire. 
No persons other than firefighters, city officials, police officers and the property owner or his agent shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(11)) 
Secs. 30-3—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments generally, § 2-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-26. - Composition. 
The fire department, either full-time, volunteer or any combination, shall consist of a fire chief, fire marshal and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for by the city manager following budgetary authorization by the city commission. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(1); Ord. No. 93-5-1, 6-16-93) 
Sec. 30-27. - Rank. 
Following the fire chief in rank shall be the fire marshal, the captain, the lieutenants, the training officer and the firefighters, in order of seniority in each group. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(2); Ord. No. 93-5-1, 6-16-93) 
Sec. 30-28. - Fire chief. 
(a)  Appointment. The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be the chief executive officer of the fire department, subject always to the orders of the manager and to the regulations of the city commission. 
(b)  Oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the fire chief shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by section 2-76 of this Code. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city, and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To see to the proper and speedy extinguishment of all accidental or intentionally caused fires. 
(2)  To see to the enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted by the commission. 
(3)  To keep or cause to be kept adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts and other activities of the department. 
(4)  To submit a monthly written report to the commission on the activities of the department. 
(5)  To establish rules and regulations, subject to approval by the city commission, and governing the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of the fire department. 
(6)  To investigate the causes of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city. 
(d)  Resignation, removal, death, disability. In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the fire chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(3)) 
Sec. 30-29. - Fire marshal. 
(a)  Appointment. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be assistant executive officer of the fire department, subject always to the orders of the fire chief and the city manager. 
(b)  Oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the fire marshal shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by section 2-76 of this Code. 
(c)  Power and duties. The fire marshal, in the absence of the fire chief or under his guidance shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city and any duties required therein, along with the following duties: 
(1)  Enforcement of such regulations as specified in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4, through the authority having jurisdiction assigned to the office of the city fire marshal. 
(2)  Conduct occupancy inspections and fire safety inspections within all buildings outlined in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4. 
(3)  Plan and specifications review of all new construction as specified in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4. 
(4)  Conduct fire cause and determination investigations of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city. 
(5)  Issue citations in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4 as well as this Code, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 93-5-1, § 3-704(4), 6-16-93) 
Sec. 30-30. - Firefighters. 
(a)  Qualifications. Any person employed or accepted as a volunteer firefighter shall satisfy the qualifications imposed by the Georgia Firefighters and Standards Act (O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.). 
(b)  Oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of their duties, all firefighters shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by section 2-76 of this Code. 
(c)  Duties. It shall be the duty of all firefighters to become familiar with and proficient in the handling of all of the apparatus of the fire department, to be prepared at a moment's notice to respond to all alarms of fire, to observe all rules and regulations of the fire department established by the fire chief, and to obey all orders of the commanding officer at all fires. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(4); Ord. No. 93-5-1, 6-16-93) 
Sec. 30-31. - Daily inspections. 
Each fire station and its equipment shall be examined daily. Such inspections shall be rigidly made and shall ensure that all apparatus are maintained in excellent working condition at all times, ready for immediate service, and that all fire stations and surroundings are in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(5)) 
Sec. 30-32. - Persons permitted on apparatus. 
No persons other than members of the fire department shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or returning from fires. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(7)) 
Sec. 30-33. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(10)) 
Sec. 30-34. - Use of equipment outside city limits. 
Upon the orders of the fire chief or the manager, members of the fire department are authorized to go outside the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of extinguishing fires or rendering aid to other fire departments, or for rendering aid in the case of accidents. 
(Code 1987, § 3-704(13)) 
Secs. 30-35—30-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FALSE ALARMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-12-01 , adopted Dec. 15, 2015, amended the Code by the addition of Art. III, §§ 30-35—30-40; however, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 30-45—30-50, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 

Sec. 30-45. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm owners and alarm businesses to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of Alarm Systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms. The city finds that excessive false alarms unduly burden the City of Helen Police and Fire Departments and waste limited public safety resources. 
(b)  This article governs alarm systems intended to summon a public safety department and provides for the assessment of fines for excessive false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 15-12-01 , 12-15-15) 
Sec. 30-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings given in this section. 
Alarm activation report means a document issued by the Helen Police Department or Helen Fire Department indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a false alarm. 
Alarm initiating device means a device that is designed to respond either manually or automatically to smoke, fire, or activation of a fire suppression system. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal, whether audible, visual, and/or silent, generated by an alarms system, to which a public safety department is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of a fire, illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which a public safety department will be requested to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, or any other entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises, whether owned or leased, an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a pre-recorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the emergency communications system requesting public safety department dispatch. 
Cancellation means the process by which a response is terminated when the alarm company (used by the alarm user) notifies the emergency communications center that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring public safety department response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation from the alarm company occurs prior to the respective public safety department arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm, and no fine will be assessed. The cancellation must come from the alarm company and not the property owner. 
City means the City of Helen, Georgia. 
Enforcement official means the fire chief or the police chief, or their respective designated representatives. 
False Alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon a public safety department which occurs as a result of mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, unless the request for response was cancelled by the alarm company before a public safety department arrives at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection of premises by a public safety department, evidence indicates that no fire, medical emergency, unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed, occurred or attempted in or on the Premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been cause or activated by violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the alarm user's alarm company, or designee, to test the alarm system, and the city is notified of such a test. 
False fire alarm means a false alarm to summon the fire department. 
False alarm shall not include the activation of an alarm system that is not a monitored system. 
Owner means any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises. 
Premises means any building, structure or combination of buildings, including structures which serve as dwelling units such as single-family or multi-family, or any other area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose, wherein an alarm system is installed. 
Public safety department(s) means the police department and the fire department individually or collectively, as the context indicates. 
Serve shall mean hand-delivery of written notification by a representative of the city to the owner or authorized representative who responded to the premises. In the event the owner or authorized representative fails to respond to the premises within 30 minutes. Serve shall mean placing a copy of an alarm report affixed to the main entrance door of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 15-12-01 , 12-15-15) 
Sec. 30-47. - Duties of the alarm user/owner. 
An alarm user or owner shall be required to: 
(a)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; 
(b)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes upon notification of the need to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises; and 
(c)  Ensure that an alarm system is not manually activated by the alarm user or any other person for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(Ord. No. 15-12-01 , 12-15-15) 
Sec. 30-48. - Inspection, testing and maintenance. 
(a)  The owner shall ensure that all alarm systems are inspected and tested at least once per year. 
(b)  The owner shall ensure that all alarm systems are regularly maintained such that the system remains in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 15-12-01 , 12-15-15) 
Sec. 30-49. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning a public safety department when no fire, medical emergency, burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than 20 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 15-12-01 , 12-15-15) 
Sec. 30-50. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Alarm activation report. The officer or member of the public safety department who responded to said premises shall serve the Owner or authorized representative with an alarm activation report either in person or by affixing such a report to the main entrance if no owner or authorized representative is on the scene. The alarm activation report will include the findings of the responding public safety department official as to the validity of the alarm activation. 
(b)  Excessive false alarm to summon police department. It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarms to summon the police department within a calendar ear is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Fines for such false alarm to summon the police department with a calendar year shall be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
(1)  First and second false alarm ..... No charge 
(2)  Third through fifth false alarm ..... $ 50.00 
(3)  Sixth false alarm ..... 100.00 
(4)  Seventh false alarm ..... 150.00 
(5)  Eighth false alarm ..... 250.00 
(6)  Ninth false alarm ..... 350.00 
(7)  Tenth and over false alarm ..... 500.00 
(c)  Excessive false alarms to summon the fire department. Fines shall be assessed against an alarm user when a false fire alarm to summon the fire department continue. Fines for each false fire alarm within a calendar year shall be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
(1)  First false fire alarm ..... No charge 
(2)  Second through ninth false fire alarm ..... $250.00 
(3)  Tenth and over false fire alarm ..... 500.00 
(d)  The police chief and members of the Helen Police Department will be authorized to issue a citation for violation of this article. The fire chief and city manager are authorized to direct the police department to issue citations for violation of this article. Any citation issued for violation of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city as a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-12-01 , 12-15-15) 
Chapter 34 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-26. - Enforcement officer. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated, the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city manager or his designees. All references in this chapter to an enforcement officer are references to the city manager or his designees in the absence of provisions to the contrary. 
(b)  The enforcement officer shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the city ordinances or codes. 
(2)  To make or cause to be made, at any reasonable hour, entries into buildings or premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing is going on, for the purpose of making inspections. 
(3)  To issue written stop work orders on construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the city when such work is being done in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1987, § 3-705) 
Secs. 34-27—34-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND DESIGN REVIEW BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-301 et seq. 

Sec. 34-51. - Established. 
There is a planning and design review board. 
Sec. 34-52. - Membership. 
(a)  The planning and design review board shall be comprised of seven members appointed by the city commission. Members of the board must be residents of the city, or a resident and registered voter of the county who either owns property within the city and has done so for one year or more, or has held a city business license and has done so for two years or more, or is an officer of a corporation which either owns property within the city and has done so for one year or more, or holds a city business license and has done so for two years or more. 
(b)  Except for the initial term, which shall be one year for the first two members, the terms for the members shall be for two years each. Members may be reappointed. 
(c)  Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only and in the same manner as for original appointments. 
(d)  Any member of the planning and design review board may be removed by the city commission for cause after written notice and a public hearing. 
(e)  All members of the planning and design review board shall receive compensation in an amount to be determined by the city commission. 
(f)  No member of the board may hold any other public office or position within the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 94-03-01, § 7(1), 7-19-94) 
Sec. 34-53. - Chairperson. 
The municipal planning and design review board shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson for a period of one year. The chairperson may serve in this position for more than one term. The vice-chairperson shall be a member of the board elected by the board and shall serve for a period of one year. The vice-chairperson may serve in this position for more than one term. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, 9-15-92) 
Sec. 34-54. - Secretary. 
The city manager or his designee shall act as the secretary of the planning and design review board. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, 9-15-92) 
Sec. 34-55. - Meetings and rules. 
(a)  The planning and design review board shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the chairperson or majority of members shall determine. 
(b)  All meetings shall be convened in the city commission chambers. The date, time and location of the monthly meeting shall be at the same time, date and location. Any change shall be publicized at the city hall. Notice of a change in the meeting shall be done at least 15 days in advance. 
(c)  Written notice of a called meeting shall be given to the members 48 hours prior to the meeting. A public notice of such a meeting will be posted at city hall 48 hours prior to the meeting. The board may only act on old business at a called meeting. 
(d)  The board may take action only when a quorum is present. A quorum is three members. 
(e)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the absent vote or the failure to vote of each member. Records shall be kept of the board's examination and other official actions. 
(f)  The minutes and records shall be on file in city hall and shall be open for public inspection. 
(g)  The board shall adopt Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised as a guideline for the conducting and administration of its meetings. The board may adopt such other rules as may be necessary. 
(h)  Each of the members of the board shall have one vote on each issue that comes before the board except that the chairperson shall only exercise his vote for the purpose of breaking a tie. 
Sec. 34-56. - Staff advisor. 
The city manager or his designee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the planning and design review board. In this capacity, he may provide information, comments or other data pertinent to a particular issue; however, he shall not have any voting powers. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 94-03-01, § 7(2), 7-19-94) 
Sec. 34-57. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The planning and design review board shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and prepare plans for physical, social, and economic growth in an effort to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare of the municipality. In carrying out its objectives the planning and design review board shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city; 
(2)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a land development ordinance and map for the city; 
(3)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a soil erosion and sediment control ordinance for the city; 
(4)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a sign ordinance for the city; 
(5)  To prepare and recommend for adoption regulations for the subdivision of land within the city and to administer the regulations that may be adopted; 
(6)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a plat or plats or an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, unlined or narrowed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites and provide for the regulation of construction of buildings or other structures within such lines; and 
(7)  To cooperate with federal, state, or local public or quasi-public agencies. 
(b)  The planning and design review board shall act as an advisory council to the city commission on any and all matters of planning and land development. 
(c)  The board shall make recommendations to the city commission on zoning issues and changes, conditional uses, subdivision approvals, future land use, and regulations pertaining to the use and development of land and buildings. 
(d)  The board shall make recommendations to the city commission on placing conditions on property that would fall within the conditional use area of the use provisions of article III at the time of development. 
(e)  The board shall review, approve or disapprove all building plans for compliance with design standards in article IV. 
(f)  The board shall review all sign applications for compliance with article VII. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, 9-15-92) 
Secs. 34-58—34-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-301 et seq. 

Sec. 34-76. - Established. 
There is a board of appeals. 
Sec. 34-77. - Membership. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall consist of five members, appointed by the city commission. Members of the board of appeals, must be residents of the city, or a resident and registered voter of the county who either owns property within the city and has done so for one year or more, or has held a city business license and has done so for two years or more, or is an officer of a corporation which either owns property within the city and has done so for one year or more, or holds a city business license and has done so for two years or more. 
(b)  Except for the initial term, which shall be for one year for the first three members, the terms for the members shall be for two years each. 
(c)  Members may be reappointed. 
(d)  Vacancies shall be filled by appointment, for unexpired terms only, and in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(e)  No member of the board of appeals may hold any other public office or position in the city. 
(f)  Any member may be removed by the city commission for cause after written notice and a public hearing. 
(g)  All members shall receive compensation in an amount to be determined by the city commission. 
(h)  The board shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson for one year. 
(i)  The chairperson may serve in this position for more than one term. 
(j)  The enforcement officer shall serve as the secretary of the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 2, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 14-03-01, 4-1-14 ) 
Sec. 34-78. - Duties and powers. 
The board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide when an official allegation is made that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  To hear and decide variances to the terms of this chapter except as to the use of property upon which such board is required to pass under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 2(D)(1), 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-79. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall meet at the call of the chairperson or at the call of a majority of its members. 
(b)  The date, time and location of any meeting of the board of appeals shall be publicized at the city hall at least 15 days in advance of the date of the meeting. 
(c)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the absent vote or the failure to vote of each member, and records shall be kept of the board's examination and other official actions. 
(d)  The minutes and records shall be on file in the offices of the city hall, and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 2(D)(4), 6-19-90) 
Secs. 34-80—34-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. IV. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-101. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Helen zoning ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 1, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation or association. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed" to be "used" or "occupied." 
Accessory building means a detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
Alley means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, or any change in use or movement of a building from one location to another. 
Apartment means a dwelling unit in a multifamily or mixed use building. 
Apartment building means a residential building, other than a townhouse or condominium, containing three or more dwelling units. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a place which furnishes lodging or lodging and meals for at least four but not more than 12 transient persons in return for compensation. 
Buffer means a landscaped strip of land, enhanced to ensure proper screening between noncompatible zoning or commercial business uses. Items permitted to be utilized in the buffer strip include but are not limited to plantings, planters, fences, walls or earth berms. 
Buildable area means the portion of a lot which remains after the required setbacks have been taken into consideration and other applicable criteria (i.e., flood hazard area, easements, etc.). 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above- or belowground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles used for purposes of a building. 
Building height means the vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the peak of the building's main roof. 
Building line means a line formed by the face of a building, and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
Building, principle means a building in which is conducted the main use of the property on which the structure is located. 
Certificate of occupancy means a permit issued by the city which indicates that the use of a building, structure or land is in compliance with the provisions of this article and occupancy of the premises is permitted. 
Clinic means a facility which shall provide medical care, for humans or animals, with the exclusion of overnight care. 
Cluster housing means a development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas of a site to provide a higher density in part of the development to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, other land uses and the preservation of environmentally unique or sensitive features. 
Commercial development means any development intended for other than exclusive use as a detached one-family dwelling or accessory building thereto; including but not limited to the following uses: retail, wholesale, general service, public service, manufacturing and any other industrial, agricultural and multifamily dwelling. 
Conditional use means a use which may be permitted in a zone where it is specifically listed, subject to the review and approval of the planning and design review board and city commission. 
Convenience store means a small retail establishment which offers commonly staple food and supplies, possibly including gasoline and oil. 
Day care center means the provision of daytime supervision, training, medical services and the like for children of preschool age or for the elderly; a private facility licensed and approved for operation. 
District or zone means a portion of the city designated by the city commission and identified on the official zoning map as subject to specific regulations contained in this article. 
Duplex means a residential building containing two dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means a room, or group of rooms, with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation designed for and occupied by only one family. 
Enforcement officer means as provided in section 34-26. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or not more than four unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Fence means a structural barrier presenting a solid face or having openings among or between its constituent members which is used for enclosure, screening or demarcation; a wall with a height greater than four feet, constructed of wood, stone, brick, masonry, or concrete shall be considered a fence. 
Flood hazard area means that area which is subject to periodic flooding as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Floodway means the channel of a stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain designated by FEMA. 
Floor area ratio means a mathematical expression determined by dividing the total floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located. 
Garage means a structure, considered part of the principal structure if attached thereto and considered an accessory use if detached therefrom, used for the sheltering of automobiles. 
Home occupation means an occupation for gain or support which is customarily conducted at the home, which is incidental to the use of the dwelling unit, which employs not more than two people not residents of the premises, and utilizes not more than 25 percent of the total actual floor area is used for the home occupation purposes. (See section 34-255) 
Lot means a parcel of contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where severance creates any nonconforming use or structure. 
Lot, adjoining or adjacent means any lot with which the boundary of the lot shares a common border with the lot in question, or whose common border is separated only by an alley, easement or right-of-way. 
Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot line, generally measured perpendicular to the front line. 
Lot frontage means the linear dimension of a lot along the right-of-way of city, county or state maintained street. 
Lot line means any boundary of a lot. 
Lot of record means a parcel of land which has been recorded within the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the front building line. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes manufactured homes, park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. 
Mixed-use structure means a building containing residential uses, in addition to nonresidential uses permitted in the zone. 
Multifamily means a residential building containing three or more dwelling units. 
Nonconforming lot means any lot of record that does not conform to the width and area requirements of this article at the effective date of their adoption or amendment. 
Nonconforming structure means any structure that does not conform to the bulk, setback, offset, height, floor area ratio, parking or loading requirements of this article at the effective date of their adoption or amendment or as amended. 
Nonconforming use means any lawful structure, building, parcel of land, or use of a parcel of land or building at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or amendment, which does not conform with the requirements of same. 
Office means a structure or portion of a structure in which business activities take place on a regular basis, but where goods are not physically produced, sold or repaired. 
Off-street loading space means a hard paved space on private property of at least 12 feet by 45 feet plus driveways, for the loading and unloading of trucks. 
Parking space means a hard paved or gravel space on private property, for the storage of a motor driven vehicle, leaving unobstructed access to a driveway. 
Permitted use means a specifically listed use that is permitted in a zoning district subject only to the requirement pertaining to all uses in the district. 
Planned unit development means a planned residential, commercial or industrial development, professionally designed as a unit, approved by the planning and design review board and located in those areas zoned for its use. 
Principal building means a building which contains the principal uses, not an accessory building. 
Principal use means the principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
Private recreational area means an area or facility owned or operated by a private entity, and while such area may be open for public use and leisure time activities, including sports and other customary and usual recreational activities, a fee is charged by the private entity to participate in such recreational activities. 
Public building means a building owned or operated by a governmental agency. 
Public recreational area means an area or facility owned or operated by a governmental entity, and designed and equipped for the public use and leisure time activities, including sports and other customary and usual recreational activities. 
Residence, single-family means a residential building containing only one dwelling unit and not attached to any other building. 
Residential development means any development intended for exclusive use as a detached single-family dwelling or accessory building thereto. 
Restaurant means a facility designed for the preparation and intake of meals in return for compensation. 
Restaurant, drive through means a facility designed for the preparation and intake of meals in return for compensation, with a special window to provide for the ordering and purchasing of the meal without entering the facility. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land over which the municipality has a right, by ownership or easement, to construct a public street, sidewalk or use for public utilities. 
Setback means the shortest distance between the street right-of-way or lot line and the nearest exterior wall or part of the principal building or structure on a lot. 
Shopping center means a single enterprise which is located on a single parcel or property which is entirely separated or segregated into individual shops or separate, distinct businesses or functions. Actual ownership of the individual, separate functions is not a factor. 
Storage building means a structure, permanent or temporary, of less than 100 square feet and no more than one story in height for the storage of equipment for the day-to-day maintenance of the appearance and upkeep of residential property. 
Street means a public right-of-way set aside for public travel which has been accepted for the maintenance by the city or the state; has been established as a public street prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; has been dedicated to the city or the state for public travel by the recording of a street plat or a plat of a subdivision which has been approved by the planning and design review board. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground which offers support for floors or a water shedding roof. Utility poles or landscaping features such as fountains, planters, decorative walls constructed of wood, stone, brick, masonry or concrete, shall not be considered a structure. Should the natural terrain of the property, or adjacent property, require a retaining wall to be built along the side property line to a sufficient height to properly retain the fill behind it, the retaining wall shall not be considered a structure. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, campsites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, rent or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes a resubdivision and, where appropriate, the context relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or areas subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the city. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
Top floor elevation means highest habitable floor of the building. 
Townhouse means an attached multiple-family dwelling in a row or group in which each is separated from adjoining houses in the same row or group by firewalls or fire separations. 
Use means the purpose for which a parcel of land or a building is designed, arranged or intended, or to which the parcel of land or building is occupied or maintained. 
Variance means a relaxation of the specific provisions of this article where such variance would not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to the conditions peculiar to the property and not as a result of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this article would result in unnecessary and undue hardships. 
Yard means the area of land around a building or structure, front, sides, and rear, which is primarily a landscaped area and is relatively open. Materials allowed to be placed in a yard include but are not limited to: (a) Grass, flowers, and landscape stone; evergreens and shrubs, a maximum of three feet in height; (b) Planters and fountains constructed of wood, stone, brick or masonry, a maximum of three feet in height; and deciduous trees listed in section 34-253. Parking may be located in a yard in accordance with the criteria found in Division 4, Supplemental Regulations. 
Yard, front means a space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear means a space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side means a space on the same lot with a main building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zero lot line development means a development technique used in multiunit developments (duplex, condominium, garden apartments) whereby the side yard requirements are waived and the units share a common wall. This allows for greater density in developments with small acreages, it further provides for flexibility in design of the development. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 3, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 96-07-02, 8-19-96; Ord. No. 10-02-01, 2-16-10; Ord. No. 10-06-02, 8-17-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-103. - Penalties. 
(a)  Upon conviction, any person who violates this article shall be penalized in one of the following manners: 
(1)  A fine of not more than $500.00. 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than 30 days. 
(3)  Fine of not more than $500.00 and imprisonment for not more than 30 days. 
(b)  In addition to the required penalty, the violator shall be responsible for all costs and expenses incurred due to the case. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from taking any other lawful action as deemed necessary to prevent or remedy a violation. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 12(B)(2), 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-104. - Purpose and intent. 
The city commission has deemed it necessary to prepare a document of land use management and minimum design standards to promote controlled, aesthetic growth and to ensure quality growth, health and safety for the residents of the city. The inhabitants of the city shall abide by and adhere to this document, the Helen zoning ordinance, as contained in this article to ensure the general welfare of the city as well as the people contained within the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 1, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-105. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all local land and structures within the corporate limits of the city as they now or may hereafter exist. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 1, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-106. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  An official zoning map will be prepared and will be considered a part of this article. It will be entitled the "Official zoning map of the City of Helen, Georgia." 
(b)  Boundaries between zoning districts will follow property lines and centerlines of streets, roads and streams unless otherwise noted. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 13, 6-19-90) 
Secs. 34-107—34-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-126. - Violation. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a lawful means of upholding the provisions established herein in order to protect the welfare and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Procedure: 
(1)  When a violation of this article has occurred or is alleged to have occurred, a written complaint which fully states the grounds therefor shall be filed with the enforcement officer. 
(2)  The enforcement officer shall properly record and investigate the complaint. 
(3)  The enforcement officer shall take action to legally have corrected any violations as provided by this article. 
(4)  The owner and or tenant of the property on which the complaint has been filed and any other person who commits, assists in or maintains the violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and shall each suffer penalties which are provided herein. 
(5)  Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 12(A), (B)(1), 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-127. - Fees. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the section is to provide a standard fee schedule for the purpose of making an application to alter the present land use. 
(b)  Requested fees. The following fees are hereby adopted by the city as the costs for making application for a change in zoning, a variance or conditional use: 

 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 11, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-128. - City commission duties and powers. 
(a)  The city commission shall be empowered to adopt, amend or abolish this article and the official zoning map for the city. 
(b)  The commission shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, as well as a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals and other matters pertaining to this article. 
(c)  Other duties of the city commission may be established by laws of the state or subsequently enacted ordinances of the city. 
(d)  It is the intent of this section to establish that the duties of the city commission in connection with this article shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. 
(e)  Procedures: 
(1)  The planning and design review board shall make a recommendation to the city commission prior to deciding on amendments as provided by ordinance. 
(2)  The amendments shall be decided on by the city commission during a public hearing, for which a notice has been posted at the city hall at least 15 days prior to the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 2(A), 6-19-90) 
State Law reference— Minimum required notice, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. 
Sec. 34-129. - Planning and design review board. 
The functions of the planning and design review board are as provided in this article and in article II, division 2. 
Sec. 34-130. - Appeals. 
(a)  How taken. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the city manager or the planning and design review board made in connection with this article. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided in the rules of the board of appeals, by notifying the officer from whom the appeal is taken and filing with the secretary of the board of appeals a notice of the appeal, specifying the ground therefor. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the city clerk all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Application. Application fees shall be paid and a completed application consisting of the following items shall be submitted to the enforcement officer: 
(1)  Application form stating the local, zoning or proposed zoning, and proposed use of the property. 
(2)  The address and use of adjacent property. 
(3)  The nature of the appeal, naming the board and/or official from which the appeal is taken and the section of this Code from which the appeal arises. 
(4)  A statement of the purpose of the appeal and, if granted, how the appeal meets the criteria for appeal. 
(c)  Stay of proceedings; exception. Any appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, a stay will not be issued unless a restraining order is issued by either the board of appeals or superior court on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  Meetings. 
(1)  Officer to administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. The chairperson, or in his absence, the vice-chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(2)  Minutes required. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon the question, or if absent or failing to vote, an indication of such fact, and the board shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(f)  Findings necessary to authorize variance. 
(1)  To authorize, upon appeal, such variances, other than uses, from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will in an individual case result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. In every case the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in an individual case of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of appeals that all of the following exist: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
b.  The application of this article or article IV or VI to the particular piece of property would create practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved. 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article or article IV or VII. 
(2)  In order to make a variance permissible, certain conditions shall be shown: 
a.  There must be a proven hardship. This must be done by showing beyond a doubt the inability to make a reasonable use of the land if the provisions of this article were applied literally. 
b.  The hardship cannot be self-created. An example is the case where the lot was purchased with knowledge of an existing restriction or claiming hardship in terms of prospective sales. 
(g)  Action on appeal. In exercising its power, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit, certificate or other document as required. 
(h)  Appeals from action of board of appeals. Appeals from the board of appeals shall be taken to superior court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 10(E), 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-131. - Amendments. 
(a)  Generally. Such regulations, restrictions and boundaries as are provided for in this article may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. A proposal for amendment to any zoning regulation may originate with the city commission, the planning and design review board or with the owner of the property in question or a duly authorized agent of the owner. Regardless of the origin of the proposed amendment, it shall be referred to the planning and design review board for consideration following the procedures below. Exceptions to the following procedures will be allowed: 
(1)  Application fees shall not be paid by the city commission or planning and design review board. 
(2)  The posting of signs on property and the mailing of certified letters of notification shall not be required when the city commission or planning and design review board applies for an amendment that will have universal effect on all properties within the city. All other provisions shall apply. 
(b)  Rezoning and other amendments (to be heard by the planning and design review board and city commission): 
(1)  Application fees shall be paid and a completed application, consisting of the following items, shall be submitted to the enforcement officer: 
a.  An application form stating the location, present and proposed zoning, and the proposed use of the property. 
b.  A list of the adjacent property owners and their addresses. 
c.  Six copies of the rezoning site plan prepared by a registered civil engineer displaying the specific use, buffers, curb cuts, building locations, parking requirement and drainage structures. 
(2)  A public meeting of the planning and design review board will be conducted during which the planning and design review board will make a recommendation for the city commission. This meeting will be held within 45 days of receiving a valid application. 
(3)  The enforcement officer shall review the application and property and prepare a report of his findings based on O.C.G.A. § 36-67-3, for presentation to the planning and design review board. 
(4)  The enforcement officer shall post a sign stating the request on the property in question at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the planning and design review board. 
(5)  The enforcement officer shall also mail certified letters of notification to the applicant and all adjacent property owners at least 15 days prior to the meeting. 
(6)  The enforcement officer shall post a notice stating the request and property in question at city hall at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the planning and design review board. 
(7)  The enforcement officer shall publish, in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial limits of the city, a notice stating the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting at least 15 days prior to the meeting. 
(8)  Before any map amendment is granted, the planning and design review board and the city commission must find that the map amendment is in agreement with the community's comprehensive plan, or, in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of the following apply and such finding shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the planning and design review board and the city commission: 
a.  That the original zoning classification given to the property was inappropriate or improper. 
b.  That there have been major changes of an economic, physical or social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the community's comprehensive plan and which have substantially altered the basic character of such area. 
(9)  The application shall not be tabled more than once, unless it is requested by the applicant and approved by the planning and design review board. If tabled, a decision must be made at the next regularly scheduled meeting or the application shall be deemed approved. 
(10)  The city commission shall make a final decision on the request during a public meeting. 
(11)  Upon approval of a rezoning application, the change in the zoning classification and the zoning district boundaries shall be entered into the official zoning map. 
(12)  Upon the denial of a rezoning application, another application requesting the same zoning change shall not be accepted for the same parcel of land or any portion of the property for six months from the date of the denial. 
(13)  Upon the denial of a rezoning application, another application requesting a different zoning change shall not be accepted for the same parcel of land or any portion of the property for three months from the date of the denial. 
(14)  Any appeal of the decision of the city commission shall be heard by a judge of superior court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 10(A), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 98-04-01, 6-25-98) 
State Law reference— Hearings, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. 
Sec. 34-131.1. - Conditional zoning amendments. 
(a)  [Generally.] All R-5 and hotel-motel amendments to the official zoning map shall be conditional zoning amendments. 
(b)  Concept plan review. The purpose of the site plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, and innovation in accordance with the design process and ensure the soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The city shall appoint an employee to review plans for technical compliance with the zoning regulations and for technical compliance with concept plan review criteria. The recommendations of the planning and design review board shall be transmitted to the Helen City Commissioners. 
(c)  Concept plan. 
(1)  In addition to any other conditions that may be imposed by the planning and design review board, or city commissioners, pursuant to the provision for conditional zoning in this zoning regulation, a concept plan review, public hearing and the use of the property for its zoned purposes shall be conditioned to said plan and become part of the amendment. 
(2)  The concept plan shall be prepared by qualified person or design professional such as an architect, engineer, landscape architect, planner or surveyor as appropriate to the project and shall be drawn in accordance with the following basic criteria: 
a.  Scale: Generally, one inch equals 100 feet; 
b.  Sheet size: Generally 24 by 36 inches (24″ × 36″) with approximate match lines provided if more than one sheet is necessary; 
c.  Vicinity map: Drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equal 1,000 feet (1″ = 1,000′) and showing adjoining roads, subdivisions and other landmarks; 
d.  Existing topography: Shown with a maximum contour interval of 20 feet; 
e.  Boundary survey: Shown and described by meters and bounds; 
f.  Adjacent properties: Provide names and addresses of adjacent property owners; 
g.  Title block: Indicating the name of the development, the owner, the developer and the person or firm preparing the plan; 
h.  Submission: Provide a minimum of six copies of above. 
(3)  The concept plan shall include the following information: 
a.  A proposed land use plan for the site, including the acreage to be devoted to each land use category; 
b.  The proposed location of streets, bikeways, pedestrian ways, parking areas, drainage and storm water detention facilities, utilities, public facilities, parks, recreation areas, tree areas to be retained or added and other open spaces, and including notations as to existing or proposed dimensions, capacities and or volumes; 
c.  Representative architectural sketches or renderings of typical proposed structures, signs, landscaping, screening and/or fencing; 
d.  Statistical or technical data as necessary to accurately describe the proposed development including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Total land area; 
2.  Amount of land to be used for public or semi-public uses; 
3.  Amount of land to be used for recreational open space purposes; 
4.  Amount of land to be occupied by streets and parking areas; 
5.  Amount of any submerged or flood prone land within the project boundary; 
6.  The total ground coverage and floor area of all buildings; 
7.  A breakdown of the number and kinds of proposed buildings, including square footage, and the number and range of lot sizes and proposed setback and yard dimensions for typical lots and/or building types. 
e.  As an attachment, a report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating the sequence of development of the various sections thereof, and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase; 
f.  As an attachment, an outline of the proposed methods for controlling and maintaining any common open space or community facilities; 
g.  Such other submissions/plans as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 96-04-01, 5-21-96) 
Sec. 34-131.2. - Plans and other documents required for amendments to the official zoning map for conditional zoning, conditional use permit, or variance request. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All applications to amend the official zoning map submitted or initiated by a party other than the city commission, planning and design review board, or other official of the City of Helen, or an application submitted for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the designated city employee and shall be accompanied by, at a minimum, the following items: 
(1)  An application form as available from City Hall, complete in all respects. 
(2)  An application fee as required to cover administrative and advertising costs as provided for in Code section 34-127 "Fees." 
(3)  A typed legal description of the subject property. 
(4)  A site plan drawn to scale, designating the subject property and identifying existing and proposed buildings and uses, adjacent existing land uses and zoning districts, including those across abutting public streets, and any other significant site improvements proposed to accommodate the proposed use, or to buffer adjacent uses, etc., or a plat of the subject property where no specific land use is proposed. The sheet size for the site plan should generally be 24 inches by 36 inches (24″ × 36″), with an 8½ × 11 inch reduction provided. In the case where only a plat of the subject property is provided and no specific land use is proposed, the plans will be evaluated based upon the most intense possible land use permitted in the proposed zoning district. 
(5)  For an amendment to the official zoning map a narrative statement from the applicant is required specifically describing the proposed use of the property and addressing each of the standards set forth in this regulation under section 34-131.3 of this article. 
(b)  Compliance with plans. If the requested zoning amendment, conditional use permit, or variance application is approved, no building permit, other permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted except for uses or structures conforming substantially with the plan and documents submitted with the application for the amendment. 
(c)  Conditional zoning. In adopting an amendment to the official zoning map, conditional use permit the planning and design review board or city commissioners, may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the purposes of the district involved and to further the goals and objectives of the city's land development codes. Such conditions may consist of: 
(1)  Dedication of required road or utility line rights-of-ways to the city where insufficient amount or none exist, 
(2)  Setback requirements from any lot line; 
(3)  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading, or storage areas or other land uses; 
(4)  Driveway curb cut restrictions; 
(5)  Restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted, maximum building heights or other dimensions; 
(6)  Special drainage or erosion provisions; 
(7)  Landscaping or planted area which may include the location, size, type, and maintenance of plant materials, fences, walls, beams or other buffering provisions or protective measures; 
(8)  Special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; 
(9)  Permitted hours of operation; 
(10)  Architectural style; 
(11)  A requirement that developers must build according to the site plan as adopted; 
(12)  A limitation on exterior modifications of existing buildings; or any other requirement that the planning and design review board or city commissioners may deem appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning, conditional use permit or issuance of a variance. 
Also such conditions: 
(1)  Shall only be valid if they are included in the motion approving the amendment for adoption; 
(2)  Shall be in effect for the period of time specified in the amendment; 
(3)  Shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of their use of the property; and 
(4)  Shall be continuously enforced in the same manner as any other provision of these regulations. 
(d)  A building permit shall not be issued until after the review and approval as provided for in section 34-527 "Building Permits." 
(Ord. No. 96-04-01, 5-21-96) 
Sec. 34-131.3. - Standards governing exercise of zoning amendments. 
(a)  In adoption of a zoning ordinance, the amendment of an existing zoning ordinance, or amending the official zoning map, the city commissioners shall consider factors relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare against the right of the individual to the unrestricted use of property and shall specifically consider the following: 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property, 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions of the current zoning, 
(b)  The extent to which the property values are diminished of the individual property owner applying for the rezoning with consideration to: 
(1)  Population density and effect on city facilities such as streets, water and sewer; 
(2)  Environmental impact; 
(3)  Effect on adjoining property values; 
(4)  Effect on the quality of life of nearby residence. 
(c)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(d)  Conformity with or divergence from any land use plan or established land use patterns. 
(e)  The availability of adequate sites for the proposed use in districts that permit such use. 
(f)  The suitability of the site for the proposed use relative to the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance such as off street parking, setbacks, buffer zones and open space. 
(Ord. No. 96-04-01, 5-21-96) 
Sec. 34-132. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Definition. A nonconforming use shall be defined as any lawful structure, building, parcel of land, or use of a parcel of land or building at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived which does not conform with the requirements of the ordinance. 
(b)  Regulations. Even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this article, the lawful use of any structure, building, parcel of land, or use of a parcel of land or building existing on June 19, 1990 may be continued subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The nonconforming use shall not be extended to occupy a greater area unless the additional area existed and was clearly designed for the same purpose as the nonconforming use on June 19, 1990. 
(2)  The nonconforming use shall not be reestablished after a voluntary discontinuance of the use for a period of 12 months. 
(3)  A nonconforming use changed to a different nonconforming use shall not be permitted. 
(4)  A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, altered, or repaired except in conformance with this article unless the change is necessary to maintain the safety of the use and the change does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement costs of the use at that time. 
(5)  Should a nonconforming use be damaged by fire, other than by deliberate action, the nonconforming use may be repaired or replaced. But, the repaired structure shall not occupy any greater lot area than the original building, nor contain more floor area than the original structure. Repairs to the damaged structure shall begin within 12 months of being damaged and completed within 24 months. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 9, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-133. - Conditional use permit. 
(a)  A request for a conditional use permit may be made by the owner of the property in question, or a duly authorized agent of the owner. 
(b)  Applicable fees shall be paid and a completed application, consisting of the following items, shall be submitted to the enforcement officer: 
(1)  Application form stating the location, present zoning and the proposed conditional use of the property. 
(2)  A list of the adjacent property owners and their addresses. 
(3)  Six copies of the site plan prepared by a registered civil engineer displaying the specific use, buffers, curb cuts, building locations, parking requirement and drainage structure. 
(4)  Applications shall be filed with the city no less than 45 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and design review board. 
(c)  A public meeting of the planning and design review board will be conducted during which the planning and design review board will make a recommendation for the city commission. This meeting will be held within 45 days of receiving a valid application. 
(d)  The enforcement officer shall review the application and property and prepare a report for presentation to the planning and design review board. 
(e)  The enforcement officer shall post a sign stating the request on the property in question at least 15 days prior to the meeting. 
(f)  The enforcement officer shall also mail certified letters of notification to the applicant and all adjacent property owners at least 15 days prior to the meeting. 
(g)  The enforcement officer shall post a notice stating the request and property in question at city hall at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the planning and design review board. 
(h)  The enforcement officer shall publish, in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial limits of the city, a notice stating the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting, at least 15 days prior to the meeting. 
(i)  The application shall not be tabled more than once, unless it is requested by the applicant and approved by the planning and design review board. If tabled, a decision must be made at the next regularly scheduled meeting or the application shall be deemed approved. 
(j)  The city commission shall make a final decision on the request during a public meeting. It will take a majority of the entire city commission to override the recommendation of the planning and design review board. 
(k)  Upon the denial of a conditional use application, another application requesting the same conditional use shall not be accepted for the same parcel of land or any portion of the property for six months from the date of the denial. 
(l)  Any appeal of the decision of the city commission shall be heard by a judge of superior court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 10(C), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91) 
Sec. 34-134. - Design review. 
(a)  A request for design review shall be made by the owner of the property in question, or a duly authorized agent of the owner. 
(b)  Application fees shall be paid and a completed application consisting of the following items shall be submitted to the enforcement officer: 
(1)  An application form stating the location, present or proposed zoning, and proposed use of the property. 
(2)  The address and use of adjacent property. 
(3)  The information required in section 34-576. 
(4)  Applications shall be filed with the city no less than 45 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and design review board. 
(c)  A public meeting will be conducted during which time the planning and design review board will make a decision as to the appropriateness of the proposed design. The meeting will be held within 45 days of receiving a valid application. 
(d)  The enforcement officer shall mail certified letters of notification to the applicant at least 15 days prior to the meeting. 
(e)  The enforcement officer shall post a notice stating the request and property in question at city hall at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the planning and design review board. 
(f)  The application shall not be tabled more than once, unless it is requested by the applicant and such request is approved by the planning and design review board. If tabled, a decision must be made at the next scheduled meeting or the application shall be deemed approved. 
(g)  The planning and design review board can place conditions on the building and construction of the building as a part of the approved application. 
(h)  Upon approval of the applications and conditions attached thereto, the enforcement officer shall issue a building permit if the building, sign or improvements meets the other requirements of this Code. 
(i)  Appeals from the decisions of the planning and design review board based upon interpretation of section 34-576 shall be appealed to the board of appeals, within 30 days from the decision of the planning and design review board. Failure to file notice of appeal within 30 days shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 10(D), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91) 
Secs. 34-135—34-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-176. - Establishment of districts. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article the property within the corporate limits of the city shall hereby be divided into specific zoning districts to provide both effective development of each parcel and to protect the health, needs and general welfare of the community. 
(b)  Any use which is not provided for within a zoning district shall be placed within a zoning classification and officially added to this article by the city commission after review and upon the recommendation of the planning and design review board. 
(c)  The zoning classifications as contained within this article are as follows: 
R-1 low density residential. 
R-2 moderate density residential. 
R-3 high density residential. 
R-4 multifamily residential. 
PUD planned unit development. 
H/M hotel/motel. 
C-1 pedestrian commercial. 
C-2 pedestrian/highway commercial. 
C-3 highway commercial. 
I-1 light industrial. 
FP floodplain. 
SPNF state park and national forest. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 4, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-177. - Low density residential (R-1). 
(a)  Purpose. The R-1 low density residential district is a low density single-family residential district with a density of approximately two units per acre. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Parks. 
(3)  Public recreation areas. 
(4)  Existing cemeteries. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Churches, with one acre minimum. 
(2)  Schools, with one acre minimum. 
(3)  Private recreation area. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Private detached garage. 
(2)  Fence. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(4)  Storage buildings. 
(e)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 22,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum road frontage: 75 feet. 
(4)  Front setback: 50 feet from a state highway/40 feet from all others. 
(5)  Rear setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Side setback: 20 feet. 
(7)  Side setback along street: 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(9)  Maximum ground coverage: 25 percent. 
(f)  Tree protection: See section 34-253. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91) 
Sec. 34-178. - Moderate density residential (R-2). 
(a)  Purpose. The R-2 moderate density residential district is a moderate density single-family residential district with a density of approximately 2.5 units per acre. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Parks. 
(3)  Public recreation areas. 
(4)  Existing cemeteries. 
(5)  Single-family residences built to R-1 development standards. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Churches, with one acre minimum. 
(2)  Schools, with one acre minimum. 
(3)  Private recreation area. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Private detached garage. 
(2)  Fence. 
(3)  Storage buildings. 
(e)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 17,500 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum road frontage: 75 feet. 
(4)  Front setback: 50 feet from a state highway and those streets designated as primary streets 10 feet from all others. The 10 feet is a 10-foot green space. 
(5)  Rear setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Side setback: 15 feet. 
(7)  Side setback along a street: 15 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(9)  Maximum ground cover: 25 percent. 
(f)  Tree protection: See section 34-253. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 92-8, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 93-6-1, 7-13-93) 
Sec. 34-179. - High density residential (R-3). 
(a)  Purpose. The R-3 high density residential district is a district for fee simple ownership of a housing unit with a maximum density of eight units per acre. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Duplex dwelling units. 
(2)  Townhouses. 
(3)  Parks. 
(4)  Public recreation area. 
(5)  Existing cemeteries. 
(6)  Single-family residences built to R-1 or R-2 development standards. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Public or quasi-public buildings. 
(2)  Churches, with one acre minimum. 
(3)  Private recreational area. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Private detached garage. 
(2)  Fence. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(e)  Development standards: 
(1)  a.  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
c.  Minimum road frontage: 100 feet. 
d.  Front setbacks: Along a state highway, 50 feet; along other streets, 10 feet (green space). 
e.  Rear setback: 15 feet. 
f.  Side setback: 10 feet. 
g.  Side setback along a street: 10 feet. 
h.  Maximum number of units: 8 units per acre. 
i.  Maximum top floor elevation: 40 feet. 
(2)  Height ratio chart for occupied floors: For every one foot height increase over 30 feet the front and side setbacks increase by six inches. 

 
(3)  Buffer requirements. A planted buffer will be required as set forth in division 4. 
(4)  The development of the site, alternative parking methods may be used including elevated or belowground structures which are integrated into the development. 
(5)  Site plan. A site plan for the proposed development shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or landscape architect and submitted to the planning and design review board for approval before any land disturbing activities shall be undertaken. The site plan at the least should provide a metes and bounds description of the proposed development, provide topographic survey information on the site at two-foot contours; show the proposed size and location of all buildings and structures, the size and location of all buildings and structures, the size and location of all existing easements, rights-of-way and utilities, the proposed location of all proposed utilities, access to the site and circulation within it, the location size and types of trees to be retained, any other landscaping or site improvements which shall be made. Six copies of this site plan shall be furnished to the planning and design review board. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 93-6-1, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 98-04-01, 6-25-98) 
Sec. 34-180. - Multifamily residential (R-4). 
(a)  Purpose: The intent and purpose of the R-4 multifamily residential zoning classification is to provide an affordable residential housing opportunity at a density which optimize land area, wherein there are no restrictions upon rental of such properties. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Condominiums. 
(2)  Apartments. 
(3)  Public recreation areas. 
(4)  Existing cemeteries. 
(5)  Unrestricted rentals. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Public and quasi-public buildings. 
(2)  Churches with a minimum of one acre. 
(3)  Private recreational areas. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Swimming pools. 
(2)  Club houses (nonprofit). 
(3)  Tennis courts. 
(4)  Private greenhouses. 
(e)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum road frontage: 100 feet. 
(4)  Front setbacks along a state highway: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Side setback: 10 feet. 
(7)  Side setback along a street: 10 feet. 
(8)  Maximum top floor elevation: 40 feet. 
(9)  Coverage: 

 
(10)  Height ratio for occupied floors: For every one foot height increase over 30 feet the front and side setbacks increase by six inches. 
For example: 

 
(11)  Buffer requirements. A planted buffer will be required as set forth in division 4. 
(12)  Site plan. A site plan for the proposed development shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or landscape architect and submitted to the planning and design review board for approval before any land disturbing activities shall be undertaken. The site plan at the least should provide a metes and bounds description of the proposed development, provide topographic survey information on the site at two-foot contours; show the proposed size and location of all buildings and structures, the size and location of all buildings and structures, the size and location of all existing easements, rights-of-way and utilities, the proposed location of all proposed utilities, access to the site and circulation within it, the location size and types of trees to be retained, any other landscaping or site improvements which shall be made. Six copies of this site plan shall be furnished to the planning and design review board. 
(13)  The development of the site, alternative parking methods may be used including elevated or belowground structures which are integrated into the development. 
(f)  Yard requirements. 
(1)  Front yard: No parking areas, structures, fence or patios shall be allowed in the first ten feet of a front yard, measured from the street or highway right-of-way. Walks shall be allowed but shall not occupy more than ten percent of the first ten feet of front yard, except that when it is not feasible to construct a sidewalk parallel to the street within the street or highway right-of-way. Where such conditions exist, a sidewalk of no more than five feet in width will be allowed upon approval of the planning and design review board. The remaining area shall be planted in plant material. 
(2)  Rear yard: No parking, structures or pavement shall be in the first ten feet of rear yard measured from the rear property line. Open walks and patios shall be allowed but shall not occupy more than ten percent of the ten-foot area. The remaining area shall be planted in plant material. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 96-04-01, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 98-04-01, 6-25-98; Ord. No. 06-06-02, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 34-180.1. - Seasonal residential housing (R-5). 
(a)  Purpose and intent of the R-5 seasonal residential housing zoning classification is to establish an area to provide housing and service needs of vacationers and seasonal residents or others. 
(b)  All seasonal residential housing (R-5) district amendments of the official zoning map shall be conditional amendments. A concept plan showing the approximate location of all building, walls, fences, property lines, landscaping, parking areas, land uses, and other features deemed appropriate by the planning and design review board as a result of the above concept plan review and public hearing shall be included as part of the amendments, and the use of the property for its zoned purposes shall be conditioned to said plan. 
(c)  Concept plan review of the site plan is to encourage logic, imagination, and innovation in accordance with the design process and ensure the soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The city's designated employee shall review plans for compliance with the zoning regulations and for compliance with concept plan review criteria. The recommendations of the planning and design review board shall be transmitted to the Helen City Commissioners for final approval. 
(d)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Rental property, single or duplex dwellings. 
(2)  Public recreational areas. 
(3)  Existing cemeteries. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(e)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Rental to ownership conversion. 
(2)  Public and quasi-public buildings. 
(3)  Churches with a minimum of one acre. 
(4)  Private recreational areas. 
(5)  Time share complexes. 
(f)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Swimming pools. 
(2)  Club houses (nonprofit). 
(3)  Tennis courts. 
(4)  Private greenhouses. 
(g)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum road frontage: 100 feet. 
(4)  Front setbacks along a state highway or other street: 10 feet. 
(5)  Rear setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Side setback: 10 feet. 
(7)  Side setback along a street: 10 feet. 
(8)  Maximum top floor elevation: 40 feet. 
(9)  One parking space per bedroom (minimum 2 spaces per unit) located within 50 feet of building. 
(10)  Maximum number of 8 units per acre. 
(h)  Yard requirements. 
(1)  Front yard: No parking areas, structures, fence or patios shall be allowed in the first ten feet of a front yard, measured from the street or highway right-of-way. Walks shall be allowed but shall not occupy more than ten percent of the first ten feet of front yard, except that when it is not feasible to construct a sidewalk parallel to the street within the street or highway right-of-way. Where such conditions exist, a sidewalk of no more than five feet in width will be allowed upon approval of the planning and design review board. The remaining area shall be planted in plant material. 
(2)  Rear yard: No parking, structures or pavement shall be in the first ten feet of rear yard measured from the rear property line. Open walks and patios shall be allowed but shall not occupy more than ten percent of the ten-foot area. The remaining area shall be planted in plant material. 
(i)  Buffers, tree requirements and other requirements: See division 4. 
(Ord. No. 96-04-01, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 98-04-01, 6-25-98) 
Sec. 34-181. - Planned unit development (PUD). 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the PUD planned unit development zoning classification is to provide a developer with the flexibility of relaxed development standards to take advantage of unique and distinctive land features. This land use must contain a minimum of 25 acres to be considered for this development. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Duplex. 
(3)  Condominiums. 
(4)  Garden apartments. 
(5)  Multifamily residences. 
(6)  Retail sales and services up to a maximum of 2,400 square feet of floor space for retail sales and services for each 100 dwelling units in a planned residential district and having an area of not less than 50 contiguous acres. 
(7)  Hotels. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Golf courses. 
(2)  Recreational lakes. 
(3)  Ornamental and swimming pools. 
(4)  Open space. 
(5)  Clubhouses and related accessory structures. 
(6)  Public and quasi-public buildings. 
(d)  Development standards: The planned unit development has been established to provide the developer with the opportunity to relax lot requirements and adjacent land uses to take advantage of unique land features, the preservation and more efficient use of open space and to provide opportunity for design flexibility. 
(e)  Tree protection: See section 34-253. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 15-11-01 , 12-15-15) 
Sec. 34-182. - Hotel/motel district (H/M). 
(a)  Purpose: The intent of the hotel/motel classification is to establish an area which provides for the housing and service needs of vacationers and seasonal residents at a density which optimize land area. 
(b)  All hotel-motel (H-M) district amendments of the official zoning map shall be conditional amendments. A concept plan showing the approximate location of all buildings, walls, fences, property lines, landscaping, parking areas, land uses, and other features deemed appropriate by the planning and design review board and the Helen City Commission as a result of the above concept plan review and public hearing shall be included as part of the amendments, and the use of the property for its zoned purposes shall be conditioned to said plan. 
(c)  Concept plan review of the site plan is to encourage logic, imagination, and innovation in accordance with the design process and ensure the soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The city's designated employee shall review plans for the compliance with the zoning regulations and for compliance with concept plan review criteria. The recommendations of the planning and design review board shall be transmitted to the Helen City Commissioners for final approval. 
(d)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Hotels. 
(2)  Motels. 
(3)  Motor courts. 
(4)  Related on-premises commercial uses (restaurants, etc.). 
(e)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Public or quasi-public buildings. 
(f)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Swimming pools. 
(2)  Tennis courts. 
(3)  Private detached greenhouses. 
(g)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Adequate lot size to accommodate development. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum road frontage: 75 feet. 
(4)  Front setback: 50 feet from state highway, 40 feet from all other streets. 
(5)  Rear setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Side setback: 15 feet. Side setback along a street: 6 feet. 
(7)  Maximum top floor elevation: 50 feet. 
(h)  Yard requirements and buffers: See division 4. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 92-6, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 96-04-01, 5-21-96) 
Sec. 34-183. - Pedestrian commercial (C-1). 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the C-1 pedestrian commercial classification is to establish a commercial zone where the main mode of transportation is by walking; it is further intended that this zone assist in retaining and fostering the Alpine theme of the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Restaurants, without drive-ins. 
(2)  Retail shops. 
(3)  Specialty shops. 
(4)  Clubs and taverns. 
(5)  Commercial entertainment and recreation. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Hotels and motels. 
(2)  Seasonal housing on the second and higher floors of commercial buildings. 
(3)  Long term housing to the rear of the structure and/or on the second and higher floors of commercial buildings. 
(4)  Banking and financial offices. 
(5)  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(6)  Laundry and drycleaning. 
(7)  Medical and dental offices/clinics. 
(8)  General offices. 
(9)  Public and quasi-public housing. 
(10)  Parking, offstreet. 
(11)  Business offices. 
(12)  Museums, galleries and theatres. 
(d)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
(2)  Minimum road frontage: 45 feet. 
(3)  Front setbacks: 10 feet from a state highway, 10 feet from all other streets. 
(4)  Rear setback: 6 feet. 
(5)  Side setback: 0 feet. 
(6)  Side setback along street: 10 feet. 
(7)  Maximum occupied floor height: 50 feet. 
(e)  Tree protection requirements: See section 34-253. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-9, 1-22-91) 
Sec. 34-184. - Pedestrian/highway commercial (C-2). 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of the C-2 pedestrian/highway commercial classification is to establish a commercial district which is transitional in nature, in that it provides an easy progression from the C-1 to C-3 zones. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  All uses allowed in the C-1 zone. 
(2)  Restaurants. 
(3)  Banking and Financial Offices. 
(4)  Shopping Centers with onsite parking. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Hotels and motels. 
(2)  Utilities. 
(3)  Those conditional uses allowed in the C-1 zone that have not been previously enumerated. 
(4)  Restaurants, with drive-in. 
(5)  Day care centers. 
(6)  Packaged liquor store. 
(d)  Development standards: 
(1)  For permitted uses: Must meet requirement of C-1 district with the exception of parking. Parking must be provided on the property under or within the building or offsite and within 1,000 lineal feet of the parcel. 
(2)  For conditional uses: Must meet requirements of C-3 district. 
(e)  Yard requirements and buffers: See division 4. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 10-11-01, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 34-185. - Highway commercial (C-3). 
(a)  Purpose: The intent and purpose of the C-3 highway commercial zoning classification is to provide for commercial uses that are related to the use of an automobile. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Shopping center with onsite parking. 
(2)  Service stations. 
(3)  Hotels and motels. 
(4)  Restaurants. 
(5)  Professional offices. 
(6)  Medical and dental offices. 
(7)  Banking and financial offices. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Amusement parks. Amusement park means a commercially operated building or facility with various devices for entertainment and similar types of recreational amusement activities such as miniature golf, video games, bowling alleys, batting cages, go-karts, amusement rides such as Ferris wheels, bumper cars, and bumper boats; but excluding shooting galleries and/or target ranges and helicopter rides. 
(2)  Automotive sales. 
(3)  Automotive repair facilities. 
(4)  Restaurants with drive-ins. 
(5)  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(6)  Utilities. 
(7)  Grocery stores. 
(8)  Packaged liquor stores. 
(9)  Public and quasi-public buildings. 
(10)  Car washes. 
(11)  Mini warehouses. 
(12)  Small animal facilities, without kennels. 
(13)  Churches. 
(14)  Commercial entertainment and recreation. 
(15)  Parking lots, offstreet. 
(16)  Long term housing to the rear of the structure and/or on the second and higher floors of commercial buildings. 
(17)  Laundry and dry cleaning. 
(d)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
(2)  Minimum road frontage: 75 feet. 
(3)  Front setback: 50 feet along a state highway, 40 feet from all others. 
(4)  Rear setback: 6 feet. 
(5)  Side setback: 6 feet. 
(6)  Side setback along street: 15 feet. 
(7)  Maximum top floor elevation: 50 feet. 
(8)  Onsite parking required. 
(e)  Yard requirements and buffers: See division 4. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 92-8, 12-15-92; Ord. No. 01-08-02, 9-6-01; Ord. No. 09-09-02, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 10-11-02, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 34-186. - Light industrial (I-1). 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the I-1 light industrial classification is to establish an area suitable for the location and operation of industries which deal in the storage and distribution of products and the assembly of components. 
(b)  Permitted uses: Manufacturing of apparel with indoor activity provided that such industry does not emit noxious gases or vapors; dust or wind driven particles; noise; or solid waste; and does not discharge liquid waste on or into the land or water. Outside storage will be allowed if it is fully screened. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Construction offices and yards. 
(2)  Ministorage facilities. 
(3)  Exhibition halls, museums, and collateral and support facilities therefor, including food service. 
(4)  General offices. 
(5)  Commercial entertainment and recreation. 
(d)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot width: 250 feet. 
(2)  Minimum road frontage: 100 feet. 
(3)  Front setback: 100 feet along a state highway, 50 feet from all others. 
(4)  Rear setback: 50 feet. 
(5)  Side setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Side setback along street: 25 feet. 
(7)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(e)  Buffer and tree protection requirements: See division 4. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 00-12-01, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 01-06-02, 6-19-01) 
Sec. 34-187. - Floodplain (FP). 
The intent of the FP floodplain zone is to regulate the use of lands which lie in the floodways and floodplain within the city in conformance with applicable EPA and FEMA guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-188. - State park and national forest (SP/NF). 
The intent of the SP/NF state park and national forest classification is to identify those land areas which are part of either Unicoi State Park or the Chattachoochee National Forest that exist within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 6-19-90) 
Secs. 34-189—34-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-251. - Yard requirements. 
(a)  Front yard: No parking areas, structures, fences or patios shall be allowed in the first ten feet of a front yard, measured from the street or highway right-of-way. A five-foot wide sidewalk shall be constructed in this area parallel to the street or highway when it is not feasible to construct a five-foot wide sidewalk parallel to the street or highway within the street or highway right-of-way. The design of the remaining area of this ten-foot strip shall follow the criteria found under the definition of a yard. The remainder of the front yard can have parking and/or drive through and walk to the building entrance, if a three-foot landscape strip can be placed next to the building. The parking and drive area layout must follow the parking criteria in section 34-254. A patio can be constructed between the ten-foot strip and the building. No fences can be constructed between the ten-foot strip and the building except if the project is allowed a buffer along the side property line in conformance with the buffer criteria defined in this section. Should buildings on the property be existing, and be located on the property that will not allow this criteria to be complied with, the planning design and review board shall review a submitted design of the front yard, and make a recommendation to the city council for granting a variance, based on the best interest of the community and the property owner. 
(b)  Side yard: No structures shall be allowed in a side yard. Parking and/or a drive through and/or walk to the building entrance is permitted in a side yard, if a six-foot landscaped strip can be placed between the side property line and the parking and/or drive through and/or walk area, and a three-foot landscaped strip can be placed between the parking and/or drive through and/or walk and the building. The parking and drive area layout must follow the parking criteria in section 34-254. A patio can be constructed in the area from the six-foot strip to the building. No fences can be constructed in the side yard except if the project is allowed a buffer along the side property line in conformance with the buffer criteria defined in this section. Should buildings on the property be existing, and be located on the property that will not allow this criteria to be complied with, the planning design and review board shall review a submitted design of the side yard, and make a recommendation to the city council for granting a variance, based on the best interest of the community and the property owner. 
(c)  Rear yard: No parking areas, structures, fences, or patios shall be allowed in the first ten feet of a rear yard measured from the rear property line, if this line is common to another parcel of land. 
If the rear property line is common to a street or highway right-of-way, no parking areas, structures, fences, or patios shall be allowed in the first ten feet of a rear yard, measured from the street or highway right-of-way. A five-foot wide sidewalk shall be constructed in this area parallel to the street or highway when it is not feasible to construct a five-foot wide sidewalk parallel to the street or highway within the street or highway right-of-way. The design of the remaining area of this ten-foot strip shall follow the criteria found under the definition of a yard. 
In either of the above situations, the remainder of the rear yard can have parking and/or a drive through and/or walk to the building entrance, if a three-foot landscape strip can be placed next to the building. The parking and drive area layout must follow the parking criteria in section 34-254. A patio can be constructed between the ten-foot strip and the building. No fences can be constructed between the ten-foot strip and the building except if the project is allowed a buffer along the side property line or rear property line in conformance with the buffer criteria defined in this section. 
Should buildings on the property be existing, and be located on the property that will not allow this criteria to be complied with, the planning design and review board shall review a submitted design of the rear yard, and make a recommendation to the city council for granting a variance, based on the best interest of the community and the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 6(A), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 96-07-02, 8-19-96) 
Sec. 34-252. - Buffers. 
(a)  Generally. A buffer is a landscaped strip of land, enhanced to ensure proper screening between noncompatible zoning or business uses. Items permitted to be utilized in the buffer strip include but are not limited to plantings, planters, fences, walls, or earth berms. 
(b)  Requirements: 
(1)  A buffer shall be planted or erected between noncompatible zoning or business land uses as may be determined by the planning design and review board. 
(2)  The buffer requirements of this section shall be placed on the considered projects side of the property line. 
(3)  The location of all undisturbed buffer shall be determined by the enforcement officer or the city commission, with the advice and consent of the planning and design review board. 
(4)  The buffer, as required in this section, shall be established and maintained by the owner of the property on which the buffer exists. 
(5)  The undisturbed buffer area shall be shown, and designated as a permanent easement, on each plat prior to approval. 
(6)  Existing vegetation shall be utilized, or supplemented with additional plantings, where required. 
(7)  There shall be no structures erected within the buffer except those specified or used for drainage purposes. 
(8)  The buffer area shall be in place in accordance with the approved plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Buffer requirements between dissimilar zoning districts or commercial businesses: 

 

 
(d)  Composition. A fence, by definition, constructed one foot off the property line, may be substituted for the buffer widths listed above, if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The fence must be erected to a height of at least four feet. 
(2)  The fence shall be constructed of wood, stone, brick, concrete, or concrete masonry units. If the material is wood, it shall be painted or stained with one of the approved Helen colors. If the material is concrete masonry units, all exposed surfaces shall be stuccoed with a heavy textured stucco and painted with one of the approved Helen colors. 
(3)  Unfinished fences shall not be permitted. 
(4)  Where existing natural vegetation and site topography are insufficient to accomplish the purpose of the required undisturbed buffer area, existing vegetation will be supplemented. Such additional plantings shall consist of evergreen trees and shrubs not less than four feet in height, or trees and shrubs that will attain a height of four feet within three years in the course of normal growth. 
The use of native vegetation is encouraged whenever possible. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 6(B), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 96-07-02, 8-19-96) 
Sec. 34-253. - Trees. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this section is to preserve and/or create as much natural vegetative environment as possible; therefore, all zones must have a coverage of tree dripline area of no less than 25 percent of the total property area (excluding the area of the building footprint plus 15 feet around the building perimeter). The following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  In areas where substantial tree coverage exist as many trees as possible shall be preserved; however, any individual tree with an eight-inch caliper or larger shall not be removed without prior approval of the planning and design review board regardless of its location on the property. 
Exemption: Pine trees are exempt from this requirement; however, for each three pines (with an eight-inch caliper or larger) that are removed one hardwood tree must be planted, or the provisions of subsection (a) above must be met, whichever provides for the greater tree coverage. 
(2)  In areas where no trees exist, hardwood trees of at least eight feet in height, indigenous to the area must be planted, and which upon maturity will provide the minimum coverage in subsection (a) above. Placement of trees to be planted must be clearly shown on the landscaping plan. 
(b)  Meeting the initial minimum requirements of subsection (a) also requires the proper treatment and protection of trees used to meet this requirement. This means that if any tree used to meet the requirement dies within five years of the approval for development, it must be replaced by a tree of at least eight feet in height and the new tree must meet the same five-year requirement. 
(c)  Not to exclude the use of others which might be approved subject to their meeting the height or growth requirements stated herein, the following plants are approved for this purpose: 

 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 6(C), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 91-3, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 96-07-02, 8-19-96) 
Sec. 34-254. - Parking regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of parking regulations is to ensure enough off-street parking area so that the street traffic is not impaired, while providing for the orderly flow of traffic. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  The parking area shall be paved according to the following design standards: 
a.  Asphalt. 
Light duty (auto): 
1.  6 inches of graded aggregate base. 
2.  2 inches of type E or F asphalt. 
Heavy duty (trucks): 
1.  6 inches of graded aggregate base. 
2.  2 inches of type B asphalt or plant mix base. 
3.  1½ inches of type E or F asphalt surface. 
All materials and workmanship shall conform to current state DOT specifications. 
b.  Concrete. 
1.  Light duty (auto): 5 inches 3000 # strength. 
2.  Heavy duty (trucks): 8 inches 3000 # strength. 
All materials and workmanship shall conform to current state DOT specifications. 
c.  Alternative paving material will be considered by the planning and design review board, including brick pavers, cobblestones and other suitable materials. 
(2)  Parking space dimensions shall be equal to or greater than: 
a.  Standard space: 9 feet by 19 feet. 
b.  Parallel space: 9 feet by 23 feet. 
c.  Handicapped space: 13 feet by 20 feet. 
d.  Loading space: 10 feet by 50 feet. 
(3)  The width of the interior driveways shall be measured from the back of curb to the back of curb according to the following standards: 
a.  One-way traffic: 12 feet. 
b.  Two-way traffic: 24 feet. 
(c)  Minimum space requirements. 
(1)  Amusement park: one space per hole for miniature golf, one space per every five seats on carnival type rides, and one space per two employees; with a minimum total of 20. 
(2)  Automobile sales and service: one space per every 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Apartments (garden or multi): one space per bedroom; minimum two spaces per unit. 
(4)  Churches: one space per four seats in the main assembly area. 
(5)  Clubhouses: one space per 200 square feet of floor area. 
(6)  Commercial entertainment and recreation: one space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. One per every four seats for places of assembly containing fixed seats. 
(7)  Condominium: one space per bedroom; minimum two spaces per unit. 
(8)  Day care centers: 2.5 spaces per classroom. 
(9)  Duplexes: one space per bedroom; minimum two spaces per unit. 
(10)  Gas service station/convenience store: three spaces per service bay with a minimum of eight spaces. 
(11)  Golf courses: two spaces per hole, plus ten for the clubhouse and one for every two employees. 
(12)  Hotel/motel/motor court: one space per unit and one per every two employees. 
(13)  Industrial plant: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor space or one space per every two employees, whichever is greater. 
(14)  Office: one space per 200 square feet. 
(15)  Office/medical: five spaces per practitioner. 
(16)  Residence, single-family: two spaces per unit. 
(17)  Restaurant: one space per every four seats plus one space for every two employees, plus, where drive through service is provided, three spaces per service window. 
(18)  Retail: four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(19)  School, primary/elementary: two spaces per classroom. 
(20)  Taverns and clubs: one space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 7, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-255. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Definition. A home occupation is an occupation for gain or support which is customarily conducted at the home, which is incidental to the use of the dwelling unit, which employs not more than two people not residents of the premises, and utilizes not more than 25 percent of the total actual floor area is used for the home occupation purposes. 
(b)  Requirements: 
(1)  No more than two persons, other than members of the family residing on the premises, shall be engaged in such home occupation. 
(2)  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes, with no more than 25 percent of the total actual floor area of the dwelling unit being used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
(3)  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building. 
(4)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises. 
(5)  Other than one sign, there shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation. This sign shall be mounted against the wall of the principal building, shall be nonilluminated, and shall not exceed one square foot in area. 
(6)  No inventory of goods for sale shall be stored or maintained in or about the premises. 
(7)  No traffic, other than that which would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, shall be generated by the home occupation. 
(8)  No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except one business vehicle with a carrying capacity that does not exceed a one-half ton. This vehicle must be used exclusively by the resident and may be parked in the carport, garage, rear yard or side yard. 
(9)  The offsite employees of the home occupation shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose not concerning the business of the home occupation. 
(10)  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses at the lot line of the operation in other than a single-family residence. 
(11)  In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates unusual or audible interference in any radio or television receiver off the premises, or cause fluctuations in electrical line wattage off the premises. 
(12)  Home occupations shall be allowed in single family dwelling units, duplexes and townhouses. They shall be prohibited from condominium or apartment developments. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 8, 6-19-90) 
Sec. 34-256. - Outdoor holiday lighting. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a uniform lighting plan for outdoor holiday lights in the commercial business districts in the city. The city desires to promote tourism, minimize intrusion, and enhance city aesthetics during the holiday season as a matter of public policy. Accordingly, it is the purpose of this chapter to establish community standards for the use of outdoor holiday lighting within the city's commercial business districts which enhance the aesthetics of the city, promote tourism within the city's commercial business districts, provide a uniform appearance for these purposes, delineate a timetable for the use of holiday lighting, establish limits of illumination levels, and provide for energy conservation. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Commercial buildings are defined as including those buildings and all lodging facilities within the C-1, C-2, C-3 and hotel/motel zoning classifications of the city. 
C7 lights are defined as traditional larger holiday lights burning at five watts each. 
LED lights are defined as lights which use a light emitting diode for illumination, rather than a traditional filament. 
(c)  Requirements. Holiday lighting shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All commercial buildings within the city limits must comply. Lighting must be either warm white LED lights or C7 clear lamps on SPT1 or SPT 2 wiring. 
(2)  Lamps/Lights must be located every six inches on either green or white wiring. 
(3)  The lights must be operational from each Friday before Thanksgiving through the third weekend of January. 
(4)  Lights must edge the rooflines of the building wherever the building borders a city street. 
(5)  The lighting along the roofline edge is to include the peaks, gables, and other architectural features of the building roof. 
(6)  Lights must be operational from dusk till dawn. 
(Ord. No. 08-11-02, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 09-06-02, 7-21-09) 
Secs. 34-257—34-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-501. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Development Ordinance of the City of Helen, Georgia." 
(Code 1987, § 14-101) 
Sec. 34-502. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." Other words are defined as follows: 
Alley means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use or movement of a building from one location to another. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above- or belowground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles used for purposes of a building. 
Building line means a line formed by the face of a building, and for the purposes of this article, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line.F 
Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the main use of the property on which the structure is located. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the governing body and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of such street. 
Commercial development means any development intended for other than exclusive use as a detached one-family dwelling or accessory building thereto, including but not limited to the following uses: retail, wholesale, general service, public service, manufacturing and any other industrial, agricultural and multifamily dwelling. 
Design standards means criteria that must be followed and implemented as an integral part of a building permit application regarding exterior and interior design characteristics regarding public use facilities, e.g., restaurants, retail shops, motels, etc. These criteria comprise written standards that may be in a textual, graphically illustrated, or photographed format for use in explanation to the applicant of the requirements. 
Enforcement officer means as provided in section 34-26. 
Lot means a parcel of contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where severance creates any nonconforming use or structure. 
Lot width means the distance between the side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes manufactured homes, park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. See also the definition for "temporary structure." 
Planned unit development. A planned unit development is: 
(1)  Land under unified control, planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a programmed series of development operations for dwelling and/or commercial units and related uses and facilities, which includes principal and accessory uses and structures substantially related to the character of the development itself and the surrounding area of which it is a part; 
(2)  Is developed according to comprehensive and detailed plans which include not only streets, utilities and lots, but also other uses and improvements on the land as related to buildings envisioned; and 
(3)  Which includes a program for full provision, maintenance and operation of such areas, improvements, facilities and services as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of the PUD, but will not be provided, operated or maintained at public expense. 
The minimum land area which may be utilized for a PUD is 15 acres. 
Residential development means any development intended for exclusive use as a detached one-family dwelling or accessory building thereto. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground not including utility poles. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, campsites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, rent or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes a resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of position of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the county. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
Temporary structure means a structure constructed totally or in part away from the permanent site, which is transportable in nature, eg. trailers, railroad cars and vending carts. See also the definition for "manufactured home." 
Tower means: 
(1)  A building or structure high in proportion to its lateral dimensions, either isolated or forming a part of any building. 
(2)  A tall structure extending far upward. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Code 1987, § 14-102; Ord. No. 92-7, 12-15-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-503. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any amendment thereto, or who fails to perform any act required hereunder or does any prohibited act, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1987, § 14-801) 
Sec. 34-504. - Technical code architectural guidelines adopted by reference. 
City of Helen, Georgia Architectural Guidelines, prepared by Hill Studio, P.C., dated September 27, 1994, as now or hereafter amended or supplemented with approval by the city commission, is adopted by reference, and is on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-01, 10-31-96) 
Sec. 34-505. - Regulations affect every building and use. 
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations specified in this article, and without first obtaining permits. In the enforcement of the provisions of this article, the building inspector may withhold building or occupancy permits until all provisions of this article are complied with or his decision is rescinded by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1987, § 14-103) 
Sec. 34-506. - Subdivision of land. 
(a)  No person shall sell, transfer, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell any land by reference to or exhibition on a subdivision plat, or make any other use of a subdivision plat before the streets on such plat have been approved by the planning and design review board of the city and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. The description of any land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents shall not exempt the transaction from this article. 
(b)  Any subdivider of land within the city shall submit to the planning and design review board the required plats of the subdivision which shall conform to the requirements of this article. No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including the clearing of land, before obtaining approval of the planning and design review board. No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected or placed on any lot within the city unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall have been accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the city commission or on a street plat made and adopted by city commission. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building inspector, city attorney or other official designated by the city commission may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
(Code 1987, § 14-104) 
Sec. 34-507. - Only one principal building on any lot. 
Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot, except for multifamily buildings and townhouses. This section shall apply to the development of a planned commercial and/or residential development which shall be approved by the planning and design review board. 
(Code 1987, § 14-105) 
Sec. 34-508. - Reduction of lot area prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, yard requirements, or other requirements of this article are not maintained. 
(Code 1987, § 14-106) 
Sec. 34-509. - Remedies. 
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this article, or any street construction is begun in violation of this article, the city manager, the planning and design review board, the building inspector, the city commission or any other person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or procedure to prevent the illegal use of buildings or land or to prevent any act which would constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 14-802) 
Sec. 34-510. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-09-01, adopted October 31, 1996, amended the Code by repealing § 34-510. Former § 34-510 pertained to amendments and modifications to this article, and derived from the Code of 1987, § 14-701. 
Secs. 34-511—34-525. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 34-526. - Administrative officer. 
The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. He shall administer the provisions of this article and shall have all administrative powers in connection therewith which are not specifically assigned to some other officer or body. He shall have no power to vary or waive the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 14-501) 
Sec. 34-527. - Building permit. 
(a)  Required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged, repaired, painted, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the city manager or designee has issued a building permit for such work. Permits shall be issued and fees charged according to the provisions of the city safety codes. 
(b)  Application. Application to the city manager or designee for a building permit shall be in accordance with the provision of the city building codes and shall be accompanied by site plans in five copies (per the provisions of section 34-576). Any building permit issued shall become invalid 12 months after date of issue subject to renewal upon application to the city manager. 
(c)  Performance bond . In addition to the other requirements of this section, all applications for a permit for a building project in the C-1 or C-2 zoning districts, as described in sections 34-183 and 34-184 of this code, must be accompanied by a performance bond equal to 125 percent of the cost of the project. The performance bond may be submitted in a form acceptable to the city manager or designee with a surety company licensed to do business in the state, to enable the city to complete the project on public and/or private property in the event the contractor or the contractor's insurance company fails to pay for the project's completion. No building permit shall be issued for the C-1 or C-2 zoning districts until such a performance bond has been received. 
(d)  Appeal from denial. If a building permit is denied, the applicant may appeal such denial as such process is provided for in the applicable safety code. If such safety code does not contain an appeal process, the appeal shall go to the board of appeals as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1987, §§ 14-502—14-504; Ord. No. 10-04-01, 4-20-10) 
Sec. 34-528. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the city is required in advance of occupancy or use of any building. A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building, shall be applied for coincidently with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the building or structural alteration of the building has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this article and the city building codes. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, upon notification to the city manager, or his designee, by the owner, or the owner's agent, that all construction has been completed in accordance with city ordinance requirements, and in compliance with the plans approved by the planning design and review board, the city manager, or his designee, shall ascertain such completion and compliance and shall, without unreasonable delay, issue an occupancy certificate therefore. 
(c)  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to all applicable provisions of the City Code and does not deviate in any material or substantial respect from the plans approved by the planning design and review board. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the city manager, or his designee, shall, within five days, state in writing the reasons for denial, and the notification of completion shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(d)  Following the denial of an occupancy certificate pursuant to 34-528(c), the owner, or his agent, shall take such action, if any, as he deems appropriate to comply with all City Code requirements and the approved plans, and thereafter, at the convenience of the owner, request a certificate of occupancy, in writing, to the city manager or designee at least five days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning and design review board. The owner, or his agent, shall appear in person at the planning and design review board meeting, at which the request is to be considered, to furnish additional information which the planning and design review board deems necessary in order to make an official recommendation to the city commission concerning the issuance of an occupancy certificate. Any such recommendation shall be in writing, and delivered to the city commission for consideration at their next meeting, and any negative recommendation shall specifically address, by reference to specific City Code provisions and specific reference to approved plans, (or deviations therefrom), why the occupancy certificate should be denied. At the city commission meeting the commission shall consider such request and recommendation and determine whether or not the owner is entitled to a certificate of occupancy. If the determination is to issue a certificate of occupancy, the commission shall direct the city manager to promptly issue such certificate. Should the determination be that the owner is not then entitled to such certificate, the commission then shall advise the owner of the specific reasons for denial. Such decision shall not be tabled or delayed except at the request of the owner. Any failure to address the issue at the city commission meeting, except for a request to table by the owner, shall result in the prompt issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1987, § 14-505; Ord. No. 05-09-02, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 34-529. - Preliminary street approval. 
(a)  Prior to beginning any work on any new street, the developer shall submit to the city manager or designee three copies of a preliminary plan of the proposed street not less than five working days prior to the next meeting of the planning and design review board. The street plans shall be drawn in such detail as to show that all specifications will be met. At a minimum, the plans shall show a horizontal plan, a vertical profile and a typical cross-section plan. 
(b)  The planning and design review board shall review the plan and submit its findings in writing to the city commission. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the date of submittal, the city commission shall: 
(1)  Approve the plan if it meets all requirements of this article; 
(2)  Approve the plan conditional upon specified changes required of the developer to meet all requirements of this article; or 
(3)  Reject the plan for specified written reasons. 
(d)  The action of the city commission shall be placed in writing on a copy of the plan by the city clerk and returned to the developer by the planning and design review board. 
(e)  The rejection of a street plan by the city commission shall not prevent the developer from resubmitting a modified or new plan for a new consideration by the planning and design review board. 
(Code 1987, § 14-506) 
Secs. 34-530—34-550. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Appeals, Variances, Etc. 

Sec. 34-551. - Board of appeals; powers. 
The board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide when an official allegation is made that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article except as to the use of property upon which such board is required to pass under this article. 
(3)  To authorize, upon appeal, such variances, other than uses, from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will in an individual case result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. In every case the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in an individual case of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of appeals that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
b.  The application of this article to the particular piece of property would create practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 14-606) 
Sec. 34-552. - Conditions for granting variance. 
In order to make a variance permissible, certain conditions shall be shown: 
(1)  There must be a proven hardship. This must be done by showing beyond a doubt the inability to make a reasonable use of the land if the provisions of this article were applied literally. 
(2)  The hardship cannot be self-created. An example is the case where the lot was purchased with knowledge of an existing restriction or claiming hardship in terms of prospective sales. 
(Code 1987, § 14-607) 
Sec. 34-553. - Action on appeal. 
In exercising its power, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit, certificate or other document as required. 
(Code 1987, § 14-608) 
Sec. 34-554. - Appeals. 
(a)  How taken. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the city manager or designee or the planning and design review board made in connection with this article. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided in the rules of the board, by notifying the officer from whom the appeal is taken and filing with the secretary of the board of appeals a notice of the appeal, specifying the grounds therefor. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the city clerk all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(c)  Stay of proceedings; exception. Any appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, a stay will not be issued unless a restraining order is issued by either the board of appeals or a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1987, §§ 14-603—14-605) 
Secs. 34-555—34-575. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 34-576. - Design review. 
(a)  All developments within the city require a site analysis, a comprehensive site plan and an architectural design plan. Any design plan for a development estimated to cost in excess of $50,000.00 shall require either an architect or engineer's stamp as appropriate to the project. (On completion of construction of the development, the architect or engineer shall be required to certify compliance with the design plan as approved.) Additionally, developments within areas of special flood hazard require a hydrological study and engineer's certification in conformity with article VI. These initial design requirements must be submitted to the planning and design review board before any permit applications are submitted for approval. 
(b)  A current design review package, available from city hall, shall be obtained and completed, as applicable, before the project is initially presented to the planning and design review board. 
(c)  Design standards shall be followed by an applicant according to the following criteria: 
(1)  Roof. The primary roof of all new structures and any existing structure for which a modification of 50 percent of the existing exterior dimensions in lineal perimeter is planned shall have a minimum roof pitch of no less than six feet of rise per 12 feet of run ( 6/12 pitch). The primary roof shall be covered with red fiberglass shingles. Any towers, bay windows or other adjunct parts of the structure may be covered with red shingles, copper or standing seam metal roofing when approved by the planning and design review board. 
(2)  Exterior and interior trim. The trim of all exterior building surfaces and publicly exposed interior building surfaces is regulated as follows for any new building or a proposed alteration to a building for which a modification of 25 percent of the existing usable square footage or for which an expenditure of more than $10.00 is planned. Trim standards shall meet design motif on all fascia. 
(3)  Glass window surface as a percentage to total exposed wall surface for each building elevation. The permitted maximum percentage of glass window surface in square feet shall be regulated in proportion to the total wall surface of each building elevation plan at the discretion of the planning and design review board. However, in no event shall the permitted maximum percentage of glass window surface exceed 40 percent of the total wall surface. (The total wall surface shall include any area proposed for use as a glass window or door.) 
(4)  Building scale. The scale of all new construction or 50 percent modification to an existing building as may be determined by additions to lineal perimeter distance of the exterior walls may follow a maximum seven-eighths scale to full size ( 7/8 scale) on all front and side exterior elevations. 
(5)  Building contiguity. The application for a building permit shall include a proposed design for the physical connection of the proposed building to any building and each elevation that may be on the same lot or on adjoining lots, whether or not such lots may be owned by the applicant. Such design shall include connections by extended wall lines, connected roof lines, or connected balconies and walkways. The purpose of contiguity is the facilitation of maximum ease in pedestrian access while maintaining a unity in design. 
(6)  Lighting standards. Illuminescence shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Exterior mounted lights may be of any type except neon. Except for gas lights, all other exterior lights shall be shielded to prevent direct lighting exposure to public view. 
b.  Interior lights may be of any type. Except for gas or kerosene lights, all other interior lights shall be shielded to prevent direct lighting exposure to public view. Additionally, interior neon lights shall not be placed in windows or otherwise displayed so as to be visible from the street, sidewalk or other public rights-of-way. 
c.  The lighting standards referenced in this subsection shall not apply to internally illuminated signage which has been approved by the city in accordance with the requirements of chapter 34, article VII, Signs. 
(7)  Building colors. The exterior colors of buildings shall be one or more of the colors shown on Ace Paint Exterior Colors for Your Life color chart (you may use any manufacturer's paint as long as colors match the approved colors in the referenced color chart). A copy of this color chart is maintained in Helen City Hall. 
(8)  Window and door design. Exterior and interior windows and doors shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Windows: minimum number of grid sections per installed frame: 4. 
b.  Doors: minimum number of panels per installed frame: 2. 
Prohibited door types: thin rail shutters, sliding partition made from vinyl or similar cloth material, hollow core, solid core single panel (trim can be applied to solid core single panel door to create two or more panel effect). 
(9)  Roof overhang, balcony overhang and portico standards. The overhang of roofs, balconies and porticos shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Roofs: minimum roof overhang: 36 inches; maximum roof overhang: six feet. 
b.  Balconies: minimum balcony overhang: four feet; maximum balcony overhang: nine feet. Balcony shall be cross-hatched beneath the top rail or filled in an alpine design. 
c.  Minimum portico overhang: two feet; maximum portico overhang: six feet. 
Porticos must be a gable design. Shed roofs are prohibited. 
(10)  HVAC equipment and utility meters. All HVAC equipment, including vents, and utility meters shall be enclosed or otherwise rendered unobtrusive, and be reasonably protected against damage. However, utility meters must be left accessible for servicing and reading. 
(11)  Handicapped accessibility. See section 34-801 for construction standards. 
(12)  Water conservation standards. See section 70-35 for maximum flow rates of plumbing fixtures and trim. 
(13)  General motif. The general motif for commercial developments shall be Alpine design as shown in the city of Helen, Georgia Architectural Guidelines, prepared by Hill Studio, P.C., dated September 27, 1994. 
(Code 1987, § 14-201; Ord. No. 92-7, 12-15-92; Ord. No. 96-09-01, 10-31-96; Ord. No. 08-10-02, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 12-08-01, 9-18-12; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ) 
Sec. 34-577. - Fire sprinkler systems. 
(a)  Commercial fire sprinklers. All new commercial construction shall be equipped with automatic fire sprinkler systems installed according to National Fire Protection Standard 13, latest edition as adopted by the State of Georgia, where required by NFPA Life Safety Code 101 or Standard Building Code, due to size or use. All other buildings not meeting the NFPA 13 Code criteria may elect to use the Cobb County, Georgia Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems in small commercial buildings as adopted by the City of Helen (reference Appendix A to Ordinance No. 94-02-2), with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Detached unenclosed structures of less than 210 square feet, i.e., pavilion, deck. 
(2)  Detached one-story noncombustible unenclosed covered vehicle storage areas, maintaining a minimum of 30 feet of open separation from any structure, with no storage capabilities and which is less than 1,000 square feet. 
(b)  Multi-family residential fire sprinklers. All new multi-family residential construction of three or more attached units, exclusive of one and two family dwellings, shall be equipped with automatic fire sprinkler systems installed according to the requirement of the National Fire Protection Standard 13R, latest edition as adopted by the State of Georgia, with the same exceptions as found in section 34-577(a)(1) and (2). 
(c)  Maintenance and testing of sprinkler systems. All new and existing sprinkler systems must be maintained and tested annually, according to NFPA Fire Protection Standard 25 or SBCCI Standard Fire Prevention Code Section 603, latest edition as adopted by the State of Georgia, by a sprinkler contractor who holds a certificate of competency issued by the state fire marshal's office. Written notification of the results of annual tests must be forwarded on such forms as the fire marshal may require, to the fire marshal's office within 30 days of the test, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Systems installed in one and two family dwellings under NFPA 13D regulations. 
(2)  Any time a deficiency is found or reported concerning a sprinkler system, a test or maintenance can be immediately required by the fire chief or fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 14-204, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 94-02-2, 3-15-94) 
Editor's note— Appendix A, referenced in § 34-577 above, has not been set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Sec. 34-578. - Manufactured homes and temporary structures. 
(a)  Manufactured homes and temporary structures of a type which are constructed totally or in part away from the permanent site shall not be situated within the city except as provided hereinbelow: 
(1)  Extreme hardship. 
a.  Acceptable hardships include, but are not limited to, providing temporary housing for convalescence or short-term housing during the construction of permanent housing; and storage of building materials and tools during the construction or renovation of a permanent structure of at least 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Within the abovementioned exceptions, applicants for such housing must submit a statement from a competent medical authority that the convalescent care is required and a statement from the applicant that suitable facilities are not available within a permanent structure on the property in question; or a statement from a building contractor certifying the imminent construction of a conforming structure which will replace the temporary structure. 
c.  The maximum period for the use of any manufactured home and temporary structure to mitigate a hardship shall not exceed 270 days from the issuance of a permit. 
d.  The procedure for applying for such a permit is as follows: 
1.  Submit application for a temporary permit to the planning and design review board with a nonrefundable fee of $250.00. 
2.  Appear at a hearing to review the matter. 
3.  If approval is granted, all applicable permits must be applied for and paid before work commences. All work will be performed subject to city ordinances and regulations. 
(2)  Planned unit development (PUD). 
a.  One manufactured home or temporary structure may be permitted for any approved planned unit development to consist of 50 or more single-family houses, provided that the situation of such manufactured home or temporary structure shall otherwise be deemed a conforming structure for the purposes of this article and provided further that its use at all times shall be exclusively for sales, marketing or other administrative operations on behalf of that approved planned unit development solely. 
b.  The maximum period for the use of any manufactured home or temporary structure as adjunct to development of an approved PUD shall not exceed two years. However, a special temporary permit must be applied for, and be approved by the planning and design review board annually. 
c.  The procedure for applying for such a permit is set forth in subsection (1)d. above. 
(3)  Parking lot attendant weather protection booths: 
a.  One protection shelter shall be allowed per parking lot. 
b.  This structure may be built on site, or off-site and transported to the site. The construction materials shall be wood frame with a stucco texture finished board exterior. The roof shall be gable shaped, with an approved slope, finished with an approved color shingle, and the fascia shall have an approved Alpine designed decorative trim. The corners, doors, and windows shall be framed with a one by four to conform to the Alpine theme. The colors shall conform to the City of Helen color chart. 
c.  The structure shall be anchored to the ground with an approved anchorage system similar to that used for mobile homes. 
d.  The maximum plan size shall be four feet in width and eight feet in length, or have a maximum area of 32 square feet. 
(b)  Existing manufactured homes within the city are excepted from the above provisions only until the present nonconforming unit is vacated or removed from the property. Once such unit is first vacated, the unit must be removed from the property within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 14-208, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 89-13, § 14-209, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 96-07-02, 8-19-96) 
Sec. 34-579. - Nonconforming uses of land or building. 
The city acknowledges the evolving nature and scope of development within its boundaries, but also recognizes that areas already developed require the full protection of the city to guard against erosion of the highest and best use of any specific property or area. To this end, specific uses of land or buildings which are not compatible with this article or which could create serious obstacles to the public safety and welfare shall not be allowed. The planning and design review board shall be charged with reviewing applications for both building and development permits and business licenses to preclude the encroachment of those uses which are not in the best interest of the growth and prosperity of the city, subject to the review provisions of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 14-209; Ord. No. 89-13, § 14-210, 1-16-90) 
Secs. 34-580—34-625. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Secs. 34-626—34-650. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Streets 

Sec. 34-651. - Streets required to meet standards. 
All streets constructed by land developers in the city following the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall meet all design and construction standards. The designation of a street by a developer as a private way, or as limited access shall not release the developer from these standards. 
(Code 1987, § 14-301) 
Sec. 34-652. - Plans. 
(a)  Street work performed according to plan. The developer shall construct the street according to the approved plan. Any change from the approved plan or the standards of this article during the construction process shall void the action of the planning and design review board in approval of the preliminary plan, requiring that a new plan be submitted by the developer. 
(b)  Modification of street plan. Should the developer find it necessary, during the construction phase, to change the plan, then he may apply to the planning and design review board for a modification by the same process as stated in this article. The planning and design review board is hereby authorized to modify the plan for a good and sufficient reason, and such reason shall be set out by motion granting the modification. 
(c)  Final approval. 
(1)  Following completion of the construction, upon the posting of a guaranty or surety and upon the submittal of a set of as-built plans conforming with the approved plan and the standards of this article as surveyed by a registered surveyor or civil engineer, the city commission shall approve the street and authorize the city manager or designee to issue building permits for lots abutting the street. 
(2)  Following the approval of the street by the city commission, the city clerk shall note the approval of the street upon four copies of a plat of the street, two copies of which can be recorded in the minutes of the city, one copy to be recorded by the developer in the records of the clerk of court of the county, and one copy to be retained by the developer. 
(Code 1987, §§ 14-507—14-509) 
Sec. 34-653. - Design requirements. 
Streets shall conform to the following design requirements: 
(1)  Minimum right-of-way width: 40 feet. 
(2)  Minimum pavement width: 18 feet subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Streets in developments restricted to single-family residential use: 18 feet excluding curb. 
b.  All other streets: 28 feet, including curb. 
(3)  Minimum cul-de-sac right-of-way: 100 feet diameter. 
(4)  Minimum cul-de-sac pavement width: 80 feet diameter, excluding curb. 
(5)  Minimum alley right-of-way and pavement width: 16 feet. 
(6)  Maximum vertical grade: For lengths of street not exceeding 200 feet: 20 percent if immediately followed by a length of 200 feet with a maximum grade not exceeding ten percent. 
(7)  Minimum vertical grade: 1½ percent. 
(8)  Minimum horizontal radii of centerline curvature: 100 feet. 
(9)  Minimum sidewalk width: 6 feet. 
(Code 1987, § 14-302) 
Sec. 34-654. - Intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle of less than 75 degrees. 
(Code 1987, § 14-303) 
Sec. 34-655. - Curbline radii. 
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a curb radius of 20 feet; and where the angle of intersection is greater than 75 degrees, the city commission may require a greater radius. The city commission also may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners. 
(Code 1987, § 14-304) 
Sec. 34-656. - Slope development. 
Street alignments are subject to performance standards as are appropriate to the city commission and state construction requirements as may be adjusted to any given site limitation. In addition: 
(1)  The street system shall follow parallel contours of the land as closely as possible. 
(2)  Depth of cuts and fills shall be held to a minimum in order to avoid excessive land disturbance. The smallest practical area shall be denuded at any one time during the construction period. Suitable vegetative cover or mulch shall be applied immediately following construction to all denuded areas located on a street right-of-way. Advice from the local soil conservation service field engineer or a qualified soil engineer is recommended. 
(3)  Permanent drainage structures shall be designed for anticipated runoff and be installed in the initial phase of road construction. 
(Code 1987, § 14-305) 
Secs. 34-657—34-665. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Water and Sewers 

Sec. 34-666. - Waiver of requirements. 
The requirements of this subdivision shall not apply if the developer enters into a contract with the city for the installation of water and sewer mains by the city or its subcontractors. The contract shall be drawn according to provisions and standards established by the city. 
(Code 1987, § 14-310) 
Sec. 34-667. - Water supply system. 
(a)  Water mains within the corporate limits of the city must be provided with connections to each lot. Minimum diameter of water pipes shall be six inches, and pipes shall be constructed with ductile iron pipe. All pipes must be of size to maintain adequate pressure in accordance with standards established by the Southeastern Fire Underwriters Association. 
(b)  If a municipal water supply is not available to the development at the time of development, the developer should provide an adequate water source and an adequate water storage facility. This should be accomplished by a community water system. 
(c)  The community water system shall be sanitary and shall have a minimum adverse pressure of 40 pounds per square inch at each lot in the development. 
(d)  The community water system shall be approved by the appropriate health agency; and a letter of approval from the state department of human resources, public health division, or the state department of natural resources, water supply section, as appropriate, shall accompany the recording permit application. 
(Code 1987, § 14-306; Ord. No. 03-05-01, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 34-668. - Water distribution plan. 
A water distribution plan shall be provided by the developer for all developments having a community water supply system. It shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location and size of water distribution system including pipes, valves, fittings, hydrants, high-pressure pumping equipment, pressure-reducing valves, etc., complete to individual lots. 
(2)  Location and size of all wells, storage tanks and lift stations. 
(3)  A certificate in the exact language set forth below, properly executed by a registered engineer for the developer, shall be attached or affixed to the water distribution plan: 
WATER SUPPLY CERTIFICATION 
State of Georgia, City of Helen 
"The water supply system proposed for (Name of development or subdivision) meets all design requirements for an acceptable water supply system based on the appropriate code of the State of Georgia." 

 
(Code 1987, § 14-307) 
Sec. 34-669. - Sanitary sewers. 
If the sewage disposal facilities cannot be connected to a trunkline sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks or other approved method of sewage treatment shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for interim use, in conformity with the requirements of the appropriate health agency. 
(Code 1987, § 14-308) 
Sec. 34-670. - Sanitary sewerage plan. 
A sanitary sewerage plan shall be provided by the developer for those developments offering such service and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location and size of all existing and proposed sewer lines in the development and tie points to other systems. Location of all sewer laterals. 
(2)  Direction of flow of each sewer line and average slope as built. 
(3)  Location of each manhole and other sewerage system appurtenances including lift stations, oxidation ponds and treatment plants. 
(4)  Profile of sewerage system. 
(5)  A certificate in the exact language as set forth below, properly executed, shall be attached to the sanitary sewerage plan. 
SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION: 
State of Georgia, City of Helen 
"I, ____________ , a registered engineer, certify that the sanitary sewerage system shown on this drawing is properly designated; meets all local and state specifications; and is adequate both in size and established depth to serve the drainage area whose sewage would normally be carried through this development or subdivision system, whether or not the total area to be served is within this subdivision. It is further certified that the information shown hereon is true and correct." 

 
"I, (Appropriate Official), hereby attest to the fact that this sewerage system and treatment plant is satisfactory and meets all requirements of the State of Georgia." 

 
(Code 1987, § 14-309) 
Subdivision IV. - Sewer System Interceptors[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-08-01, adopted September 19, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former subdiv. IV, §§ 34-671—34-673, and adding a new subdiv. IV. Former subdiv. IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 05-01-04, adopted February 15, 2003. 

Sec. 34-671. - Purpose. 
Excessive amounts of fats, oils and grease, grit, sand and other solid or viscous materials can cause blockage and obstruction in the sanitary sewer and treatment systems, causing untreated wastewater to overflow into the environment. Much of the waste material that has the potential to cause blockage or obstruction originates from commercial facilities, such as food preparation facilities. This article sets forth minimum and uniform requirements for the treatment and disposal of commercial waste into the sanitary sewer system. The objectives of this article are to minimize the discharge of pollutants associated with commercial waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system that may interfere with normal operation of the system. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-672. - Definitions. 
All terms used in this subdivision shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions and abbreviations as set forth in this section, or in any other section of this article: 
City means the City of Helen, represented by its elected officials, city manager, or their authorized agent or employees. 
Commercial wastes means: 
(1)  Nontoxic, nonhazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities; or 
(2)  Grease interceptor contents generated by a commercial food operation or institutional food preparation facility, including without limitation, fats, grease, and food scraps. 
EPD means the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division or its duly authorized representative. 
F.O.G. means fats, oils, and grease. 
F.O.G. separator means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease interceptor means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease trap refers to a F.O.G. separator or interceptor. 
Grit trap means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit. 
Hazardous waste means any waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulation promulgated by the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-11. 
mg/L means milligrams per liter. 
Oil-water separator means a structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain oily substances. 
Originator means the owner or operator of the grease or F.O.G. interceptor, grit trap, oil-water separator, or sand trap from which commercial wastes are removed. 
Registration means acceptance by the EPD of a transporter. 
Sand trap means a receptacle designed for the accumulation and removal of sand, grit, rocks and other similar debris. 
Septic waste means the contents of a septic tank. 
User means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the introduction of wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-673. - Sand and oil/grease traps. 
(a)  Requirement for. 
(1)  All users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide oil/grease traps. Grease traps shall be designed as appropriate for the size of the facility as specified in subsection (b), below. Additionally, any user who generates a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of oil and grease than 100 mg/L, and provided that the excess oil and grease is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease trap, then said user will be required to install an oil/grease trap. 
(2)  All users whose wastewater stream is associated with unusually large quantities of grit, sand or gravel shall be required to install a sand trap. All car/truck wash systems shall be required to install a sand trap; design specifications and calculations must be submitted and approved by the city before installation. 
(3)  No originator may cause or permit any F.O.G. to bypass or avoid the oil/grease trap. 
(4)  The requirements of this ordinance section shall not apply to private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  Design criteria. 
(1)  For restaurants and other eating establishments. 
a.  Required except as provided in c. below. All oil/grease traps used in conjunction with restaurants or other eating establishments shall be a minimum of 1500 gallons and shall have a total volume size to be such to allow one change of contents per 24 hour period. All oil/grease traps must be designed in accordance with Department of Human Resources Public Health, Chapter 290-5-26 Section 12, Grease Traps. 
b.  Required except as provided in c. below. All existing in ground oil/grease traps, for existing eating establishments, must have a filter system installed on the discharge side of the trap. 
c.  Under the counter oil/grease traps are determined to constitute a high risk of failure to prevent F.O.G. from contaminating the public sewer system and are not recommended, and specifically discouraged. However, due to various circumstances existing within the city, all existing and anticipated originators may not be able to provide an in ground oil/grease trap, and therefore, under the counter oil/grease traps will be permitted as hereinafter provided in this subdivision. All such under the counter oil/grease traps must be designed so that they prevent water flow if the trap is filled to capacity and, when filled to capacity the water flow will back up unless the trap is cleaned out. 
d.  All oil/grease traps shall be designed to fully and efficiently function at the maximum daily flow. 
e.  Design details, specifications and calculations must be submitted and approved by the city before installation. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All grease, oil and sand traps shall be maintained by the user at their expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(2)  In the maintaining of grease traps, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the city. All manifests or other records of removal shall be provided to the city on a quarterly basis. The frequency of removal shall be such as to ensure that no overflows of oil, grease or sand into the wastewater system ever result. The frequency for maintaining these traps shall, at the minimum, be as follows based on the classifications listed: 
Class I - Food establishments with an under-the-counter trap: Monthly. 
Class II - Food establishments with an in ground oil/grease trap of at least 1,500 gallons and serving less than 100 customers in a 24-hour day, during the highest annual serving 24-hour period: Two times per year. 
Class III - Food establishments with an in ground oil/grease trap of at least 1,500 gallons and serving more than 100 customers but less than 250 customers in a 24-hour day, during the highest annual serving 24-hour period: Four times per year. 
Class IV - Food establishments with an in ground oil/grease trap of at least 1,500 gallons and serving more than 250 customers in a 24-hour day, during the highest annual serving 24-hour period: Monthly. 
(d)  Under the counter oil/grease traps. 
(1)  Under the counter oil/grease traps shall not be permitted in any food establishment using a dishwashing machine. 
(2)  Under the counter oil/grease traps shall be allowed only upon application for an annual permit for an under the under counter oil/grease trap. All such permit applications shall provide such information as required by the application developed by the city manager, and shall contain at least the following: (a) a full and complete description of the under the under counter oil/grease trap; (b) the capacity of the oil/grease trap; (c) the location, and means of access, of the oil/grease trap; (d) the manufacturer's and/or installers recommendations for maintenance of the oil/grease trap; and (e) the expected useful life of the oil/grease trap. 
(e)  Proper disposal of collected materials. A current licensed waste disposal firm must perform any removal and hauling of the collected materials from the sand/oil/grease traps. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the city's wastewater collection system. It is the responsibility of the originator to provide the city, within ten days of waste disposal firm's manifests showing compliance with the maintenance provisions of oil/grease traps. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-674. - Permits and permit fees. 
In order to identify users, and provide funds for administration and enforcement of this subdivision, all users of sand, oil, or grease traps shall secure an annual permit from the city, and pay an annual fee therefor to the city, simultaneously with the due date of any occupational tax due upon the user's business, as follows: 
(1)  Class I food establishments - $300.00; class II, III, and IV food establishments - $100.00; and sand traps - $100.00. 
(2)  Every user shall fully complete an application for permit as provided by the city and developed by the city manager. 
(3)  All permits shall be valid for the then current calendar year, and are transferable to a subsequent owner/operator at the same location, but are not transferable to a different location. 
(4)  All renewal permit applications shall require only disclosures reflecting changes to the original or previous permit application. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-675. - Enforcement. 
Inspection and entry. Representatives of the city, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any originator, transporter, processor, or disposal site servicing the city's jurisdiction at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article or the commercial waste transporter permit. Representatives of the city during inspections of the originator may review records to determine compliance with provisions of these regulations. The right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, sample, test, record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-676. - Violations. 
Upon any violation of any provision of this subdivision, the city may take any or all of the following actions: 
(1)  Discontinue water and sewer service to the offending premises until the problem is rectified to the full satisfaction of the city; 
(2)  Charge a sewer surcharge in the amount of $1,000.00 for each violation; 
(3)  Charge a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation; 
(4)  Apply for appropriate court action to abate or halt such discharge; 
(5)  Pursue any penalty provided in Sec. 1-7 of this Code; or 
(6)  Any combination of the above. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-677. - Severability. 
If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this subdivision shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if the provisions of any part of this subdivision as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances, shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such validity shall not be considered to affect the portions of this subdivision not so held to be invalid, or the application of this subdivision to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city commission to provide for separate and divisible parts, and it does not hereby adopt any and all parts hereof held invalid for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-678. - Liberal construction. 
It is hereby further provided that any ordinance or law, which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out the intent, purpose and provisions hereof, shall be liberally construed to be in favor of the city and is hereby adopted as a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-01, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 34-679. - Sewer system interceptors existing prior to October 1, 2006. 
(a)  All under the counter oil/grease traps in existence and use prior to October 1, 2006, and otherwise complying with the provisions of subdivision IV. Sewer system interceptors, may remain in service provided: 
(1)  They now are designed, or will be modified by January 1, 2007, to be designed, to fully and efficiently function at the maximum daily flow; 
(2)  All such under the counter oil/grease traps must be designed, or modified by January 1, 2007, so that they prevent water flow if the trap is filled to capacity and, when filled to capacity the water flow will back up unless the trap is cleaned; 
(3)  All such under the counter oil/grease traps must be designed, or modified by January 1, 2007, so that they utilize a filter which prevents any oil or grease from entering the city sewer system; and 
(4)  There is no increase in seating capacity. 
(b)  All class II, class III, and class IV food establishments with an in ground oil/grease trap of at least 800 gallons in existence and use prior to October 1, 2006, and otherwise complying with the provisions of subdivision IV. Sewer system interceptors, may remain in service provided: 
(1)  They now are designed, or will be modified by January 1, 2007, to be designed, to fully and efficiently function at the maximum daily flow; 
(2)  All such oil/grease traps must be designed, or modified by January 1, 2007, so that they prevent water flow if the trap is filled to capacity and, when filled to capacity the water flow will back up unless the trap is cleaned; all such oil/grease traps must be designed, or modified by January 1, 2007, so that they utilize a filter which prevents any oil or grease from entering the city sewer system; and 
(3)  There is no increase in seating capacity. 
(Ord. No. 06-10-01, 12-5-06) 
Subdivision V. - Rules and Regulations for Water, Sewers, and Sewer System Interceptors 

Sec. 34-680. - City manager authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall adopt and publish such rules and regulations for subdivision III and IV of this chapter 34, article IV, division 4, dealing with water, sewers, or sewer system interceptors as may be consistent therewith, and any such rule or regulation shall have the force and effect of law. Any such rules or regulations may be amended, modified, or supplemented by the city manager upon compliance with the requirement of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-02, 8-15-06) 
Sec. 34-681. - Approval of initial rules and regulations. 
The city commission has reviewed and approved, the initial submission of rules and regulations entitled "City of Helen, Water and Sewer Plan Review/Approval Process Manual," dated June, 2006, consisting of: 
(1)  A cover sheet bearing that title, a table of contents therefor, pages 1—8 thereof; 
(2)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Application and Plan Review Process Flow Chart" followed by a single page flowchart; 
(3)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Preliminary Project Information" followed by a single page fill-in-the blanks information sheet; 
(4)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Drinking Water Project Submittal Form" followed by a single page fill-in-the blanks submittal form; 
(5)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Sanitary Sewer Extension Submittal Form" followed by pages 1—4 of a fill-in-the blanks submittal form; 
(6)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Inspection Request Form" followed by a single page fill-in-the blanks request form; 
(7)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Maintenance/Performance Bond" followed by a single page fill-in-the blanks bond form; 
(8)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Sewer or Septic Line Connection Subcontractor Affidavit" followed by a single page fill-in-the blanks affidavit form; 
(9)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Water and Sewer Development Permit" followed by a single page fill-in-the blanks specimen permit; and affidavit form; 
(10)  A cover sheet bearing the title "Certificate of Completion Form" followed by a single page fill-in-the blanks specimen certificate. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-02, 8-15-06) 
Sec. 34-682. - City clerk to maintain and archive rules and regulations. 
All such rules and regulation shall be maintained by the city clerk, as a separate volume, in both printed and electronic media form, and available for review and inspection by the public at all times during business operation at city hall. The city clerk shall, in both print and electronic format, maintain an archive of the initial rules and regulations and any subsequent change thereto, so that it can be conclusively determined the rules and regulations in effect on any date. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-02, 8-15-06) 
Sec. 34-683. - Review by city commission. 
The city commission shall comply with any responsibility for changes to the rules and regulations which may be required pursuant to City Charter, by directing the city manager to make such changes as he or she shall deem appropriate, and present, at a public meeting, such changes for review and comment to the city commission. Unless the city commission, by vote, shall determine that some, or all, of the changes are inappropriate, such changes shall be effective on the fourteenth day following the meeting at which the changes are reviewed and commented upon, (unless a different effective date is stated within the changes themselves or by the commission). Thereafter, the city clerk shall, within 60 days from the effective date of the changes, revise the printed and electronic rules and regulations to reflect the changes; indicate the volume revision; indicate the sections affected by the changes, indicate the effective date of each revision; and provide a publicly available archive of the prior volume 
(Ord. No. 06-08-02, 8-15-06) 
Sec. 34-684. - Penalties. 
Any firm, person, or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by the promulgated rules or regulations, as the same exists or as may hereafter be amended, modified, or supplemented, or who shall fail to do anything required by such rules or regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the municipal court of the city, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail or correctional institution not to exceed 60 days, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-02, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 11-3-03, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 34-685. - City commission retains right to grant variance, amend, void or nullify. 
Nothing herein shall limit the right of the city commission to grant variance from, amend, void, or nullify all or any portion of any rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-02, 8-15-06) 
Secs. 34-686—34-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 34-701. - Performance and specifications. 
Every developer shall be required to make the improvements outlined in this subdivision in accordance with the specifications herein or otherwise adopted by the city. The necessity for storm drainage on each site will be determined by the criteria in article VI. 
(Code 1987, § 14-401) 
Sec. 34-702. - Grading. 
(a)  Generally. All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded by the developer so that pavement and sidewalks can be constructed to the required cross section. The minimum width of grading shall be the pavement width as specified in section 34-653, plus six feet on each side. Deviation from the above will be allowed only when due to special topographical conditions. 
(b)  Preparation. Before grading is started, that part of the right-of-way consisting of the area to be paved plus the shoulders, shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, other objectionable materials, and all trees not intended for preservation. 
(c)  Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rock and fill areas, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. 
(d)  Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the roadway. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed 12 inches loose and compacted by a sheeps-foot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to the roller shall be mechanically tamped. 
(e)  Subgrade. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled, and uniformly compacted to conform with the lines, grades, and typical cross sections as shown on drawings approved by the planning and design review board. Unsuitable materials shall be excavated and replaced with acceptable compacted material. 
(Code 1987, § 14-402) 
Sec. 34-703. - Storm drainage. 
An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross-drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural waterflow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full roadway width and the required slopes. The size of pipe to be provided shall be engineeringly determined by the developer; but in no case shall the pipe diameter be less than 15 inches. 
(Code 1987, § 14-403) 
Sec. 34-704. - Storm drainage plan. 
A storm drainage plan shall be submitted at the preliminary review stage and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location of proposed drainage ways, streams and sediment ponds within the development. 
(2)  Location, size and invert elevations of proposed drainage structure including culverts, bridges, pipes, drop inlets, and top elevations of headwalls, diversion ditches, etc. 
(3)  Area of land contributing runoff to each drainage feature. 
(4)  Location of easements and rights-of-way for drainage ways and maintenance accesses therefor. 
(5)  Typical improvements around drainage features and culverts, if any. 
(6)  Direction of waterflow throughout the subdivision and computed velocities at those points deemed necessary by the planning and design review board. 
(7)  Detailed engineering drawings on all impoundment structures, dams, sediment ponds, etc. 
(Code 1987, § 14-404) 
Sec. 34-705. - Installation of utilities and driveways. 
After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. 
(Code 1987, § 14-405) 
Sec. 34-706. - Street and alley improvements. 
(a)  Curb and gutter required. All streets shall provide curbs and gutters constructed with either precast concrete curb, asphalt curb or integral concrete curb and gutter conforming to the following dimensions or as approved by the planning and design review board: 
(1)  Precast concrete curb: 6 by 18 inches. 
(2)  Miami Roll curbs: 24 inches wide. 
(3)  Asphalt curb: according to state DOT specifications. 
(4)  Integral concrete curb and gutter: cross section as approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Exception to curb and gutter requirement. An exception may be made to the curb and gutter requirement provided the developer furnishes proof satisfactory to the city manager that all road grades and road ditches will be stabilized without use of curb and gutters. In lieu of curb and gutter, the developer may stabilize road ditches by paving or by rock check dams or by methods approved by the city manager. 
(c)  Paving required. All streets must be prepared according to the following methods or by equivalent methods acceptable to the city manager: 
(1)  Base. The base shall consist of crushed stone or other approved material having a minimum thickness, after being thoroughly compacted, of six inches and constructed on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, and typical cross section as shown on the drawings submitted to and approved by the city manager. 
a.  All materials shall generally conform to minimum acceptable standards of the state department of transportation, highway division, for this area. 
b.  All materials shall be mixed to the extent necessary to produce a thoroughly pulverized and homogeneous mixture. 
c.  As soon as the base material has been spread and mixed, the base shall be brought to approximate line and grade until full thickness of the base course has been compacted thoroughly. Defects shall be remedied as soon as they are discovered. New materials shall be added, if necessary, and defective portions shall be entirely removed. 
d.  The base course shall be maintained under traffic and kept free from ruts, ridge, and dusting, true to grade and cross section until it is primed. 
e.  No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the subgrade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
(2)  Pavement. Wearing surface shall conform to mixes found suitable by the state department of transportation, highway division, or an independent testing laboratory and shall be applied after prime coat. Unless otherwise approved by the city manager, pavement shall be constructed as follows: 
a.  Prime coat shall be cut-back asphalt or cut-back asphalt emulsion applied on a clean, slightly damp surface in the amounts of from 0.10 to 0.30 gallons per square yard, depending on the nature and condition of the surface. 
b.  Wearing surface shall consist of an approved plant mix prepared in a central plant and composed of aggregate and bituminous material having an in-place minimum compacted thickness of 1½ inches. 
(3)  Sealing of joints. Care and precaution shall be taken that all joints between the surface mixture and such structures as manholes and curbs are well sealed. 
(4)  Restoration of disturbed pavement. Any pavement on a public right-of-way disturbed in the conduct of development shall be fully restored in accordance with minimum acceptable standards of the state department of transportation, highway division. Such restoration shall be fully completed within 30 days from the date of first disturbance; provided, however, that the city may direct earlier completion in instances involving dire hazard to the public safety. The cost of such restoration shall be paid by the developer. 
(d)  Sidewalk required. All streets shall provide sidewalk a minimum of six feet wide, constructed of precast concrete. 
(Code 1987, § 14-406) 
Sec. 34-707. - Guarantee against faulty material. 
Final approval of street improvements shall be granted and streets accepted for maintenance by the city only in accordance with one of the following provisions: 
(1)  If the state department of transportation inspects subdivision roads at the time of construction and finds they are built to state specifications, the city may accept them immediately. 
(2)  The street improvements shall have been completed and in place for a period of one year and, upon inspection following such period of time, shall be found to be free from defective workmanship or material and free from sinkholes or other settling. 
(3)  Following otherwise satisfactory completion of such work, the developer shall post with the city a guaranty bond or other surety, as approved by the city commission, in an amount equal to ten percent of the value of the street for which acceptance is sought. The bond will guarantee to the city that the street has been installed in a workmanlike manner, that such street is free from defects caused by faulty material or workmanship, and that the street will remain in acceptable condition for a period of at least one year. The guaranty bond shall be effective for a period of one year. If, before the end of the one-year period, the street is found to have settled or be otherwise unacceptable because of faulty workmanship or material, the defective street shall be repaired at the cost of the developer up to the amount of the guaranty bond, and upon failure or refusal to do so within 90 days after demand is made by the city commission, the city shall make such repairs as are reasonably necessary and recover the cost thereof. 
(Code 1987, § 14-407) 
Sec. 34-708. - Landscaping. 
The following landscaping requirements established by this section are the minimum design standards for all development: 
(1)  Landscaping plan required. A landscaping plan shall be submitted at the preliminary review stage and shall conform to the following design standards: 
a.  Landscape design and planning shall be integrated with the overall design concept for any project; therefore, the planning and design review board shall evaluate the landscaping proposed as to its relationship to the existing natural landscape; developed and other proposed landscape, including on adjacent properties and public right-of-way; and the building or buildings existing and/or proposed. 
b.  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or replaced with suitable vegetation. 
c.  Landscaping shall be used whenever possible to screen objectional views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units, transformers, etc. 
d.  Grass areas should be sodded; however, if grass seed must be used, it shall be a variety suitable to the area that produces complete coverage. 
e.  No artificial plants, trees or other vegetation shall be installed. 
f.  All existing, healthy deciduous and hardwood trees with a caliper of eight or more inches at a point three feet above the ground shall be retained, whenever feasible; if not feasible, the tree shall be replaced with the same or similar type of tree. 
g.  All planted trees shall be native to this region and when planted, shall be a minimum height of eight feet with a height at maturity of at least 20 feet. 
(2)  Landscaping coverage. 
a.  The minimum total lot area in landscaped open space shall be the sum of the areas required to meet perimeter, frontage, interior parking lot, and buffer strip landscaping requirements. 
b.  Existing onsite plant materials may be credited as landscaped open space, if in the opinion of the planning and design review board, such plant materials achieve the purposes of this section; however, no more than 25 percent of any lot area in water or floodplain shall be credited as landscaped open space. 
(3)  Frontage and perimeter landscaping requirements. 
a.  A landscaping strip of at least ten feet in width shall be required along all public rights-of-way, except where driveways or other openings may be required. 
b.  A landscaping strip of at least five feet in width shall be required along any side lot that abuts adjoining property that is not a public right-of-way, except where driveways or other openings may be required. 
(4)  Parking area landscaping requirements. Interior landscaping for parking areas shall be required for all parking lots designed for 20 or more spaces and shall comply with the following design criteria: 
a.  Not less than ten percent of the interior of a parking lot shall be landscaped. 
b.  No parking space shall be located more than 90 feet from any interior landscaped open space required by this section. 
c.  The required landscaped area need not be contiguous, but there shall be at least one tree in each separate area; and each separate area shall have an area of at least 50 square feet with a minimum width or diameter of five feet. 
(5)  Tree requirements. 
a.  A minimum of one tree shall be required for each 500 square feet of the total minimum required open space. For the purpose of meeting this requirement, all existing or replaced trees as defined in subsection (1)f. above, planted trees as defined in subsection (1)g. above, and all other existing trees of at least 20 feet in height shall be counted. 
b.  Trees shall be planted and/or retained in areas of the site to enhance the overall project design and provide such amenities as visual attractiveness, natural resources preservation, energy conservation, etc. 
c.  All retained or planted trees shall be protected or situated as to prevent damage from environmental changes resulting from any building or other improvements. 
(6)  Agreement and bond required. Prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy, the owner shall post a performance bond or cash escrow guaranteeing all landscaping materials and work for a period of two years after approval or acceptance thereof, in a sum established by the planning and design review board. The bond shall be in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of replacing all of the landscaping approved or accepted. At the end of two years, the city inspector shall make an inspection and notify the owner and the bonding company of any corrections to be made. If no corrections are required, the bond shall be released. 
(7)  Maintenance required. The owner, occupant, tenant and representative of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping. 
(Code 1987, § 14-408) 
Secs. 34-709—34-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TECHNICAL CODES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; water system, § 70-26 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, § 70-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(12). 

Sec. 34-801. - Adoption by reference. 
The following are adopted by reference as if set out at length in this article: 
(1)  2006 International Residential Code, most current edition, as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(2)  Handicapped Accessibility Standard (ANSI 117.1), most current edition, as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(3)  Life Safety Code (NFPA No. 101), most current edition, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(4)  2005 National Electrical Code (NFPA No. 70), most current edition, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(5)  2000 International Energy conservation Code, most current edition, as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(6)  2006 International Building Code, most current edition, except paragraphs 102.2 through 108, all as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(7)  2006 International Fire Code, most current edition, except paragraph 105, as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(8)  2006 International Fuel Gas Code, most current edition, except paragraphs 102.2 through 108, all as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(9)  2006 International Mechanical Code, most current edition, except paragraphs 102.2 and 108, all as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(10)  2006 International Plumbing Code, most current edition, except paragraphs 103.2 and 109, all as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(11)  2003 International Existing Building Code, most current edition as promulgated by the department of community affairs. To include state amendments (being a minimum building standard mandated by state law). 
(12)  2006 International Property Maintenance Code, most current edition and any and all updates. 
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, in the event a technical code hereinabove referred to is published during the pendency of any permit, the edition of that code published at the time of the application for that permit shall be the standard applied for all purposes applicable to that particular permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-03, 10-31-96; Ord. No. 00-10-01, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 07-01-01, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 09-04-01, 4-21-09) 
Charter reference— Adoption by reference, § 2.25. 
State Law reference— Minimum state standards, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Sec. 34-802. - Permit fees to be set by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall adopt and publish such permits fees for this article as may be consistent herewith, and any permit fees shall have the force and effect of law. Any such permit fees may be amended, modified, or supplemented by the city manager upon compliance with the requirement of this section. 
(b)  The city commission has reviewed and approved the initial submission of permit fees dated January, 2007, for building permit fee schedule, moving fee, demolition fee, electrical permit fee schedule, plumbing permit fee schedule, meter valve fee schedule, labor, and mechanical permit fee schedule. 
(c)  All such permit fees shall be maintained by the city clerk, as a separate volume, in both printed and electronic media form, and available for review and inspection by the public at all times during business operation at city hall. The city clerk shall, in both print and electronic format, maintain an archive of the initial permit fees and any subsequent change thereto, so that it can be conclusively determined the permit fees in effect on any date. 
(d)  The city commission shall comply with any responsibility for changes to the permit fees which may be required pursuant to City Charter, by directing the city manager to make such changes as he or she shall deem appropriate, and present, at a public meeting, such changes for review and comment to the city commission. Unless the city commission, by vote, shall determine that some, or all, of the changes are inappropriate, such changes shall be effective on the fourteenth day following the meeting at which the changes are reviewed and commented upon, (unless a different effective date is stated within the changes themselves or by the commission, in which event the stated date shall be the effective date). Thereafter, the city clerk shall, within 60 days from the effective date of the changes, revise the printed and electronic permit fees to reflect the changes; indicate the volume revision; indicate the sections affected by the changes, indicate the effective date of each revision; and provide a publicly available archive of the prior volumes. 
(e)  Any firm, person, or corporation who shall fail to timely pay such permit fees, as the same exists or as may hereafter be amended, modified, or supplemented, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the municipal court of the city, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail or correctional institution not to exceed 60 days, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(f)  Nothing herein shall limit the right of the city commission to grant variance from, amend, void, or nullify all or any portion of any permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-02, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 07-01-01, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 11-3-03, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 34-803. - Licenses required for plumbing, electrical and HVAC permits. 
Plumbing, electrical and HVAC permits shall only be issued to tradesmen licensed by the state. 
(Code 1987, § 18-103) 
State Law reference— State regulation of electrical, plumbing and mechanical contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 34-804. - Appeals. 
Appeals from decisions made under the codes of this article shall go to the city board of appeals. 
Secs. 34-805—34-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-11-01, adopted December 17, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former art. VI, §§ 34-901—34-912, 34-926—34-930, 34-951—34-955, in its entirety, and adding a new art. VI to read as herein set out. Former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1987, §§ 16-101—16-110, and Ord. No. 97-21-01, adopted February 10, 1999. 
Charter reference— General powers of city, §§ 1.12, 1.13. 
Cross reference— Erosion and sedimentation control, § 26-76 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 34-901. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Georgia has in O.C.G.A. Art. IX, § II, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-902. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-903. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-904. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Secs. 34-905—34-920. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 34-921. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-922. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated April 11, 2001, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for the unincorporated county are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-923. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-924. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-925. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-926. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-927. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-928. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-7. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Secs. 34-929, 34-930. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 34-931. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The city planning and design review board is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-932. - Permit procedures. 
Application or development permit shall be made to the city planning design and review board on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 34-942(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage: 
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The city planning design and review board shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-933. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city planning design and review board shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-922, then the city planning design and review board shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 34-932(2). 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 34-932(2). 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city planning design and review board shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 34-932(1)(c) and section 34-942(2) or section 34-944(2). 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city planning design and review board shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city planning design and review board and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Secs. 34-934—34-940. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-941. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-942. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-941(4), "elevated buildings." 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 34-933(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, 
must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (see section 34-941(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 34-942(3)a.—c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-922, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. 
Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if section 34-942(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-943. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-922, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-922, then the city planning design and review board shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4, only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in an increase greater than that allowed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study, latest edition, in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-941(4), "Elevated buildings." 
The city planning design and review board shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 04-03-01, 4-20-04) 
Sec. 34-944. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-922, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-941(4), "Elevated buildings." 
The city planning design and review board shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 34-932(1)(c) and section 34-932(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-945. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Secs. 34-946—34-950. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 34-951. - Procedures. 
(a)  The board of appeals as established by the city commission shall hear and decide requests for appeals and the city commission shall hear and decide variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city planning design and review board, and any city official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests for variance, the city commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 34-952. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The city planning design and review board shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and the city clerk shall report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Secs. 34-953—34-960. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 34-961. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the planning design and review board's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 34-922. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction. Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before August 11, 1987, (the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the city as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 11, 1987, (the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the city as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 11, 1987, (the effective date of the first floodplain management code or article adopted by the city as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 11, 1987, (the effective date of the first floodplain management Code or ordinance adopted by the city as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Secs. 34-962—34-970. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 34-971. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-11-01, 12-17-02) 
Secs. 34-972—34-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIGNS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-01-01, adopted February 15, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former art. VII, §§ 34-1001—34-1006, 34-1026—34-1035, 34-1051—34-1055, and 34-1101—34-1117, and adding a new art. VII. Former art. VII pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 90-6, adopted September 18, 1990; Ord. No. 94-09-01, adopted October 18, 1994; Ord. No. 94-12-02, adopted January 17, 1995; and Ord. No. 96-07-02, adopted August 19, 1996. 
Charter reference— General authority to regulate signs, §§ 1.12, 1.13(17). 
Cross reference— Signs for pay parking lots, § 14-165. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; advertising signs on or near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-1001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign means a permitted sign which was erected on property in conjunction with a particular use which use has been discontinued for a period of 30 days or more, or a permitted temporary sign for which the permit has expired. 
Administrator means that person designated by the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Banner means a flexible substance (such as cloth, plastic, or paper), typically square or rectangular in shape, on which copy or graphic may be displayed. 
Changeable copy sign means a sign on which message copy is changed manually in the field through the utilization of attachable letters, numbers, symbols and other similar characters or changeable pictorial panels. 
Commercial or industrial center means two or more separate occupancies located within the same or adjacent building or buildings on the same commercial or industrial plat of record. 
Commercial sign or message means any sign containing a message that promotes a business or attempts to generate good will for a business; any message that advertises a product or service for sale; and any message that proposes a commercial transaction. Any sign containing any commercial message shall be regulated as a commercial sign. The content of commercial signs is not regulated by this article, but examples of commercial sign usage might be the establishment name, services or good offered by the establishment, logos or trademarks of the business; or information about the business such as whether an establishment is open or closed, its hours of operation, or specific services available. However, these examples are illustrative, rather than an imposition of any required content, and neither the contents nor the messages contained within a commercial sign are regulated by this article. 
Dilapidated sign means any sign which is structurally unsound, has defective parts or is in need of painting or maintenance. 
Directional sign means: 
(1)  A sign, permanently erected and permitted, in the public right-of-way by the city or other governmental agency, or upon private property by the appropriate enterprise, to denote the name of any thoroughfare; the route to any city, town, village, educational institution, public building, historic place, shrine or hospital; to direct and regulate vehicular or pedestrian traffic; to denote any railroad crossing, bridge or other transportation company for the direction or safety of the public. 
(2)  Signs erected and maintained by the city upon city property or right-of-way, upon which the city, for an annual fee, provides, attaches and maintains, uniform, multiple directional arrows, imprinted with minimal information consisting of the various businesses names. 
(3)  A sign, notice or symbol for the information of the Federal Aviation Agency as to locations, directions, landings and conditions affecting safety in aviation. 
Directory sign means a sign utilized by more than one business, activity or professional office for activity conducted within a building, group of buildings, or a commercial center. 
Double-faced sign means a single sign, with two faces, having identical information of each, with no angle separating the two faces. 
Driving area means those areas within the city not designated as "walking area" and are most commonly accessed through vehicular means, rather than pedestrian. The city commission finds that differing permitted signage size requirements are permissible in the driving area from the walking area, as areas most conducive to vehicular traffic, rather than the pedestrian traffic common to the walking area. 
Electrical sign means a self-illuminated sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections and/or fixtures are used as part of the sign proper. 
Existing sign means any sign that was erected, mounted or displayed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Facade means the entire building wall, including main street wall face, and parapet, fascia, windows, doors, canopy and roof on any complete elevation. 
Flag means any unframed fabric or bunting, usually rectangular in shape, that is used as a symbol for a non-commercial message (ie. as of a nation, a signaling device, or as decoration). 
Flashing sign means any lighted or electrical sign which emits light in sudden transitory bursts. 
Freestanding sign means a sign supported by a sign structure secured in the ground and which is wholly independent of any building, fence, vehicle or other support. 
Frontage means the length of the property line of any one premises parcel serving as public right-of-way line. 
Frontage wall face means the building facade, excluding parapet, fascia, soffit, mansard and roof, which faces a frontage of the premises. 
Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the nearest road centerline to the top of the sign face or sign structure, whichever is greater. 
Illuminated sign, external means any sign which is directly lighted by an external source. 
Illuminated sign, internal means any sign which transmits light through its face or any part thereof. 
Inflatable sign means a sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions or supported by gasses contained within the sign or sign parts at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. 
Ingress/egress sign means a sign which designates only the direction of ingress or egress of a parking area or driveway or business, such as "Enter," "Exit," "One Way," "Do Not Enter," etc. 
Moving message board means any electrical sign having a continuous message flowing across its face by utilization of lights or other electrical impulses forming various words or designs. 
Noncommercial message means any message that is not a commercial message. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which has a valid permit, was erected or displayed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or any subsequent amendments thereto and does not conform with any provisions of this article. 
Occupancy means any use of or activity upon the premises. 
Off-premises sign means any sign located or proposed to be located any place other than within the same platted parcel of land on which the specific business or activity being promoted on such sign is itself located or conducted. For purposes of this article, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be outside such platted parcel of land and any sign located or proposed to be located in such easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an off-premises sign. 
On-premises sign means any sign located or proposed to be located any place, if otherwise permitted by this article, within the plat of record for the business or other activity identified on such sign. 
Painted wall sign means a sign painted directly on any exterior building wall or door surface. 
Panel means the primary surface of a sign upon which the message of the sign is carried. 
Pennants and balloons means any animated, rotating, fluttering or non-stationary device made of flexible materials designed to attract attention. 
Permitted sign means a sign for which a valid permit has been issued. 
Portable sign means any sign which is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground, or which is attached to a motor vehicle. 
Premises means the plat of record which is affected either directly or indirectly by the contents of this article. 
Project sign means any sign erected and maintained on the premises temporarily while undergoing construction by an architect, contractor, developer, finance organization, subcontractor or materials vendor upon which property such individual is furnishing labor, services or material. 
Public right-of-way line means the line where the property meets the public right-of-way at a public street or public waterway, provided that this definition shall not include unimproved alleys, easements or other similar dedicated uses. 
Public way means any street, highway, road, path or right-of-way, whether privately or publicly owned, which is designed or used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, either by public right or custom or by invitation of two or more common owners. 
Pylon sign means a sign advertising multiple businesses, with each individual business sign stacked one upon the other. 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or sale. 
Roof means the exterior upper covering of the top of a building, or a mansard. 
Roof sign means any sign erected on or over, and wholly or partially dependent upon the roof of any building for support, or attached to the roof in any way. 
Rotating sign means any sign which revolves around one or more fixed areas. 
Shadow box means a sign utilized for menus and specials by establishments offering food and beverage as their primary business purpose. 
Sidewalk or sandwich sign means a movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or any building or structure. 
Sign means any device or presentation for visual communication used for the purpose of bringing the subject to the attention of others which is located on or attached to premises, real property, structures on real property or a vehicle. 
Sign, area of means the square-foot area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign face. On signs which are composed of individual symbols, letters, figures, illustrations, messages, forms or panels, the sign area shall include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed, and frame around the sign and cutouts or extensions, but shall not include any supporting structure or bracing. 
Sign face means the part of the sign that is used, or can be used, to identify or communicate information or for visual representation which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. Sign face includes any background material, panel, trim or color that differentiates the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon which or against which it is placed. The sign structure shall not be included as a portion of the sign face, provided no message, symbol or any of the aforementioned sign face criteria are displayed on or designed as part of the sign structure. 
Sign structure means a supporting structure erected, used or intended for the purpose of identification or attracting attention, with or without a sign thereon, situated upon or attached to the premises, upon which any sign may be fastened, affixed, displayed or applied. This definition shall not include a building, fence, wall or earthen berm. 
Snipe sign means a sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes or fences, or to other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which such sign is located. 
Special event sign means a sign which carries a message regarding a special event or function which is of general interest to the community. 
Swinging sign means a sign installed on an arm, mast or spar that is not, in addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole. 
Temporary sign means any sign or information transmitting devise intended to be erected or displayed for a limited period of time. 
Traffic direction/Safety sign means a sign which is on the premises which is designed, sized, and erected for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or safety. 
Vehicle sign means a permanent or temporary sign affixed, painted on or placed in or upon any vehicle legally and physically capable of being driven upon the public ways of this state, or in or upon a trailer or other device capable of being legally and physically towed upon the public ways of this state. Specifically excluded from this definition is a sign upon or in a vehicle, trailer, or other device which is no longer physically or legally capable of being driven or towed upon the public ways of this state, and has, as its principal function or primary purpose, the display or attraction of the attention of the public rather than to serve the business or the owner thereof in the manner which is customary for the vehicle, trailer, or device. 
Walking area as referenced in this article, means those commercial areas within the city most conducive to pedestrian traffic by the visitors to the city and its residents, and as such, subject to differing signage size requirements than the "driving area" of the city for aesthetic purposes in the promotion of the city's tourism industry. The walking area is further defined as follows: 
(1)  Main Street: Bounded by Munich Strasse to Spring Street; 
(2)  River Street: Bounded by Main Street to Unicoi Strasse; 
(3)  Dye Street: Bounded by Main Street to Unicoi Strasse; 
(4)  Spring Street: Bounded by Main Street to Unicoi Strasse; 
(5)  East side of Munich Strasse: Bounded by Main Street to The Helendorf Inn (33 Munich Strasse); and 
(6)  Chattahoochee Strasse: Bounded by Main Street to Schloss Weg. 
Wall graphics means artwork, excluding lettering except for the identification of the artist, applied upon a wall. 
Window graphics means artwork, excluding lettering except for the identification of the artist, applied upon a window. 
Window sign means any sign which is painted on, applied to, attached to or projected upon or within the exterior of a building glass area, including doors, whose identification, message, symbol, insignia, visual, representation, logotype or any other form which communicated information can be read in such a manner within the building that it can be seen from the exterior of the structure through a window or door and is designed to attract attention from the exterior as such. This definition is specifically intended to include illuminated signs located within the interior of premises, but which signs are designed to be seen from and attract attention from the exterior of the structure through either a window or door. 
Window sign, temporary means a window sign of a temporary nature used to direct attention to the sale of merchandise, or a change in the status of the business, including, but not limited to, sign for sales, special and grand openings. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 11-06-02, 7-19-11; Ord. No. 12-09-02, 9-18-12; Ord. No. 13-06-03, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1002. - Penalties. 
(1)  The city manager, code enforcement officer, or other personnel authorized by the governing authority, are authorized to issue a citation for violation of this article, and/or institute an injunctive proceeding and/or remove the sign if within a right-of-way pursuant to section 34-1032 of this chapter or if said sign does not have a proper permit and is violation of this chapter, and/or proceed with other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the violation of this article. 
(2)  Any citation issued for violation of this article shall be taken to the municipal court of the city and prosecuted as any other criminal citation within the municipal court. 
(3)  The maximum punishment imposed for a violation of this article shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment or both. 
(4)  Any suit for injunction filed on behalf of the governing authority as authorized above shall be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction and prosecuted as any other suit for injunction within that court as allowed by law. 
(5)  Any citation, injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation of this article may be taken against the owner or erector of the sign, the owner of the property on which the sign is located, and/or any other person or entity that has an ownership interest in the sign or property. 
(6)  Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(7)  All remedies and penalties specified in this article are cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 11-06-02, 7-19-11) 
Sec. 34-1003. - Interpretation. 
(a)  The standards and provisions of this article shall be interpreted as being the minimum requirements necessary to uphold the purposes of this article. 
(b)  Whenever this article imposes a higher standard than required by any other city ordinance or requirement, the provisions of this article shall govern. Whenever any other city ordinance or requirement imposes a higher standard than required by this article, the provisions of such city ordinance or requirement shall govern. 
(c)  Whenever this article imposes a higher standard than required by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(d)  When the provisions of any applicable state or federal statute imposes a higher standard than required by this article, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1004. - Purpose. 
The City Commission finds that the purpose of this article is for: 
(1)  Safety. 
a.  Do not create traffic hazards by distracting or confusing motorists, impairing motorists' ability to see pedestrians, other vehicles, obstacles, or to read traffic signs; 
b.  Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment; and 
c.  Do promote the aesthetics, safety, health, morals and general welfare and the assurance of protection of adequate light and air within the city by regulating the posting, displaying, erection, use and maintenance of signs. 
(2)  Information. Promote the efficient transfer of general public and commercial information through the use of signs. 
(3)  Public welfare. Protect the public welfare and enhance the overall appearance and economic value of the landscape and preserve the unique natural environment that distinguishes the city. It is also acknowledged that the city's economic wellbeing is heavily dependent upon the resort and tourism industry. This dependence makes the preservation of the environment from unreasonable signage a matter of critical importance to everyone. 
(4)  Aesthetics. The designation of the city as Georgia's Alpine Village is well known, and the presentation to visitors of the Bavarian theme is a vital economic component of the city; such that the proliferation of signs without regulation would have an adverse economic impact on the city. 
Accordingly, the city commission finds that by minimizing the proliferation of signs through the restrictions contained in this article; that the rights of individuals to convey their message through signs is preserved, while simultaneously protecting residents and visitors to the city to be protected from adverse effects of an unrestricted proliferation of signs. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1005. - Prohibited signs. 
Except as may be specifically permitted hereinafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or use within the city, when visible from any public way, any of the following signs: 
(1)  Snipe signs; 
(2)  A sign which contains any moving, flashing, animated lights, visible moving or moveable parts, or giving the appearance of animation; 
(3)  Roof signs; 
(4)  Any sign which emits a sound, odor or visible matter; 
(5)  Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way; 
(6)  Any sign and/or sign structure which obstructs the view of, may be confused with, or purposed to be a governmental or traffic directional/safety sign; 
(7)  Any sign or sign structure, other than freestanding, which extends above the parapet or building roofline against which the sign is located; 
(8)  Signs using the words "stop," "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, confuses or distracts a vehicle driver; 
(9)  Moving message signs; 
(10)  Except as otherwise provided, no sign, whether temporary or permanent, except by a public agency, is permitted within any street or highway right-of-way; 
(11)  Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, rocks or other natural features, telephone or utility poles or painted on the roofs of buildings visible from any public way; 
(12)  Abandoned or dilapidated signs; 
(13)  Any sign which exhibits statements, words or pictures of obscene or pornographic subjects or material; 
(14)  Portable signs; 
(15)  Inflatable signs; 
(16)  Finger or pennant streamers; 
(17)  Paper signs or paper advertising on the exterior of building or on the interior of a window or door, or within three feet of a window or door, so as to be visible from the outside; or 
(18)  Reserved. 
(19)  A vehicle sign, when the vehicle is (a) not regularly used in the conduct of the business or activity advertised on the vehicle, and (b) is visible from a public right-of-way. A vehicle shall not be considered as "regularly used in the conduct of the business or activity" if the vehicle is used primarily (i) for advertising, or (ii) for the purpose of advertising. 
(Ord. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 10-01-02, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 10-08-01, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1006. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06-01 , adopted June 21, 2016, repealed § 34-1006, which pertained to purpose and derived from Ord. No. 05-01-01, adopted Feb, 15, 2005. 
Sec. 34-1007. - City sponsored directional fee signs. 
(a)  The city may, but shall not be required to, erect, replace, repair, and maintain one or more structures upon which the city may affix, for a fee, signs identifying private commercial business within the city, and directing traffic in the direction of such business. 
(b)  There shall be multiple signs affixed to the same structure, on a first come, first served basis. 
(c)  All such signs shall be of a uniform size, material, coloring, and lettering. 
(d)  No business owner or operator may affix, remove, or modify any sign upon any such structure, and the entirety of the structures, and any signs affixed thereto, shall be the sole property of the city. 
(e)  The city shall establish, and revise from time to time as necessary: 
(1)  An initial fee to cover the cost of manufacture, installation, affixation, and related expenses, of signs and sign structures; and 
(2)  An annual renewal fee to cover the cost of repair, maintenance, and replacement, of signs and sign structures. 
(f)  No business owner or operator shall have a sign affixed to such sign structure, unless and until, such owner or operator shall have paid the initial fee, any renewal fee, is current on payment of all business license fees, occupation tax, and any other tax or fees owed to the city, and completed an application for affixation of such sign upon forms provided by the city manager. 
(g)  Upon implementation of this section, all previous and similar city structures and signs shall be permanently removed. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Secs. 34-1008—34-1025. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 34-1026. - Authority to issue notices—Sign maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Compliance. It is unlawful for any person to place, erect, locate, or allow any sign within the city that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Permit required. Except for those signs exempted from permitting under this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, replace, or relocate within the city any sign without first following the permit process in sections 34-1051 through 34-1100 of this chapter. 
(c)  Interpretation and authority. The city manager and duly authorized officers shall have the authority to issue sign violation notices and citations, identifying a sign which is not in compliance as to the requirements, standards, definitions or any other provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Sign maintenance. Any signs not meeting the following provisions shall be repaired or removed in accordance with the specifications of this chapter. 
(1)  The area around the sign on private property on which the sign is erected shall be maintained clear of brush, trees, or other obstacles such that the sign is readily visible. 
(2)  All burned out bulbs (if the sign falls within the permitted category of illuminated signs which are permitted under section 34-1102 of this chapter) must be replaced. 
(3)  All panels or portions of any sign which are damaged must be replaced. 
(4)  All sign copy shall be maintained securely to the face of the sign, and all missing copy must be replaced. 
(5)  All existing signs must be maintained in good repair, and will be subject to annual examination in accordance with subsection 34-1034(a) of this chapter. 
(6)  All signs shall be designed, constructed, installed and maintained in compliance with the applicable building and electrical codes and in accordance with any applicable state law governing sign placement and sign characteristics. 
Ord. No. 11-06-02, 7-19-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-06-02, adopted July 19, 2011, deleted the former § 34-1026 and enacted a new § 34-1026 as set out herein. The former § 34-1026 pertained to authority to issue notices, enter premises for enforcement purposes and derived from Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05. 
Sec. 34-1027. - Legal signs. 
(a)  Any existing and permitted sign which complies with the provisions of this article, and any subsequent amendment hereto, is hereby deemed to be a legal sign. Any proposed alteration to or relocation of such sign shall not be undertaken until the permit required by subdivision II has been issued, unless the proposed alteration is specifically exempt from such permit requirement. 
(b)  Any legal sign which does not comply with the provisions of this article solely due to the enactment of an amendment hereto subsequent to the effective date of this article shall, upon the effective date of such amendment, become a nonconforming sign and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1028. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any sign erected or existing as of the date of the first reading of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and which has a valid permit from the city, but which does not conform to the provisions of this article is hereby deemed to be a non-conforming sign. A non-conforming sign may be maintained by painting, refinishing, refurbishing, or repairing the sign, or sign structure as it was originally permitted by the city. Any alteration, relocation, replacement, or redesign of a sign other than for the permitted maintenance purposes described above will render the prior permit void, and such sign shall be reclassified as an illegal sign pursuant to section 34-1029. Signs which were non-conforming to the and illegal under the prior ordinance and which do not conform to this Code remain an illegal sign under section 34-1029. 
(b)  Any nonconforming sign may become a legal sign if, after compliance with the provisions of this article, it is brought into conformity. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1029. - Illegal signs. 
Any sign erected or existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which does not have a valid permit from the city, is hereby deemed to be an illegal sign and such sign and the person or persons responsible for such sign shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Signs located on any property annexed into the city after the effective date of this article must conform to the provisions of this article within six months of final annexation date. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Secs. 34-1030, 34-1031. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-1032. - Impoundment of signs. 
(a)  The city manager and his staff shall have the authority to remove and impound all signs, without notice to the owners thereof, placed within any city street or highway right-of-way. 
(b)  The owner of an impounded sign may recover same upon the payment of $50.00 for each sign prior to the expiration of the ten-day impoundment period. In the event it is not claimed within ten days, the administrator shall have the authority to dispose of such sign. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1033. - Fees. 
(a)  In order to defray the administrative costs associated with processing permit applications for signs and inspection of signs, a non-refundable application fee of $25.00 shall be paid at the time of sign application. If the application is approved, a fee of $75.00 shall be due for the sign permit, if issued. If a variance request is required to be heard, an additional $50.00 fee shall be due for the application for the requested variance. 
(b)  Temporary permitted signs. Those temporary signs which are required to obtain a permit will be charged an application/permit fee of $25.00. 
(c)  Reinspection fee. If a reinspection of the sign is required after initial installation, a reinspection fee of $25.00 shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1034. - Sign inspection. 
(a)  Existing signs. All commercial signs will be reviewed and inspected annually, concurrent with the city occupation tax certificate. The owner of such sign shall execute an affidavit stating the sign(s) are all in good repair, and file such affidavit with the payment of the occupation tax. 
(b)  New signs. 
(1)  Within ten working days of completion of approved work related to a permitted sign, the permittee or sign contractor shall notify the city manager, or his designee, that such sign is ready for a final inspection. The city manager, or his designee, shall conduct the final inspection for the purpose of verifying that the sign is in compliance with the requirements of the permit and all other provisions of this article. 
(2)  Failure to obtain a satisfactory inspection result shall render the permit invalid, and the applicant shall be required to reapply for a permit or remove the sign or sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1035. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06-01 , adopted June 21, 2016, repealed § 34-1035, which pertained to display of decals and derived from Ord. No. 05-01-01, adopted Feb. 15, 2005. 
Secs. 34-1036—34-1050. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permit 

Sec. 34-1051. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted by this section, no sign or sign structure shall be erected, displayed, moved, relocated or altered until a permit fee has been paid and a sign permit issued by the planning and design review board. 
(b)  A permit is not required for the following types of signs: 
(1)  An official sign or notice issued by any court, public agency or office. 
(2)  A traffic directional, warning or information sign authorized by any public agency. 
(3)  A private street or road name sign or a traffic directional sign which does not exceed one square foot per sign face. 
(4)  Current real estate signs, not more than one on each road frontage, advertising property for rent, lease, or sale, not to exceed nine square feet per sign face, provided such sign(s) are removed within 30 days of the completion of the advertised transaction. 
(5)  An ingress/egress sign which does not exceed one square foot per sign face. 
(6)  Temporary holiday decorations, which do not contain advertising, provided such decorations are installed no more than 45 days prior to the holiday, and removed not more than ten days following the holiday. 
(7)  Flags which are not utilized for a commercial message and which are maintained in good repair, provided that the flag is either attached to a flagpole mounted in the ground or attached to a structure, and the flagpoles shall conform to the applicable setback restrictions of the zoning district. The location and flagpole must be placed in an area that does not create any traffic safety issue, and shall not exceed the height of the primary structure on the lot. 
(8)  Banners, maintained in good repair, flown for holidays; citywide special events which involve the city as a whole, such as Fasching, Mayfest, and Oktoberfest; or permitted banners for permitted special events. 
(9)  Vehicle signs, if such vehicle is regularly used in the conduct of the business or activity advertised on the vehicle. A vehicle shall not be considered as "regularly used in the conduct of the business or activity" and this permit exemption shall not apply if the vehicle is used primarily, (i) for advertising, or (ii) for the purpose of advertising. 
(10)  Patio Umbrellas. 
(11)  All signs containing non-commercial messages only. However, any temporary sign which does not require a permit because it contains a non-commercial message and which pertains to an event to be concluded on a date certain shall be removed within 14 days after the conclusion of the event. 
(c)  A permit is not required prior to engaging in sign alterations if such alteration involves only: 
(1)  The changing of copy on a permitted changeable copy sign; or 
(2)  The painting or refinishing of the surface of a sign face or sign structure of a permitted sign to keep the appearance of such sign as it existed on the date such sign received a permit. 
(Ord. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 10-01-03, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 10-08-02, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 11-06-02, 7-19-11; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1052. - Application. 
(a)  Where to apply. Any application for a sign permit shall be submitted to the city manager on a form supplied by the city. 
(b)  Information required. The following information shall be submitted with the application for a sign permit: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number and city occupation tax license number of sign permittee; 
(2)  Legal description and/or street address of premises or property upon which the sign is to be located; 
(3)  The type of sign for which a permit is being sought; 
(4)  An exact color rendering, to scale, of the proposed sign showing elevations of the sign, and the relationship to other existing adjacent signs. In the case of a freestanding sign, the rendering shall include a site plan showing the sign location and any existing or proposed landscaping which is affected by each sign; 
(5)  If required by the planning and design review board, a copy of stress sheets and calculations indicating that the sign is properly designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction, as required in chapter 12 of the Standard Building Code as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1053. - Determination of board to issue or deny permit. 
Upon compliance with the provisions of this article, the planning and design review board shall issue a permit for such sign or sign structure within 45 days of receipt of a completed permit application. Failure to comply with any provision of this article shall result in a denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1054. - Expiration. 
A sign permit shall be valid for a period of 90 days from the date of its issuance and noted on the permit, unless a 30-day extension is granted for good cause shown by the applicant. Failure to complete approved work related to the permitted sign within such 90-day period shall result in the expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1055. - Appeal and variance. 
(a)  Denial of application. In the event of denial by the planning design and review board of a sign permit application, an appeal may be made to the city commission. The applicant may appeal to the city commission for relief based on: 
(1)  Grounds that his sign application met the criteria of the Helen Municipal Code as presented. 
(2)  To request a variance from the Helen Municipal Code. 
(b)  If a variance is requested, the planning design and review board shall deny the application, but make a recommendation to the city commission, based on information submitted by the applicant and review by the city building and zoning inspector, as to whether the city commission should approve a variance request. Variance requests should only be approved in such circumstances where: 
(1)  The property itself, or a building being constructed on said property, results in extraordinary conditions in which a variance is justified because of the size, shape, location, or topography of the property or building. 
(2)  The application of this article to this particular piece of property or building would create an unusual hardship on the applicant. 
(3)  If the size, shape, or location of the building being constructed (or a modification of an existing building) will cause the hardship, the request for a sign application variance must be made as a part of the building permitting process. 
(4)  Variances should not be granted where the extraordinary conditions the applicant relies on are the result of actions of the applicant or the owner of the property. 
The decision of the city commission with regard to variance requests will be a final determination from the city. The city commission shall make a decision on a variance request within 30 days of the recommendation of the planning design and review board. 
(Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Secs. 34-1056—34-1100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-1101. - Setback from right-of-way, and visual restrictions. 
No portion of a sign or sign structure shall be allowed on any city right-of-way without special approval of the city commission, and not withstanding any other size restrictions, and in addition thereto, neither the sign structure nor sign face may obstruct or impair safe vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1102. - Sign illumination. 
(a)  In the non-residential zoning districts, up to one lighted commercial sign which is internally lit or is composed of lighted elements may be permitted and approved. The dimension of the sign face shall not exceed four square feet in the "walking area" of the city; or six square feet in the "driving area" of the city, as those terms are defined in Code section 34-1001. Additionally, hotels, motels, or other rentals providing overnight accommodations may also display one additional illuminated commercial sign which does not exceed seven inches in height. 
(b)  Light sources to illuminate signs shall be shielded from all adjacent residential buildings and streets and shall not be of such brightness to cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or auto drivers or to create a nuisance to adjacent property owners or businesses. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1103. - Materials and style. 
(a)  All signs will be constructed of wood or a suitable substitute approved by the planning and design review board. An internally illuminated sign may also be approved by the planning and design review board as authorized in the code. 
(b)  Signs shall not be light-reflecting. 
(c)  Any double-faced sign shall be identical on both faces. 
(d)  Colors shall comply with the applicable city color chart. 
(e)  Business signs shall utilize those fonts approved on the chart shown on City of Helen Font Chart. A copy of this font chart is maintained in Helen City Hall. Due to the physical nature of internally illuminated signage, this font requirement shall not be imposed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 12-08-01, 9-18-12; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ) 
Sec. 34-1104. - Dimensions and quantity. 
The dimensions and quantity of any sign face shall conform with the following: 
(1)  Each individual business in the non-residential zoning districts of the city will be authorized two non-illuminated commercial signs in the following dimensions: Signs in the walking area of the city (as defined in Code section 34-1001) shall not exceed six square feet. Signs in the driving area shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(2)  Residential developments shall be permitted one freestanding sign, of not more than 32 square feet, at primary vehicle entrance plus one additional sign, of not more than 16 square feet, at any secondary vehicle entrance. 
(3)  Commercial developments, which contain at least 2,500 square feet of heated floor space shall be permitted one freestanding sign per vehicle entrance, with not more than 24 square feet of sign face per sign. 
(4)  Regardless of the permitted square footage for a sign, no sign shall be permitted which has a ratio of height to width; or a ratio of width to height; on the sign face that is greater than 4:1. 
(5)  The area of the "sign face" shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle which would enclose the limits of the sign face, regardless of the shape of the sign, and specifically including any material or portions of the sign which form an integral component of the sign face. 
(Ord. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 09-09-01, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 10-01-01, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-05-01, 6-5-12; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1105. - Height. 
The maximum height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed ten feet above the average elevation, (measured along the distance of the road frontage), of the nearest public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1106. - Width. 
The maximum width of the entire sign structure shall not exceed ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1107. - Structure size. 
The size of the support structure for any freestanding sign shall not exceed the sign face by more than 100 percent. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1108. - Freestanding signs; location identified. 
Prior to permitting, the location for a new freestanding sign shall be clearly identified by a white stake extending at least six inches above ground level at each location at which a support footing will be embedded in the ground. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1109. - Window and wall graphics. 
(a)  Window signs are considered signs for the purposes of this article and must be approved by the planning design and review board. An applicant seeking to utilize window signage shall file a regular permit application with the planning design and review board. Applications shall include a description and/or sketch of the proposed sign and a sketch of the area of the window or door to be used in conjunction with the sign. 
(b)  Window and Wall graphics are not considered signs for the purpose of numerical limitation, but are considered signs for all other purposes within this article, and must also be approved by the planning and design review board. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 14-01-01, 2-18-14 ) 
Sec. 34-1110. - Off-premises and on-premises directional signs. 
(a)  Off-premises signs, limited to two, not to exceed nine square feet each, are permitted for direction to a business or development where the on-premises signage is not clearly visible to the general public from Main Street or Edelweiss Strasse. 
(b)  On-premises directional signs are permitted where necessary and prudent for reasonable business operations. Such signs are presumed reasonable, necessary, and prudent unless determined otherwise by the planning design and review board, in writing and specifying each incident of unreasonableness or lack of necessity or prudence, with a full narrative explanation supporting such findings. Such signs are absolutely permitted when required by a federal or state agency or the business' insurance carrier. Unless some other criteria is required, then each such sign: 
(1)  Shall not exceed one square foot in size; 
(2)  Lettering not to exceed two inches in height; 
(3)  Lettering color shall contrast with background color; and 
(4)  All sign color shall be compatible with building colors. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1111. - Temporary commercial signs. 
(a)  Temporary commercial signs as regulated herein means any sign or information transmitting device intended to be erected or displayed for a limited period of time for conveyance of a commercial message. The intent of this section is not to limit or regulate the content of a permitted temporary commercial signs, however, by way of illustrative example, temporary commercial signs could be those related to the initial opening or final closing of a business, signs related to a to a sale or markdown of merchandise or services, or signs related to services or goods offered, as examples thereof. However, these examples are illustrative, rather than required, and the contents and messages contained therein are in no way regulated in this article. All temporary commercial signs will be subject to the permit requirements of this article, unless specifically exempted by Code section 34-1051; and may be permitted in accordance with the following standards. 
(1)  Size requirements. Temporary commercial signs in the "walking area" of the city, as that term is defined in Code section 34-1001, shall not exceed four square feet in size, with the calculation of the size of said sign calculated in the same matter as provided for in Code section 34-1104(5). Temporary signs in the "driving area" of the city, as that term is defined in Code section 34-1001, shall not exceed six square feet in size, with the calculation of the size of said sign calculated in the same matter as provided for in Code section 34-1104(5). 
(2)  Location requirements. Temporary commercial signs shall only be permitted to be located only in the interior of premises and affixed either to the windows or doors of those premises. 
(3)  Time Limits and number of signs. Temporary commercial signs shall be authorized for a maximum of seven days, with no more than two temporary commercial signs permitted at any given time. Such authorized signs shall be removed upon expiration of the approved time. A business must have an interval of 21 days between the uses of temporary commercial signs. No business shall receive more than four permits in any one calendar year under this subsection. 
(b)  Temporary real estate development signs are signs related to the commercial development of, or for the sale of real property. Unless specifically exempted by section 34-1051, a temporary sign is subject to the permit requirements of this article. 
(1)  Temporary Project signs. Signs for work under construction may be erected upon the issuance of a building permit for the construction site and remain during construction. It shall be removed within seven days following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Temporary signs announcing the subdivision of land. Temporary signs announcing the subdivision of land may be erected on the land being developed and shall be removed when 100 percent of the development lots are conveyed, or for a term not to exceed six months, whichever comes first. A single equal extension may be permitted by the planning and design review board upon application. 
(3)  Temporary signs advertising sale, rental or lease of property exceeding in size those exempted by Code section 34-1051. Signs permitted and exceeding nine square feet, advertising the sale, rental, or lease of property shall be removed within 30 days following the completion of the transaction advertised, or upon the expiration of six months, whichever comes first. Equal extensions, if necessary, may be permitted by the planning and design review board upon application. 
(Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06-01 , adopted June 21, 2016, repealed the former § 34-1111 and enacted a new 34-1111 as set out herein. The former 34-1111 pertained to temporary signs and derived from Ord. No. 05-01-01, adopted Feb. 15, 2005. 
Sec. 34-1112. - Multiple-use shopping, business, office and professional centers; directory signs. 
Directories. Any multiple-use shopping, business, office and professional center or mall shall be allowed to have not more than two directories for individual businesses, provided they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Information. Signs shall be for directory information purposes only, and shall contain only the businesses located within the multi-use center names designated upon the city occupation tax certificate, with the sign containing the name of the multi-use center atop the pylon with an area not to exceed four times the area of the individual pylon signs. All such signs shall be subject to the permit provisions of this article, however, such individual pylon signs shall not apply to any numerical limitation on signs. 
(2)  Size. The area of the directory shall be proportional to the property business list as determined by the planning design and review board. However, the businesses listed upon such directory must be readable by a person of normal vision from the far traffic lane of the nearest public road or street, and the lettering may not exceed 1 1/3 times readable. 
(3)  Location. Not more than one directory shall be permitted upon any street upon which the multi-use center fronts. 
(4)  Type. All such directories shall be freestanding pylon type signs. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1113. - Gasoline filling stations. 
(a)  Petroleum products pumps and dispensers shall be permitted to display information required by law and, in addition, the brand name and type of product being dispensed. 
(b)  Premises which dispense retail bulk petroleum products by pump shall display the price per gallon on each pump structure with characters not exceeding six inches in height. 
(c)  Signs permitted under this section shall not apply to any numerical limitation on signs. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1114. - Display/dispensing machines and apparatuses. 
The location, design and use of outside machines and apparatuses for the display or dispensing of advertising, newspapers, soft drinks, ice, food or other products shall be permitted by the planning and design review board in the same manner as for signs. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1115. - Other Code required signage criteria. 
Other provisions of the Municipal Code of the city may also address signage criteria and requirements, (i.e. pay parking lots under section 14-165), and the requirements of those provisions are in addition to the requirements of this article, unless those other provisions are inconsistent or contradictory to the provisions of this article. In the event those other provisions are inconsistent or contradictory, those other provision shall apply and prevail only to the extent that they are inconsistent or contradictory. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-01, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-1116. - Signs allowed in zoning districts. 
If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically allowed in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited in that district, except as otherwise provided for under this article. 
(a)  No signage other than house number, original house designation, street identification number, real estate sign (allowed under section 34-1051), security identification sign, or sign containing a non-commercial message shall be allowed on any residential property in the residential zoning districts in the city. No sign shall be taller than three feet in residential zoning districts. The sign height shall be measured in a vertical plane from ground level to the top of the sign. The level of the ground shall not be altered solely to provide additional sign height. No sign with the total area of each sign face greater than four square feet shall be allowed on any residential property in the city. No signs containing commercial messages shall be allowed on any residential property in the city other than temporary real estate signs as authorized under section 34-1051 and temporary commercial signs as described in paragraph (2) below. 
(1)  For all property located in a residential district, there shall be a total maximum of 12 square feet of sign face per lot. For projecting or double-faced signs each display face shall not be added together in computing the area of the sign face for that sign. 
(2)  A temporary commercial sign utilized by a private owner, with examples of such commerce including yard sale, estate sale, garage sale signs (but with the content to be utilized therein not dictated by this article); and subject to the size, height, and setback restrictions provided elsewhere for signs on residential lots, may be displayed on residential premises where a sale is to be conducted beginning five days before the date of the sale. Said signs must be removed when the sale is terminated. The governing authority considers such sales to be a part of the incidental occupation of the residential property and permissible limited commercial sign activity under this section. 
(b)  The following signs shall be allowed within the nonresidential zoning districts in the city: 
(1)  Signs allowed in a residential district. 
(2)  Commercial signs which have met the size requirements of sections 34-1104—34-1106 of this chapter, as well as all other requirements contained herein. 
(3)  Temporary on-premises signs, including banners, when said signs are related to a special event of a noncommercial nature, provided the area of each sign face shall not exceed 16 square feet. Such signs shall be permitted for a maximum of ten days, and such sign shall be removed upon expiration of the approved time, or the business or person displaying such sign shall be subject to citation under this article. No business may display more than one of these signs at any given time. 
(Ord. No. 11-06-02, 7-19-11; Ord. No. 16-06-01 , 6-21-16) 
Sec. 34-1117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06-01 , adopted June 21, 2016, repealed § 34-1117, which pertained to restaurant outdoor banners and derived from Ord. No. 12-09-02, adopted Sept. 18, 2012. 
Sec. 34-1118. - Standards and requirements for shadow box signs. 
(a)  Purpose. As defined in section 34-1001 of the code, shadow box means a sign utilized for menus by restaurants who offer prepared food on site and beverage as their primary business purpose. Shadow box signage under section 34-1118 is limited to these establishments. This type of shadow box signage is in addition to other types of signage permitted under this chapter. 
(b)  Shadow box structure. The shadow box structure must be approved in the same manner proscribed in this chapter for all other signage. The maximum size of the shadow box shall have a maximum content area of 24 inches wide by 24-inch height and constructed of a material approved by the planning design and review board. Decorative trim with a maximum width of four inches shall be required. A roof shall be required for the shadow box with a 12/12 pitch. The face of the shadow box shall have an impact resistant (Plexiglass; lexan, or other approved material); with a hinged and lockable door. The shadow box must be located on the property in such a manner that it does not impede foot or vehicular traffic. Once the structure is approved, the menu contained within the shadow box may be changed as the establishment may desire. However, the menu displayed within the shadow box shall be of white or a neutral color, and the content therein shall be maintained by the establishment. 
(c)  Quantity. Each business shall be allowed one shadow box sign per entrance to the licensed restaurant, with a maximum of two. 
(Ord. No. 13-06-03, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 14-07-01, 7-15-14 ) 
Secs. 34-1119—34-1200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-08-02, adopted September 17, 1996, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 34-1202—34-1207, and amended § 34-1201. Former §§ 34-1202—34-1207 pertained to unsafe buildings, and derived from Ord. No. 87-8, adopted December 8, 1987. 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 26-51 et seq. 
State Law reference— Unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1201. - Authority to enforce provisions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(b), the city is hereby authorized to adopt ordinances relating to the dwellings, buildings, or structures within such municipality which are unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 41-2-7 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-02, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1202. - Incorporation of provisions of O.C.G.A. 
Any and all definitions applicable to, and any and all authority granted to municipalities, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, (as same may be amended by Georgia Laws), are incorporated herein by reference verbatim, and such authority may be exercised by the city or its designated official pursuant to the provisions thereof. In the event any provisions of the ordinances of the city conflict with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 41-2-7 et seq., such ordinances shall not be deemed unenforceable in their entirety, but any such ordinance, (or applicable part[s] thereof), shall yield to provisions of O.C.G.A. 41-2-7 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1203. - Designation of building inspector to exercise powers. 
The building inspector of the city and his/her successors in office shall be the public officer designated and appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1204. - Complaint, notices, hearings, orders, costs, liens and collections. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the building inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or whenever it appears to the building inspector, (from his own motion), that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the building inspector shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, buildings, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the building inspector, (or his designated agent), at a place within the city, fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the building inspector. 
(b)  If, after such notice and hearing, the building inspector determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and caused to be served upon the owner and parties in interest thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish dwelling, building, or structure. 
In no event shall the city commission require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one- half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(c)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the building inspector may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or the [dwelling, building or structure] be vacated and closed or demolished; and that building inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful. 
(d)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the building inspector may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the building inspector, set forth in paragraph (c) and this paragraph, shall not be exercised until the city commission shall have by ordinance ordered the building inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of Article VIII with respect to the particular property or properties which the building inspector shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance; 
(e)  The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the building inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the building inspector in the office of the clerk of the city upon a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the building inspector, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the building inspector, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing herein shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause the removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(f)  The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed; 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city; and 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of said 3 year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subparagraph (2) above, the City may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having and right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 48, Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1205. - Determination by building inspector. 
(a)  The building inspector may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(b)  The building inspector may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon the personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1206. - Additional powers of building inspector. 
The building inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officer, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1207. - Service of complaint or orders. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by the building inspector pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the building inspector or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest. 
(b)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)  Nonresidents of the state shall be served by posting a copy of such complaint or orders in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the city or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) above. If such minor or insane person or persons laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person or persons; in the case of other persons who live outside of the city, or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the building inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) above or service may be perfected upon any person, firm, or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement that a lien may arise against the describe property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1208. - Injunctions. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the building inspector may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the building inspector from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the building inspector pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the building inspector. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1209. - Eminent domain; police power. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the poser of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1210. - Use of revenues, grants and donations. 
The city is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 34-1211. - Construction. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its local enabling act, its Charter, or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 96-08-03, 9-17-96) 
Chapter 35 - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE AND TOWERS 

Sec. 35-1. - Short title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Standards for Telecommunications Antennae and Towers" 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this article the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multi-channel multi-point distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
Director means the city manager or his/her designee. 
Governing body means the board of commissioners of the City of Helen. For the purpose of this chapter, the words "city" and "governing body" are one and the same. 
Microtelecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than 20 feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than six antennae per site. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Telecommunications facilities refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
Whip antenna means a flexible, vertical rod, or radio antenna that would bend without breaking. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-3. - Scope and exclusions. 
This article shall apply to any telecommunications facility construction, erection, maintenance/renovation, or upgrade activity undertaken in the City of Helen by any person(s) or entity except for the following: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, provided, however, that the construction of any tower is not located within 200 feet of any waterway. 
(2)  Any tower or antennae owned and operated by the city for the safety of its citizens. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-4. - Design requirements. 
General requirements for all telecommunications facilities set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities addressed by this article. 
(1)  Height. No telecommunications facility shall exceed 200 feet in total height. 
(2)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in the state. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the director. 
(3)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this article shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
(4)  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(5)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(6)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. 
(7)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(8)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public way, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The director may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the director. 
(9)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(10)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but may not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area providing all other requirements of these regulations are met. 
(11)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  All property necessary to satisfy setback requirements covering the total height of the tower shall be under the ownership or control of the applicant. The requirements for control may be satisfied by lease or rent. 
b.  Telecommunication towers must be set back a distance equal to the total height of the tower from any adjacent property line as measured radially from the base of the tower to the property line of the subject property. 
c.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided, however, that the director may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
1.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential and non-residential structures. 
2.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum building setback requirements. 
d.  For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ration (example: ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(12)  Additional requirements for towers. 
a.  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
b.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
c.  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect any historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
d.  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
e.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-5. - Application procedure and compliance with conditional use process. 
(a)  General application requirements for all building and other use permits. Application for a building, erection, maintenance/renovation, or upgrade activity permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the City of Helen by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. Each application will be made as part of a conditional use application in compliance with chapter 34 of this Code. The following information shall also be submitted when applying for any telecommunications tower permit or variance included in this article and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
(2)  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including but not limited to any adjacent residential or commercial structures, roadways, and waterways. 
(3)  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the state, documenting the following: 
a.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical and engineering data; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower; 
d.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunication facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris should failure occur. 
(4)  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
(5)  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
(6)  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
(7)  Identification of the geographic service areas for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within and outside of the proposed network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-6. - Future development. 
(a)  Two-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a two-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
(1)  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city. The list must include the following information for each site: 
a.  Land lot and district; 
b.  Address if available; 
c.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
d.  The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
e.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
f.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
(2)  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of area where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next two years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(b)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
(1)  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the director. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The director will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The director shall carefully weigh such claims and the evidence presented in favor of them against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
(2)  Applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
(3)  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The director shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
(4)  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(c)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-7. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits. 
(1)  A request for a telecommunication tower permit under this article shall be initiated by application to the city with the permit provision of section 35-5 of this article. All applications for telecommunications antenna and towers are to be approved only as conditional uses under chapter 34 of the Helen Municipal Code, and as such, shall follow the conditional use process as described in chapter 34, together with the requirements provided for in this chapter. If approved in accordance with chapters 34 and 35 of this Code, the city may issue a permit provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of the Code have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. Applications shall be denied where it is determined that sufficient information has not been presented or where requirements of the aforementioned sections have not been sufficiently satisfied. 
(2)  In granting a permit, the city may impose additional conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(b)  Permit fees. 
(1)  A fee in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be charged for each application. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-8. - Co-locations. 
Applicant and owner shall allow the city government as well as other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-9. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of, local, state, and federal regulations and shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-10. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the director, or his/her designee, of any telecommunications facility it is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the city standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-11. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Sec. 35-12. - Penalty for violations of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this chapter without having first obtained the necessary building permit, special use permit or variance in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of this city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article or without obtaining that required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 13-11-01, 11-19-13 ) 
Chapter 36 - OUTDOOR MERCHANDISING 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall mean: 
Goods mean objects or materials for sale. 
Merchandise means all goods or services for sale by the business or goods or services used to draw attention to the business, or support structures used to display these. 
Perimeter means the outermost walls of the business. 
Premises means the building, or portion of the building, which occupies the business. 
Public walkway means any sidewalk, alley, corridor, or path open to pedestrian foot traffic. 
Shop means the leased or owned area occupying a place of business. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-01, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 36-2. - Application. 
This article applies to all businesses, active or inactive, within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-01, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 36-3. - Regulation, outdoor display for merchandise prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any business to display goods or merchandise outside. This means standing on the ground outside the shop, hung or fastened to the exterior wall, or hung or fastened to any door which, whether in the open or closed position, puts the goods or merchandise on any face of the door which is then outside the perimeter, except for goods or merchandise contemplated by section 34-1114, or which is of such a nature that it ordinarily remains out of doors after business hours such as produce, firewood, fertilizers, outdoor furniture, or garden plants. Such goods or merchandise shall in no way obstruct a public walkway except as provided in section 34-1114. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-01, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 36-4. - Open decks. 
Should an open deck be used to display merchandise, the perimeter of the deck must have a rail constructed with a material and style consistent with the architectural and design requirements of the City Code, and permitted by the planning design and review board. Any merchandise displayed thereon is limited to goods or merchandise which is of such a nature that it ordinarily remains out of doors after business hours such as produce, firewood, fertilizers, outdoor furniture, or garden plants. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-01, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 36-5. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in order to provide opportunities for seasonal closeout and other sales, for a ten-day period beginning on the last Saturday of March, June, September, and December, each shop may display outdoors, on private property, without restrictions imposed by this chapter, goods and merchandise usually and customarily offered for sale by such shop. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-01, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 36-6. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-01, 9-20-05) 
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police department authorized, § 1.13(36). 
Cross reference— Departments generally, § 2-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, par. III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-26. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the city manager shall prescribe following budgetary approval by the commission. 
(Code 1987, § 3-703(1)) 
Sec. 38-27. - Rank. 
Following the police chief in rank shall be the captain, the lieutenants, the sergeants, and the police officers, in order of seniority in each group. 
(Code 1987, § 3-703(2)) 
Sec. 38-28. - Police chief. 
(a)  Qualifications, appointment and powers. The police chief shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. The police chief shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders of the city manager in keeping with the adopted policies of the city commission. In the exercise of official duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(b)  Bond and oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the police chief of the city and such other officers who receive initial payments of cash bonds shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,500.00. The police chief shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by section 2-76 of this Code. 
(c)  Duties. The police chief shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To attend all meetings of the city commission and all trials before the municipal court. 
(2)  To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments, and rules of the city commission as may be directed by the city manager. 
(3)  To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court. 
(4)  To see that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced. 
(5)  To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof. 
(6)  To protect the rights of persons and property. 
(7)  To oversee the conduct of the officers and other employees in the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department. 
(8)  To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department including a log of all questions, activities and investigations. 
(9)  To make a monthly report available to the city manager on the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officer. 
(10)  To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the manager or commission. 
(d)  Resignation, removal, death, disability. In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
(Code 1987, § 3-703(3)) 
Sec. 38-29. - Police officers. 
(a)  Qualifications. Any person employed by the city as a police officer shall comply with the qualifications in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 
(b)  Bond and oath. Prior to entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of the police department including nonuniformed employees in the police department shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,500.00. All officers of the police department shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by section 2-76 of this Code. 
(c)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein; to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of the police department; and to respect and obey all orders of the police chief not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 3-703(4)) 
Sec. 38-30. - Arms and uniforms. 
Each officer and member of the police department shall be furnished with such uniform, arms and police equipment as provided for by the city commission. Uniforms shall be kept clean and pressed and shall be worn on duty at all times, unless otherwise ordered by a superior officer. The equipment, arms and uniforms furnished by the city shall be and always remain the property of the city and shall be, when a change is ordered or on retirement from office, returned to the city. The members of the department shall be liable on their bonds for any loss or careless destruction of or damage to their arms and uniforms. 
(Code 1987, § 3-703(5)) 
Sec. 38-31. - Arrests. 
Police officers of the city may make arrests for violations of municipal ordinances and state laws. 
(Code 1987, § 3-703(6)) 
Sec. 38-32. - Entering private dwellings. 
No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless in pursuit of a fugitive of whom the officer has personal knowledge or if the officer has probable cause to believe the suspected offender has committed or attempted to commit a felony, or under such other facts and circumstances authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States. 
(Ord. No. 94-03-01, § 7(3), 7-19-94) 
Chapter 42 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES AND PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power, § 1.13(16). 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1987, § 13-104) 
Sec. 42-2. - Alcoholic beverages in open containers prohibited on public rights-of-way and property. 
It shall be unlawful to carry or drink any alcoholic beverages in or from an open container upon the public rights-of way or other public property. However, a bottle of wine that has been resealed and is carried pursuant to section 6-7 of the Official Code of the City of Helen, Georgia and O.C.G.A. section 3-6-4 shall not constitute an open container for purposes of this section. Further, the consumption of beer or wine in an area designated as an outdoor cafe area, at and during a duly authorized special city event, shall not constitute an open container violation for purposes of this section. 
State Law reference— Possession of open container of alcohol beverage while operating vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253; removal of wine from restaurant by patron, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, 7-18-89; Ord. No. 09-12-01, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 13-05-01, 5-21-13) 
Sec. 42-3. - Camping prohibited within city limits. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Camp or camping means to use property within the city for the purposes of habitation, as evidenced by the use of camp facilities or paraphernalia. 
Camp facilities include, but are not limited to, temporary shelters, tents, huts, lean-tos, shacks, trailer campers, motor homes or any other type vehicle, trailer, or any other type shelter or structure. 
Camp paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, blankets, mattresses, hammocks, lanterns, stove, or other cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp within the municipal limits of the City of Helen. This shall exclude security personnel for special events approved by the planning design and review board and the city commission. It shall also exclude residents of the City of Helen or their guest located in a residential zoning who are camping on their property overnight for recreational purposes. 
(Code 1987, §§ 32-101, 32-102; Ord. No. 13-07-02, 7-16-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-07-02, adopted July 16, 2013, deleted the former § 42-3, and enacted a § 42-3 as set out herein. The former § 42-3 pertained to Camping within city; permit and derived from Code 1987, §§ 32-101 and 32-102. 
Sec. 42-4. - Criminal trespass. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-7-21, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-5. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to and purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
The provisions of O.G.C.A. 3-3-23 relating to furnishing alcoholic beverages to, and purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by, a person under 21 years of age, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-6. - Operation of unregistered motor vehicles, vehicles without license plates, decals, etc. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 40-2-8, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-7. - Possession of less than one ounce of marijuana. 
The possession of one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city is determined to be an illegal act. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-8. - Shoplifting. 
The first or second offense of shoplifting of $100.00 or less within the corporate limits of the City of Helen, Georgia, is determined to be an illegal act. A person convicted in a municipal court of a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting property valued at $100.00 or less shall be punished as provided in paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. section 16-8-14, provided that nothing in this section or O.C.G.A. section 16-8-14 shall be construed to give this city the right to impose a fine or punishment by imprisonment in excess of the limits as set forth in the Charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-9. - Disorderly conduct. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. Section 16-11-39, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-10. - Public drunkenness. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-11-41, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-11. - Littering public or private property or waters. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-12. - Designation of containers for household garbage; misuse or vandalization of container. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-7-47, (except that each reference therein to "county" shall be deemed to refer herein to "city," and as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-13. - Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings, or processions. 
A person who recklessly or knowingly commits any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-14. - Loitering or prowling. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-11-36, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-15. - Use of machine guns, sawed-off rifles, sawed-off shotguns, or firearms with silencers during commission of certain offenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or to use a machine gun, sawed-off rifle, sawed-off shotgun, or a firearm equipped with a silencer, as those terms are defined in O.C.G.A. section 16-11-121, during the participation in criminal gang activity as defined in O.C.G.A. section 16-15-4. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-16. - Participation in criminal gang activity prohibited. 
Any person who actively participates in any criminal street gang with knowledge that its members engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity and who willfully promotes, furthers, or assists in any felonious criminal conduct by members of that gang shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-17. - Public indecency. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of public indecency when he or she performs any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse; 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the sexual organs; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; or 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply only to a first or second offense, and shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section only, "public place" shall include jails and penal and correctional institutions of the state and its political subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-18. - Damaging, injuring, or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities, or political subdivisions. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-7-25, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-19. - Smoking in public places. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-12-2, (as same may be hereafter amended), are incorporated herein, verbatim, by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-20. - Certain acts in public transit buses, public transit vehicles, cable cars, trolleys, rail cars, or stations. 
(a)  A person who commits any of the following acts in a public transit bus, a public transit vehicle, a cable car, a trolley, a rail car, or a station shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Spits; 
(2)  Discards litter, except into receptacles designated for that purpose; 
(3)  Plays any radio; cassette, cartridge, or tape player; or similar device unless such device is connected to an earphone that limits the sound to the hearing of the individual user; 
(4)  Carries or possesses any explosives, acids, other dangerous articles, or live animals, except for seeing eye dogs properly harnessed and accompanied by a blind person and small animals properly packaged; 
(5)  Obstructs, hinders, interferes with, or otherwise disrupts or disturbs the operation or operator of a public transit bus, a public transit vehicle, a cable car, a trolley, or a rail car; or 
(6)  Boards any public transit bus, a public transit vehicle, a cable car, a trolley, or a rail car through an exit door, unless so directed by an employee or agent of the carrier. 
(b)  A person convicted of a first offense of violating subsection (a) of this Code section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, a person shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 97-08-01, 9-16-97) 
Sec. 42-21. - Bicycles, tricycles, roller skates, roller blades, and skateboards, on public street, public sidewalks, and Market Platz. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rollerskate, rollerblade, ride a skateboard, ride a bicycle, or ride a tricycle on any public sidewalk within the city, or upon the Market Platz within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon rollerskates, rollerblades, a skateboard, a bicycle, or a tricycle on any public sidewalk within the city, or upon the Market Platz within the city, to fail to yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and any such act shall constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon rollerskates, rollerblades, or skateboard, on any public street within the city, to fail to yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or pedestrian, and any such act shall constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(Ord. 04-08-05, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 42-22. - Coolers and drink containers prohibited in Chattahoochee River. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess any cooler or drink container either in, or upon, the Chattahoochee River and within the city limits. Such containers shall include, without limitation, containers made of glass, plastic, paper, or metal, and shall include, without limitation, containers known as cups, bottles, or cans. An exception to this section is permitted for one plastic bottle per person, per tube, not to exceed 32 ounces. 
(Ord. No. 06-07-02, 8-1-06; Ord. No. 06-11-01, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 08-06-03, 7-15-08) 
Sec. 42-23. - Requirements for companies providing flotation devices for use in Chattahoochee River. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any company within the city limits, providing flotation devices for use in the Chattahoochee River, to permit any customer to use or possess any cooler or drink either in, or upon, the Chattahoochee River and within the city limits. Such containers shall include, without limitation, containers made of glass, plastic, paper, or metal, and shall include, without limitation, containers known as cups, bottles, or cans. An exception to this section is permitted for one plastic bottle per person, per tube, not to exceed 32 ounces. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any company within the city limits, providing flotation devices for use in the Chattahoochee River, to provide any such flotation device unless they have a sign posted at the ticket sale area, and at all entrances to the river, upon which is clearly printed the following: 
(1)  It is unlawful, pursuant to City Code 46-22, for any person to use or possess any cooler or drink container with the exception of one plastic bottle of water per tube not to exceed 32 ounces, either in, or upon, the Chattahoochee River and within the City Limits of Helen, Georgia; 
(2)  No glass allowed; 
(3)  No littering - Georgia State Law; 
(4)  No coolers; 
(5)  Respect other river users, [i.e., fishermen, kayakers, waders, etc.]; 
(6)  Respect private property; 
(7)  No nudity; 
(8)  No alcohol; and 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to leave the river by way of the river bank except at the designated area. The sign posted at the ticket sales counter shall be at least 16 inches × 16 inches, and the sign posted at the entrances to the river shall be at least 24 inches × 36 inches. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any company within the city limits, providing flotation devices for use in the Chattahoochee River, to provide any such flotation device unless they also provide, on a daily basis, company employee(s) in such number as is reasonable necessary, to clean up the Chattahoochee River and riverbank, from city limit to city limit. River cleanup shall be performed daily and shall be performed on a weekly rotation basis by each tubing company providing floatation devices. The city shall designate the company for the first week of cleanup and the companies shall rotate weekly cleaning the river until the season has concluded. 
(Ord. No. 06-07-02, 8-1-06; Ord. No. 06-11-01, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 08-06-03, 7-15-08) 
Secs. 42-24, 42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public order and safety, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-26—42-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOISE 

Sec. 42-41. - Prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing within the city limits. 
(Code 1987, § 13-101) 
Sec. 42-42. - Unlawful noises enumerated. 
The following acts are declared to be a loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive: 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns. The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the manager or chief of police. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The using or operating of any loudspeaker, or sound-amplifying, or broadcasting device mounted upon any vehicle, upon any building, or set outside upon the premises of any property within the city, for the purpose of broadcasting or advertising any information about any business or activity, amplifying the sound of any entertainment thereon or therein, or for any other purpose, when, at a distance of 50 feet from the source of any such broadcast or amplification, the noise level, six (6) feet above the ground level, exceeds 70 decibels. 
(4)  Equipment and activities. The operating of any equipment for the loading or unloading of solid waste dumpsters (or any similar contrivance), either private or commercial, and the act of loading or unloading of solid waste dumpsters (or any similar contrivance), either private or commercial, and the act of connecting road tractors to freight trailers, and the operating of any equipment or the performing of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads, or projects within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  Exhausts. The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by frequent or continuous barking, chirping or other means of communication disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(9)  Hawkers and peddlers. The selling of anything by outcry within the city, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similarly licensed public entertainment events. 
(10)  Drums. The using of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city, unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the city manager or chief of police. 
(Code 1987, § 13-102; Ord. No. 97-09-01, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 97-10-01, 11-8-97) 
Sec. 42-43. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 1987, § 13-103) 
Sec. 42-44. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents of this city shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1987, § 13-105) 
Sec. 42-45. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in chapter 1, section 1-7, of this Code. 
(b)  Each day of violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 97-09-01, 10-21-97) 
DIVISION 3. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 42-46. - Short title and definitions. 
(a)  Short title. This Division 3 of Article II shall be known and recited as "The Curfew for Minors Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours are the hours between 12:00 midnight of any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
Establishment is any privately owned place of business operating for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Minor is a person who has not yet reached his or her 18th birthday. 
Parent is the lawful father or mother of a minor, and for purposes of this division, a legal guardian or other adult person having responsibility for the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
Public place is defined as any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes streets, alleys, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, condominiums, common properties, office buildings, transportation facilities, open business establishments, municipal, state, and federal buildings and grounds, and for purposes of this division, includes privately owned vehicles, carriages, and any mode of public transportation while upon the streets, roads, alleys, and other public ways in the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-02-01, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 42-47. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to promote juvenile safety and well being, while reducing juvenile crimes, juvenile violence, and juvenile victimization. 
(Ord. No. 95-02-01, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 42-48. - Penalty. 
Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this division shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7 of the Code of the City of Helen and/or as otherwise provided for juveniles and juvenile proceedings allowable under applicable sections of the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-02-01, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 42-49. - Violation. 
(a)  Any minor who remains in a public place or on the premises of any establishment as herein defined during curfew hours, and whose activities are not excepted or exempted from coverage as enumerated in section 42-50, shall be in violation of this division. 
(b)  A parent, guardian, or other adult having responsibility for the lawful care and custody of a minor, shall be in violation of this division if he or she or they knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow a minor or minors in his, her, or their charge to remain on a public place or on the premises of any establishment herein defined during curfew hours. 
(c)  Any business owner or licensee or authorized agent of a business owner or licensee who allows a minor to remain on the premises of a defined place or establishment during curfew hours shall be in violation of this division except as otherwise set out hereinafter in section 42-50(b) thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-02-01, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 42-50. - Exceptions and exemptions enumerated. 
(a)  This division shall not apply to any person under 18 years of age who: 
(1)  Is or has been emancipated by marriage; 
(2)  Is accompanied by his/her parent, parents, legal guardian or other adult having responsibility for lawful custody and care of the minor; 
(3)  Is engaged in employment or employment-related activities; 
(4)  Is engaged in interstate or intrastate travel; 
(5)  Is attending school, a religious or civic organization function that is supervised; 
(6)  Is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(7)  Is in a public place because of an emergency; 
(8)  Is on the sidewalk in front of his or her home or an adjacent dwelling; and 
(9)  Is on an errand directed by his or her parent, parents, legal guardian or other adult person having responsibility for the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(b)  Business owners also commit a violation of this division if they allow a minor to remain on the premises of an establishment defined herein during curfew hours. It shall be a defense or an exception for the business owner if the business owner, the agent, or employee of the business owner, notified the city police about the minor remaining on the business premises after he or she had been requested to leave. 
(Ord. No. 95-02-01, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 42-51. - Conflicts. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Ord. No. 95-02-01, 7-18-95) 
Chapter 43 - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-02-01, adopted Mar. 17, 2015, amended Ch. 43 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 43, §§ 43-1—43-6, pertained to short term special events, and derived from Ord. No. 01-10-04, adopted Nov. 20, 2001; Ord. No. 08-02-01, adopted Mar. 18, 2008; and Ord. No. 14-05-01, adopted May 20, 2014. 

Sec. 43-1. - Purpose and definitions. 
Preamble: The City of Helen encourages special events. The intent of this chapter is to set procedures for approval by the regulating authorities of the city for the special event and the apparatus required to efficiently bring special events to a successful conclusion, while encouraging special events which are compatible with the tourism industry, as well as the public safety and welfare of the city's residents, visitors, and merchants. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. 
Special event: The term "special event" shall mean any organized activity having as its purpose, entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, city property, or occurs on private property and impacts government services. 
City Manager: The city manager of the government of the City of Helen, or his designee for the administration of this chapter. 
Producer: Any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting a special event. 
Vendor: Any person or persons who engage in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other city owned property. 
( Ord. No. 15-02-01, 3-17-15 ) 
Sec. 43-2. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event within the city limits of Helen without having obtained a valid permit as required prior to such special event. All permit and application fees are non-refundable. 
( Ord. No. 15-02-01, 3-17-15 ) 
Sec. 43-3. - Application requirements and fees. 
(a)  Application. An application package shall be submitted to the city manager, a minimum of two months prior to the intended date of the special event (but no more than one year in advance thereof) and shall include the following: 
(1)  Request letter on organization letterhead providing a description of the special event and listing all persons in charge of the special event along with a principal designated agent for the special event. A photo identification card of the designated agent must be provided, and the designated agent shall be fully responsible for the compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements of this chapter, and other applicable laws. 
(2)  Photos or renderings of all apparatus required to hold the special event such as signs, banners, inflatables, tents, offices and structures. 
(3)  The time frame of the proposed special event should be clearly specified. Except for clearing of the area. no special event shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the special event. 
(4)  Identify what is needed from the city related to safety, law enforcement and clean up. A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the special event is to take place and the producer of a special event shall be responsible for the provision of police and sanitation services within the boundaries of the special event for a period of two hours past the conclusion of the special event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such special event. 
(5)  Identify by sketch or map all locations in the city which will be occupied by the special event. The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than eight and one-half by 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. The manager, or designee, shall require, as part of the approval for the special event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area(s) delineated for the special event. The producer of a special event such as a walk or run, as to which the above provisions would not be practicable, shall submit with the application for a permit, a map, which shall be no smaller than eight and one-half by 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. 
(6)  Identify any amplification of sound and apparatus to be used for amplification of sound. 
(7)  A list of anticipated vendors sponsored by the special event with a description of the anticipated vendors and how their products and or services relate to the special event. Only vendors selling goods or services specific to the special event will be allowed. 
(b)  Fees. An application processing and permitting fee of up to $225.00 based on the approvals necessary will be required at the time of the initial application. The schedule of fees for approvals, processing and permitting are as follows: 
(1)  Standard application fees. 
Application ..... $50.00 
Approval by city commission [if required] ..... 50.00 
Parade permit for city regulated streets ..... 25.00 
Parade permit for Department of Transportation regulated streets ..... 75.00 
Signage approval and permitting ..... 25.00 
A deposit of $500.00 will be required at the time of application approval, all or a portion of which may refunded at the conclusion of the special event depending on the condition of city property used for the special event. 
(2)  Additional fees required: Additional fees to conduct a special event may be imposed which shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such special event, and which fees shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. If, at the conclusion of the special event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the producer of the special event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter. Fees for the estimated costs of government services must be paid no later than 14 days prior to the date of the special event. 
( Ord. No. 15-02-01, 3-17-15 ) 
Sec. 43-4. - Approval process and requirements at time of approval. 
(a)  Administrative review. The city manager shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the manager determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed special event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the manager in facilitating the special event and services required. A minimum of 30 days shall be allowed for the administrative review of the application. 
(b)  Special conditions. Each department of the government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the special event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the city manager, planning design and review board, or city commission may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of any permit issued and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this chapter. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Review by planning design and review board. The application package will be reviewed by the city planning design and review board. The board will approve or disapprove the application if city commission approval is not required under this chapter: or shall recommend approval or disapproval is city commission approval is required under this chapter. The review of the planning design and review board shall be based upon the administrative review of the city manager and the city departments as described above: the compatibility and compliance of the application package with the requirements of this chapter: and the compatibility of the proposed special event with the city's tourism industry. Ordinances related to land development, as contained in the city code, are not applicable, and will not be the basis for the planning design and review board decision. However, all local and state regulations for public health and safety must be complied with by the special event producers. 
(d)  City commission approval required in certain circumstances. If a public right-of-way will be required to be closed for two hours or longer; or if the special event will require the use of city property for two hours or longer; or in the event that because of the nature of the special event, additional law enforcement personnel or public works personnel will be required to be on duty; or if the city manager determines that additional commission approval should be required because of potential impact of the special event on the public safety or infrastructure of the city; then, in those circumstances. City commission approval will be required. If city commission approval is required, the planning design and review board will recommend approval or disapproval of the application to the city commission following their review pursuant to subsection 43-4(c) supra , and the city commission shall make the final decision regarding approval or disapproval of the application. 
(e)  Final approval of permit. If the application is approved in accordance with the above, the city manager is authorized to issue a permit for a special event after the payment of all applicable fees and costs: together with such special conditions as are required by the city manager. City planning design and review board, and/or city commission. If the application is denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reasons for the denial. 
( Ord. No. 15-02-01, 3-17-15 ) 
Sec. 43-5. - Liability. 
The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the City of Helen, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event and proof of such insurance may be required by the City of Helen prior to permit issuance. A City of Helen may require such insurance as a condition of the approval of the special event. 
( Ord. No. 15-02-01, 3-17-15 ) 
Sec. 43-6. - Vendors. 
(a)  Sales permitted. The sale of food or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the producer of the special event and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. All vendors must be identified by the producer of the special event to the city prior to the special event. Vendors not identified to the city as part of the application process shall not be allowed to vend. 
(b)  Authorization of vendors. Upon meeting the requirements of subsection 43-6(a), the producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow vending as a component of an special event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business at any location or in any manner not authorized by the producer of the special event, or in violation of any local, state or federal law or regulation. 
(c)  Permit not required. Vendors authorized by the producer of a special event as a component of the special event shall not be required to obtain any separate vendors permit to operate during the period of the special event. 
(d)  Food sales. The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as a part of a special event shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the producer of a special event to assure compliance with this section by any such vendors. 
( Ord. No. 15-02-01, 3-17-15 ) 
Sec. 43-7. - Additional rules and regulations for special events. 
(a)  Glass containers prohibited. The use of glass containers within the area of any special event shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Police services. Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the Helen Police Department and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the chief of police. Costs shall be paid by the Special event permittee as determined above. 
(c)  Toilet facilities. The producer of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any special event at which 100 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the director of the building inspection department. 
(d)  Musical entertainment. Any musical entertainment shall be provided in a manner consistent with the peace and good order of the community. The producer of the special event shall be responsible for full compliance with the noise ordinance. 
(e)  Temporary facilities. Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands or other temporary facilities constructed or erected as a part of a special event shall be approved by the director of the building inspection department and the fire marshal at the time of review. 
(f)  Street closing. The complete or partial closure of any city street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the city commission in consultation with the chief of police. A request to close the state highway will also require the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(g)  Banners, signs, etc. Temporary, noncommercial banners or signs may be permitted overhead across city public streets for the purpose of designating "starting" and "finish" lines for a race. Small banners, pennants, signs or other decorations which do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and which do not damage or deface any tree or public structure, may be allowed as part of a special event with approval by the planning design and review board. The producer of the special event shall be responsible for the removal of such banners, pennants or decorations within 24 hours after the close of the special event. 
(h)  Duration of permit. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(i)  Cessation of activities. The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The chief of police may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire special event, which does not meet this community standard. Upon notification of the special event producer in person by the chief of police to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such producer and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. 
( Ord. No. 15-02-01, 3-17-15 ) 
Chapter 46 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Parks, § 1.13(12). 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-126 et seq. 
State Law reference— Parks authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Rules and regulations authorized. 
The city manager of the city is authorized and directed to develop and publish rules and regulations for the use of all city parks, and to supplement and amend same from time to time, so long as such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Code of the city. Each such rule or regulation shall bear the effective date thereof, and the violation thereof shall be a misdemeanor under this Code. Any such rules and regulations shall be presented to the city commission at the meeting next following the development, publishing, implementation, and effective date of such rules and regulations, for review. Upon commission review, any or all of such rules and regulations may be overruled by the commission, and upon such action, such rule or regulation is immediately revoked and repealed ab initio, and no later rule or regulation substantially similar therewith shall be permitted without express approval by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 04-08-03, 9-21-04) 
Secs. 46-2—46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-301 et seq. 

Sec. 46-26. - Composition, appointment, tenure. 
The park and recreation board shall consist of five persons appointed by the commission for terms of five years each. 
(Code 1987, § 3-803(1)) 
Sec. 46-27. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on the park and recreation board shall be filled by the commission for unexpired terms only. 
(Code 1987, § 3-803(2)) 
Sec. 46-28. - Compensation. 
The members of the park and recreation board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1987, § 3-803(3)) 
Sec. 46-29. - Officers, rules of procedure. 
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the park and recreation board shall meet and elect one of their members president and elect such other officers as may be necessary. The board shall recommend rules and regulations for adoption by the commission on the governance of its proceedings. Following any adoption, the park and recreation board members shall keep a correct record thereof. 
(Code 1987, § 3-803(4)) 
Sec. 46-30. - Powers and duties. 
The park and recreation board shall conduct and maintain recreation policies for the city in such a way as to employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner. In particular, it shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  To plan public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, leisure activities, recreation programs, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city. 
(2)  To recommend the setting aside, leasing or acquisition of lands or buildings within or without the city limits for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, or for other recreational purposes, and to provide for the maintenance and improvement of such areas. 
(3)  To cooperate with the local school board in the establishment, conduct and maintenance of a recreation system. 
(4)  To submit a budget proposal annually to the city manager in the same manner as is required by department heads. 
(5)  To submit an annual report to the city manager which shall include a financial statement of money received and expended and a description of all activities sponsored by the board during the year. 
(6)  To exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it from time to time by the manager following policy directives that may be adopted by the commission. 
(Code 1987, § 3-803(5)) 
Chapter 50 - PERSONNEL[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Personnel policies, § 3.14. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-76 et seq.; personnel policies and procedures, app. A. 

Sec. 50-1. - Physical examination. 
Applicants seeking employment may be required to complete a standard application form as provided by the city and to pass a complete physical examination to be given by a licensed physician and paid for by the prospective employee. The physician shall enter his findings on a standard form to be provided by the city. This provision shall not apply to those employees hired in an emergency and for a period of less than ten working days. 
(Code 1987, § 3-604(2)) 
Sec. 50-2. - Strikes. 
No municipal employee shall participate in or encourage any form of sit down, slow down, work stoppage, or strike against the city. 
(Code 1987, § 3-604(7)) 
Sec. 50-3. - Accidents. 
Employees involved in, or having any knowledge of, any accident involving any other person employed by the city or any property or equipment owned or operated by the city shall immediately report the accident and pertinent information to their department head, who shall forward such information to the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall record the information on three copies of the applicable accident form, one copy to be forwarded to the insurance carrier, one copy to the city attorney, and one copy retained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1987, § 3-604(3)) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority relative to solid waste, § 1.13(22), (23), (40). 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-126 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection means where a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial premises means all commercial concerns within the city. 
Convenience center means a conveniently located site for collection of solid waste and/or recyclables, operated by or on behalf of the city, or by any private entity. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposit of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in rules of the department of human resources. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Recycling means the collection of used glass, aluminum, corrugated cardboard, newspapers, plastic or other materials for processing into new products. 
Refuse means classes of refuse which are designated as follows: garbage, limbs, leaves, and trimmings. 
Residential class A premises means all single-family residential dwellings for which curbside service is feasible to provide in the collection of solid waste in the form of household garbage, excluding yard trash and rubbish, from a limit of three 30-gallon cans or a limit of three 30-gallon approved sealed plastic garbage bags, with a limit of three such containers; or any combination, not to exceed three cans or bags total. A residential class A premises shall normally have one pickup per week. 
Residential class B premises means all multifamily residential dwellings for which curbside service is feasible to provide and a commercial type container is provided and shared by all residential tenants or owners. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, trash, cans, bottles, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Code 1987, § 11-103; Ord. No. 96-06-01, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-2. - Penalty. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided in (b) and (c) hereof, any person charged with a violation of any section or provision of this chapter shall be given a written notice and instructions from the city manager as to the required remedy for such violation and shall be given ten days to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with the requirements of such written notice and instructions of the city manager shall result in the termination of services of the sanitation department and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7. Reinstatement of city trash and garbage collection shall only be provided after the person, firm, institution or corporation has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) notwithstanding, any person detected to be in violation of the provisions of section 54-4 may be immediately charged with such violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of subsection 54-34(a) and subsection 54-34(b), shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 for the first offense, and by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for any subsequent offense, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1987, § 11-116; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 11-3-03, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 54-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage and refuse. 
(Code 1987, § 11-101) 
Sec. 54-4. - Depositing in street or public place. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, throw, deposit, scatter or otherwise cause to be placed or left upon any vacant or unoccupied lot or lots, along any street or sidewalk or other public place within the city, any paper, wastes, rubbish, trimmings, limbs or garbage of any kind. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person utilizing any vehicle, moving or parked, to cause any paper, wastes, cartons, rubbish, feathers, gravel, earth, trimmings, limbs, or garbage of any kind to be littered, thrown, deposited or scattered upon any street, sidewalk or public place or any private property, occupied or unoccupied. Such precautions as are necessary to contain transported materials, including covering of open trucks, shall be utilized to prevent such littering and scattering. 
(Code 1987, § 11-112) 
Secs. 54-5—54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-26. - City responsibility for sanitation services. 
The city, by and through its proper departments, shall be responsible for sanitation services including the collection and disposal of all garbage, trash and other refuse within the city except as hereinafter set out in this chapter; provided, however, that residential or commercial classes may dispose of refuse from their premises. The city reserves the right to contract with its designee for commercial or residential solid waste pickup and removal service. 
(Code 1987, § 11-102; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-27. - Deposit. 
If sanitation service is supplied to residential class A premises to which the city does not supply water service, a deposit equal to three times the applicable fee shall be made in advance of initiation of service. 
(Code 1987, § 11-110; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-28. - Collection days designated. 
Garbage, trash and refuse shall be collected from residential class A premises by the proper departments of the city or as may be contracted by the city once per week. 
(Code 1987, § 11-104; Ord. No. 96-06-01, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-29. - Residential sanitary trash and garbage containers. 
(a)  Residential solid waste customers of the city shall provide sanitary containers in which trash, garbage or refuse shall be kept prior to collection by the sanitation department or designee. Such containers shall be constructed of rustproof, moistureproof material and shall be equipped with tight-fitting covers with handles. Such containers shall be restricted to a maximum capacity of 30 gallons in all residential areas and at any structure used for residential purposes, except as provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Each Residential Class A customer shall provide at least one and not more than three such containers at a single collection point. 
(c)  Persons required to maintain such containers shall maintain them in a sanitary condition, tightly covered at all times except during filling, emptying and cleaning; free from odor; and such containers shall be filled in such manner as to allow pick up by one person, except when a standard hoist type container is used. Such container shall be further maintained so as to prevent the overflow or scattering of trash, garbage or refuse. 
(d)  Residential class B customers shall maintain containers in a sanitary condition, tightly covered at all times except during filling, emptying and cleaning; free from odor. Such container shall be further maintained so as to prevent the overflow or scattering of trash, garbage or refuse. 
(Code 1987, § 11-105; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-30. - Commercial and industrial operations containers. 
All classes of commercial and industrial operations using containers shall maintain them in a sanitary condition, free from odor and shall prevent the overflow or scattering of trash, garbage or refuse on the premises, nearby properties or public streets and places. 
(Code 1987, § 11-106; Ord. No. 96-06-01, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-31. - Placement of refuse for pickup. 
(a)  All persons utilizing city pickup of trash or cuttings shall be required to place such cuttings, trimmings, leaves and tree limbs on their premises located as to be easily accessible to street pickup, but not including the street, sidewalk or properties other than the premises of the depositor. 
(b)  Each classification of refuse must be kept separate and will be picked up separately. 
(c)  All refuse resulting from building, repairing, remodeling or any kind of construction shall be moved by the contractor, owner of property or person having work done. The city shall not move refuse of this nature. All trees, limbs, bushes, trash, dirt and other refuse resulting from cleaning up or improving property shall be removed by the contractor, tree surgery company, owner of property, developer or person having work done. 
(d)  No person shall be allowed to place for collection limbs or cuttings greater than five feet in length or 50 pounds in weight. Cuttings, trimmings and leaves shall be placed in plastic bags and located as stated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  The city shall schedule two clean up weeks annually, for pickup of limbs, leaves, general rubbish and grass trimmings, once in the spring and once in the fall at the discretion of the city. 
(f)  No person shall be allowed to deposit such trash, cuttings, trimmings, leaves or tree limbs for collection by the city in excess of the load equivalent of one four-yard dump truck per dwelling or business establishment per cleanup week, as provided in this chapter. Charges shall be levied for such pickup exceeding the above amounts, charges to be based upon total cost of such additional service as may be determined by the city sanitation department or designee. 
(g)  No person shall be allowed to deposit such trash, cuttings, trimmings, leaves or tree limbs on any public street, sidewalk or property. 
(h)  The city manager of the city is authorized and directed to develop and publish rules and regulations for the implementation of the services provided by the city under this section, and to supplement and amend same from time to time, so long as such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Code of the city. Each such rule or regulation shall bear the effective date thereof, and the violation thereof shall be a misdemeanor under this Code. Any such rule or regulation may contain a schedule of fees developed by the city manager, however, any such fee shall not exceed the estimated approximate cost of the provision and administration of such service. Any such rules and regulations shall be presented to the city commission at the meeting next following the development, publishing, implementation, and effective date of such rules and regulations, for review. Upon commission review, any or all of such rules and regulations may be overruled by the commission, and upon such action, such rule or regulation is immediately revoked and repealed ab initio, and no later rule or regulation substantially similar therewith shall be permitted without express approval by the city commission. 
(Code 1987, § 11-113; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 04-08-04, 9-21-04) 
Sec. 54-32. - Disposal of dead animals. 
The disposal of dead animals shall be in compliance with state and county health rules and regulations and any city ordinance hereinafter passed for the health and well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 11-114) 
Sec. 54-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-06-01, adopted July 15, 1996, amended the Code by repealing § 54-33 in its entirety. Former § 54-33 pertained to classification of residential premises, and derived from the Code of 1987, § 11-108. 
Sec. 54-34. - Solid waste disposal prohibited in city maintained trash barrels. 
(a)  Except for solid waste receptacles (trash barrels) provided by the city in public areas to accommodate disposal by tourism pedestrian traffic, no person or entity shall deposit solid waste except in approved collection receptacles and upon payment therefor, or upon specific expressed permission of the entity controlling the receptacles. 
(b)  No person or entity, who is not a visitor or tourism pedestrian, shall place solid waste in receptacles designed to collect immediately generated solid waste from visitors and tourists. 
(Ord. No. 95-03-01, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Secs. 54-35—54-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Service charges authorized, § 6.15. 

Sec. 54-51. - Fee schedule. 
As needed, the city commission shall by resolution set the rates for monthly sanitation solid waste charges. 
Rates shall be classified as follows: 
Residential class A; 
Residential class B receptacle rates are restricted by applicable city contract with service providers; 
Convenience center rates; and 
Commercial receptacle rates are restricted by applicable city contract with service providers. 
(Code 1987, § 11-107; Ord. No. 90-1, § 11-103(3), 3-20-90; Ord. No. 96-06-01, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-52. - Nondesignated services. 
The city shall not be required to provide any services not stipulated in this chapter. However, should the city, in its discretion, determine to provide any service not provided for under any section of this chapter pertaining to the collection of garbage, trash and refuse, with a charge not specifically set out, a fee equal to the cost of the operation, including collection, transportation, and disposal, plus a ten percent service charge shall be charged. 
(Code 1987, § 11-115; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-53. - Exclusive contractor for removal of solid waste. 
In order to protect the general welfare and safeguard the public health and infrastructure, no person or entity may contract with any person or entity, except that person or entity designated by contract with the city, for solid waste collection within the city. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit any person or entity from disposing of their own solid waste in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1987, §§ 11-107, 11-110; Ord. No. 98-03-01, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 54-54. - Nonpayment of fees. 
Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay the monthly sanitary and health charge for garbage pickup provided for in this chapter, after having been duly billed for same by the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and all sanitary and health services and water service provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated by the city. 
(Code 1987, § 11-111) 
Charter reference— Collection of delinquent fees, § 6.18. 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers relative to streets, sidewalks and public places, § 1.13(11)—(13), (17), (32). 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-126 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— General authority relative to streets, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS AND PICKETING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assembly means a group of two or more persons who are together for a common cause or purpose, who stand, walk, congregate or assemble upon any of the sidewalks, streets or public property of the city, who evidence their cause by signs, slogans, common dress, solicitation of money or membership, public speech, or the distribution of written materials. The solicitation by one or more persons for money, or membership in any organization or group, or the distribution of written materials for the solicitation of money or membership in any organization, or an advertising or sales promotion upon any of the sidewalks, streets, or public property of the city, is prohibited. 
Demonstration and picketing shall be given their usual meaning, but in any event, any such activity must first be defined as an "assembly" to be included in the context herein. 
Parade means any procession on a public street, excepting funerals and military activities, containing ten or more persons or five or more vehicles. 
(Code 1987, § 31-105) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-27. - Penalty. 
Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1987, § 31-109(1)) 
Sec. 58-28. - Appendixes adopted by reference. 
All appendixes referenced in this article are on file in the office of the city clerk and are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this article. 
Sec. 58-29. - Conduct of activities. 
(a)  All activities under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be conducted under the supervision of the person or persons making the application, and shall be conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner in compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  In the conduct of such activities, no signs, shields or banners shall be placed or carried by any person upon the sidewalks of the city that extend beyond the width of the person's body, or that extend more than 24 inches above the person's head. Persons carrying any such signs, shields or banners shall be at least ten feet apart; shall not stand or loiter in front of any doorway, driveway or intersection; and shall not interfere with the general flow of traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular. 
(Code 1987, § 31-104) 
Secs. 58-30—58-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 58-41. - Required; compliance with terms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to promote, organize or hold, or to assist in promoting, organizing, or holding, or to take part or to participate in any parade, assembly, picketing or other public demonstration in the streets, on the sidewalks or other public areas of the city, unless a permit for it has been secured from the city clerk. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade, assembly or demonstration or picketing at any time other than the time specified in the permit therefor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade, assembly or demonstration, or picketing along, upon or over any street, sidewalk or public area other than those set out in the permit issued as provided in this division. 
(Code 1987, § 31-107) 
Sec. 58-42. - Application; review and approval procedure. 
Any person desiring to stage a parade, demonstration or assembly, or engage in picketing, on the public streets, sidewalks or public area of the city, shall make application for a permit to the city clerk not later than 4:00 p.m. ten days prior to the day that such proposed activity is intended to be staged or carried out. Such application shall be filed with the city clerk in writing except that any application for activity on any of the state highways of the city must be filed 30 days prior to the planned activity. Such permit shall be granted only after review and approval by the city manager following consultation with the chief of police and the city attorney. The city manager shall be empowered to determine and reasonably restrict the time and duration of the proposed activity, the number of units or automobiles to be involved, the number of persons to participate in such activity, and the streets or locations where such activity shall be allowed, so as not to impair the health, safety, and convenience of the public in general (see Appendix A, on file in the office of the city clerk, application form). 
(Code 1987, § 31-101) 
Sec. 58-43. - Payment for additional expenses. 
After a review of the application for a permit to conduct a parade, assembly, demonstration or picketing activity, and as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit for such activity, the applicant may be required to pay to the city any and all additional expenses incurred by the city for additional police protection, traffic control, and the expense of cleaning up the area in which the parade, assembly, demonstration or picketing activity is permitted to take place, if such extra expense is reasonably foreseeable. The city manager may require a cash deposit to be paid by the applicant in advance to defray such additional municipal expenses as herein set out. If no additional expenses are incurred by the city as a result of the parade, assembly, demonstration or picketing activity, or if only a portion of the deposit is utilized therefor, the city will refund to the applicant any excess funds held by the city. If the cash deposit is insufficient to defray such additional expenses, the applicant will be liable for the additional expenses as a debt owed to the city, and subject to payment. The applicant, upon accepting the permit from the city for the conduct of a parade, assembly, demonstration or picketing activity, expressly waives questions regarding jurisdiction and venue, and any civil action brought to collect any indebtedness owed for excess municipal expenses may be brought in the appropriate court in the county. 
(Code 1987, § 31-108) 
Sec. 58-44. - Considerations for receiving permit. 
The city manager shall consider at least the following factors before making a decision under this division (see Appendix B, approval form): 
(1)  Traffic densities involved on the streets or sidewalks during the time for which the permit is requested. 
(2)  Police and fire protection required and available at the time and place requested. 
(3)  Street and sidewalk condition in the area requested. 
(4)  Other public or private activities known to occur during the same time and place which would have an impact upon public safety and convenience. 
(5)  Sanitary facilities available in the area requested. 
(6)  Noise impact analysis for the time and area requested. 
(7)  Any other matter which is likely to affect the public order, safety, health or welfare of the citizens, including those people participating in the activity. 
(Code 1987, § 31-102) 
Sec. 58-45. - Number of permits. 
An application and permit under this division shall be required for each such activity; provided, however, only one application and permit shall be required for each proposed parade, demonstration, assembly or picketing site and the picketing (see Appendix C, receipt of permit form). 
(Code 1987, § 31-103) 
Sec. 58-46. - Permit from DOT. 
Parades which are scheduled to pass over or cross any of the state highways which pass through the city must also be given permits by the department of transportation of the state. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain the correct permit from the state department of transportation. No city permit will be issued without a state department of transportation permit having been first obtained. 
(Code 1987, § 31-106) 
Sec. 58-47. - Revocation. 
If any participants, during the course of the permitted activity, breach any law of the United States, the state or any ordinance of the city, and an arrest is made or citation is issued, the permit may be immediately revoked by the chief of police or senior police officer on duty, and the activity shall cease immediately. 
(Code 1987, § 31-109(2)) 
Secs. 58-48—58-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMING AND STRUCTURE NUMBERING SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-02-01, adopted March 15, 1994, amended the Code by the addition of provisions which have been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. III, §§ 58-101—58-111. 
Cross reference— Design and construction standards for streets, § 34-651 et seq. 

Sec. 58-101. - Short title. 
This article shall be further referred to as the "Street Naming and Structure Numbering System." 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. I, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-102. - Designation of street and road names and numbers. 
Streets and roads now being maintained by the City of Helen and other public agencies within incorporated Helen shall in the future be named and numbered as now designated on the Official Map and Official Index of the City of Helen as amended by each implementing ordinance. Every other street and road within incorporated Helen shown on the Official Index shall hereafter be referred to as designated on the Official Index for structure numbering purposes. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. II, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-103. - Designation of structure numbers. 
(a)  Structure numbers for dwelling units, places of business, industrial locations and all other structures and uses requiring same shall be assigned by: 
(1)  The Planning Department of White County and the Helen Public Works Department in conjunction with the United States Postal Service during the implementation stage of the system; and 
(2)  The Planning Department of White County and the Helen Public Works Department following the implementation phase of the system in each area of the incorporated area of the city. 
(b)  The planning department shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this article. Such records may be maintained in data processing storage systems if so desired. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. III, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-104. - Posting of designated structure numbers. 
(a)  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned, shall be notified in writing by the White County Planning Department in conjunction with the City of Helen Public Works Department of the number assigned to the same at any time after adoption of this article. 
(b)  Within 60 days after receipt of such written notification, the owner, occupant, or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure, or use to which a number has been assigned, shall cause the same to be posted in either one or two locations depending upon the following conditions: 
(1)  If the mailbox is located on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be affixed to the mailbox in letters two inches in height, but no larger than six inches in height, and of a color contrasting with the color of the mailbox. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of the structure if so desired. 
(2)  If the mailbox is not on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be posted at two locations: 
a.  On the mailbox as prescribed by U.S. Postal Service Regulations; and 
b.  Either on the structure front if visible from the street, or on an above-ground sign attached to a post or other object at the driveway or curb cut. The numbers shall be two inches in height, but no larger than six inches in height, and of a color contrasting with the color of the background. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of his structure if so desired. 
(c)  In the case that a building is served by two or more driveways or curb cuts, the number shall be assigned and posted to the front entrance or driveway. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the dwelling unit, structure or use, upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number which might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure. 
(e)  In such cases where the assigned number cannot be posted as required above or no mailbox exists, the number shall be posted as prescribed by the city public works director after consultation with the owner. The city public works director is hereby directed to develop a written policy on the placement of structure numbers for all buildings not maintaining a mailbox. 
(f)  All structure numbers, for commercial buildings, erected pursuant to this article are to have a Germanic design, as prescribed in a written policy issued by the city planning and design review board. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. IV, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-105. - Types of numbers. 
Two types of numbers are used under this article: 
(1)  A primary number to be assigned to each street frontage of each parcel of land, whether or not the parcel is occupied. The primary number is required to be posted only if the parcel is occupied by a dwelling unit, structure or active use and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified under section 58-104(a) of this article. Other primary numbers are reserved for future development of the numbered parcels and will be assigned at the time of development. 
(2)  Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures and uses co-exist on the same parcel of land. Examples of parcels requiring secondary numbers include apartment projects, condominium projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit developments, recreational vehicle parks, recreational areas, shopping centers, and other uses where the use of secondary numbers would clarify the location of a unit or be used for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers, the White County Planning Department and the city public works director shall work with the owner, manager, or person in charge of the project to determine a logical numbering system under the following guidelines: 
a.  Existing numbered units and uses shall retain the present set of addresses with only the primary number being changed if the primary number is not in sequence with the overall system. 
b.  Buildings on a single parcel with more than one and less than five units may be given either letter (preferred) or number designations as requested by the owner. 
c.  A single building on a single parcel of land and with five or more units may be given numerical designations such as Suite 5, Apartment 5, etc., if so desired. 
d.  Multiple buildings on the same parcel of land may be given secondary numbers consisting of number designations if the buildings are accessed from a main entrance to the project. Generally the number designations should increase in a clockwise direction from the main entrance. 
e.  Recreational vehicle parks, and similar uses shall be given letter designations for lots or sections and number designations for individual lots or sites. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. V, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-106. - Exempt and excluded structures. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to exclude from this article those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life if destroyed by a fire or other events. 
(b)  The following structures shall be excluded from the provisions: 
(1)  Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address such as a barn, poultry house, outbuildings, or equipment storage buildings. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices, or the normal work station of an employee shall not be exempt. 
(2)  Storage and accessory buildings for the use of the occupant of another building on the property. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices, or the normal work station of an employee, or requiring a separate mailing address, shall not be exempt. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. VI, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-107. - New structure and lots. 
(a)  Structure numbers will be assigned to each new lot, tract or building site on the original drawings of a final subdivision plat, recreational vehicle park plan, planned unit development, or other plan requiring the approval of the city public works director. 
(b)  No building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit for any new or remodeled or repaired structure will be issued by the public works director of the city, following the implementation of this article in the affected area of the city until the owner, developer, or builder has procured from the city public works director the official structure number or numbers. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired, or use requiring said number, shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the standards of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. VII, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-108. - Utility company compliance. 
(a)  Following the implementation of this article in any area of the city, all utility services regulated by the state public service commission or any utility cooperative service organization, shall withhold service from any building until the owner or other requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid structure number. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the city public works director to notify each affected utility service of each implementation area by issuing maps and lists of official numbers assigned each structure or use. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. VIII, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-109. - Implementation by city departments. 
Every department and official under the jurisdiction of the city manager shall not render any non-emergency service until the occupant, owner, or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid structure number. Non-emergency service includes any service provided by the city manager except fire, rescue, law enforcement, or emergency medical service. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. IX, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-110. - Penalties. 
Any firm, person, or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the municipal court of the city, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail or correctional institution not to exceed 60 days, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. X, 3-15-94; Ord. No. 11-3-03, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 58-111. - Effective date and repealer. 
(a)  This article shall be implemented upon the date of adoption, and shall be in full force and effect. 
(b)  All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed upon enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-02-01, Art. XI, 3-15-94) 
Sec. 58-112—58-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDITIONS FOR USE OF MARKET PLATZ, CITY PARKS, AND BAND SHELL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-03-01, adopted Apr. 6, 2010, repealed former Art. IV, §§ 58-401—58-409, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 05-08-01, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 06-07-01, 8-1-06. 

Sec. 58-401. - Short title and purpose. 
This article shall be further referred to as the "Conditions for Use of Market Platz, City Parks, and Band Shell." The City of Helen recognizes that the City Band Shell and Market Platz area benefits the city by providing a place for musical entertainment and special events; contributing to the enjoyment of visitors to the city and to the economy of the area. At the same time, the city is aware of the need to insure the peace and privacy for residents and businesses in the area surrounding the band shell. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 58-402. - Market Platz defined. 
The Market Platz is that triangular shaped pedestrian area of the downtown city lying on the southerly side of State Highway 75, bounded by State Highway 75, River Street, and a row of privately owned shops, and containing a structures commonly referred to as the "band shell," and fountain. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 58-403. - Market Platz performance area defined. 
The Market Platz performance area is that area of the Market Platz bounded: easterly by the rear of the band shell; southerly by the northerly rock face, and rock face extended, of a planter; westerly by the easterly rock face, and rock face extended, of a planter located directly behind the benches placed for band shell seating; and northerly by the southerly rock face, and rock face extended through a walkway, of a wall near Main Street. Less and except from those boundaries is the walkway lying immediately northerly of the band shell and the planter lying immediately southerly of the band shell. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 58-404. - Reservation of band shell; permits required for performance in band shell; use of band shell; reservation of performance periods; conditions; exceptions; limitations. 
(a)  Reservations for events or performances shall be on a first-come, first-serve basis; however, events or performers reserved by the City of Helen, Alpine Helen/White County Convention and Visitors Bureau or the Helen Chamber of Commerce receive priority in reservation of the Market Platz performance area and band shell, until reservations are opened to the public. 
(b)  Reservation of the band shell includes uses of the band shell, but does not include the remainder of the Market Platz area. This area remains open to the public. 
(c)  Permits are required in order to provide performers with the exclusive right to perform, during designated periods, within the Market Platz performance area and to use the band shell itself; 
(d)  Performance times shall be scheduled on a daily basis beginning with the first performance. The period for performances shall be between 10:00 a.m., and 9:30 p.m.; with the last performance of the day concluding no later than 9:30 p.m. 
(e)  Each performance period shall begin on the hour and end upon the half hour or shall begin on the half hour and end on the hour; other than events or performers reserved by the City of Helen, Alpine Helen/White County Convention and Visitors Bureau, or the Helen Chamber of Commerce which may be of longer duration. 
(f)  Performers must be present at least 15 minutes prior to, and begin set up no earlier than 15 minutes prior to, the applicable performance period, and must complete removal within 15 minutes following the applicable performance time, unless the same performer is permitted for consecutive performance times, in which event no removal shall be required between consecutively scheduled performance times. 
(g)  During set up and removal, no audible testing of equipment, voice, amplification, or tuning shall be allowed. 
(h)  For the calendar period beginning Thanksgiving Day and continuing through Christmas Day, performers may reserve, at any time during the 12 months prior to the requested date, a maximum of two performance periods each day. 
(i)  For times other than the calendar period beginning Thanksgiving Day and continuing through Christmas Day, performers may reserve, at any time during the six months prior to the requested date, a maximum of four performance periods each day with a maximum of 12 performance periods in any one month. 
(j)  The permit may not be transferred or assigned. 
(k)  Each performer shall be conclusively presumed to have inspected the entirety of the Market Platz performance area, and found same to be acceptable for their purpose, "as is," without any warranty whatsoever, and without any representation, warranty, or covenant as to fitness for any purpose. 
(l)  No performer shall use any public utility prior to the first daily performance period and following the last daily performance period. 
(m)  Each performer, and any and all persons associated in any manner with the performer, shall be conclusively presumed to have received, acknowledged, executed, and agreed to hold harmless and indemnify the city, their commissioners, agents, employees, officers, directors, and any person or persons acting in concert with them, from and against any and all liability, cost, expense, and damages, direct or indirect, foreseen or unforeseen, related to, or in any manner arising from, the performance by the performer. 
(n)  If a performer or performers desire an amplified performance, the city amplification system must be used. No outside speakers or amplification is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 58-405. - By whom permits are to be issued. 
The entity charged with the responsibility of issuing permits for the use of the Market Platz performance area and band shell shall be that entity with whom the city has contracted for the promotion of tourism within the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Editor's note— At the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 10-03-01, that entity is the Alpine Helen/White County Convention and Visitors Bureau. 
Sec. 58-406. - Prohibited activities within the Market Platz and city parks. 
The following activities are prohibited within the Market Platz and city parks: 
(1)  Any activity in violation of federal, state, county or city laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations, or of these conditions. Any performers, by use of the Market Platz, Market Platz performance area, or city parks shall be conclusively presumed to have actual knowledge of all such laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, and of these conditions, including, in particular, and without limitation, noise ordinances; and 
(2)  Any performance other than a solely gratuitous performance. However, so long as it is not violative of these conditions, performers may accept voluntary contributions or donations, provided also that no amount of contribution or donation may be specified, urged, suggested or commented on. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 58-407. - Prohibited activities within the Market Platz. 
The following activities within the Market Platz are prohibited: 
(1)  Open flames; 
(2)  Dispersing of any liquids; 
(3)  Unreasonable obstruction of pedestrian traffic to businesses; 
(4)  Any electronically amplified sound except when originating from the band shell or speakers provided by the city; 
(5)  Use of profanity; and 
(6)  Consumption of alcohol or display of alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Use of any animal or bird to perform in the Market Platz area which may leave excrement causing unsanitary conditions, littering of the sidewalks or causing damage to the landscaping or other city property; or the use of any animal or bird in a performance which can create a biting or scratching hazard to the public. 
(8)  Use of the city planters at the Market Platz area for any type of display or signage. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 13-06-02, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 58-408. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager may adopt and publish such additional rules and regulations for use of the Market Platz and city parks as may be consistent with this article, and such shall have the effect of law. However, no such rules or regulations shall be effective until reviewed for comment by the city commission, and published and made available to the public at city hall. All such rules and regulations shall be published in a single volume, in a reasonable organizational manner, and revised not later than 60 days following any change thereto. The city commission may, by vote, abolish any or all of such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Editor's note— At the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 10-03-01, a City of Helen Band Shell Usage Policy and Application for use pursuant to section 58-405 was reviewed for comment by the city commission, published and made available to the public at City Hall. 
Sec. 58-409. - Penalties. 
Any firm, person, or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the municipal court of the city, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail or correctional institution not to exceed 60 days, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 58-410. - Security deposit for use of band shell 
A refundable security deposit of $100.00 shall be paid with the reservation for any event, performance or performances in the band shell. Upon request by applicant, the deposit may be retained by the Alpine Helen/White County Convention and Visitors Bureau as the required deposit for future reservations, or it will be refunded within two weeks of a written request following the event, performance or performances except under the following circumstances. 
(1)  There is damage to the facility or grounds of the band shell. Applicant shall be held liable for all damages that occur during the reservation period. Applicant will be billed for all damages in excess of the damage deposit. 
(2)  The band shell and surrounding area is not left in a clean condition at the conclusion of the performance. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Sec. 58-411. - Revocation of permit. 
The city shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon violation of any conditions in this section or where staging of the event would have an immediate and adverse effect on the welfare and safety of persons or property. The chief of police shall have the authority to close any event immediately upon violation of conditions set forth herein or to preserve the safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-01, 4-6-10) 
Secs. 58-412—58-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROTECTION OF SIDEWALKS, STREETS, PUBLIC PLACES, PUBLIC PROPERTY, AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 58-501. - Throwing, depositing, or disposing of garbage, trash, yard trimmings, leaves, or other solid waste upon the sidewalks, streets, public places, public property and public rights-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, sweep, blow or discard debris, garbage, litter, trash, yard trimmings, leaves or other solid waste upon the streets, sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way within the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-01, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 58-502. - Transporting garbage, trash, solid waste, or other material in open vehicles; spills from motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated upon any public street in the city any open truck, trailer, wagon or other motor vehicle in and upon which garbage, trash, manure, solid waste material, other debris, or materials are transported, unless the vehicle shall be equipped with a cover or other securing device that will prevent the garbage, trash, waste material, other debris or other material from falling from the truck onto the streets of the city. 
(b)  In the event that spillage does occur in spite of the appropriate use of said devices, the person responsible for the operation of the vehicle shall take immediate action to remove the material from the street or sidewalk. Shoveling, sweeping, or vacuuming the material and removing it from the roadway is an appropriate response. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-01, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 58-503. - Spills from vehicles; concrete, cement, gravel, sand, dirt, and asphalt hauling. 
(a)  Any person engaged in hauling concrete, cement, gravel, sand, dirt, asphalt or any other material on any public streets within the corporate limits of the city shall load or fill vehicles so as not to allow spillage of any material onto the city streets or sidewalks. All vehicles hauling wet concrete, cement or loose material, are required to use suitable covers, spill prevention and capture devices to prevent materials from blowing, spilling, or dripping from the vehicle. 
(b)  In the event that spillage does occur in spite of the appropriate use of said devises, the person responsible for the operation of the vehicle shall remove the material from the street or sidewalk. Shoveling, sweeping, or vacuuming the material and removing it from the roadway is an appropriate response. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-01, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 58-504. - Defacing city sidewalks, streets, public places, public property and public rights-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform the act of nailing, tacking, posting, gluing, painting, stapling, marking or writing upon the surface of any street, sidewalk, public place, public property and public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-01, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 58-505. - Penalties. 
Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the municipal court of the city, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail or correctional institution not to exceed 60 days, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-01, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 11-3-01, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 58-506. - Types of alcohol possession and consumption prohibited above city sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of Helen's citizens and visitors through the prohibition of the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in those second story open air locations in which the possession and consumption of such those alcoholic beverages, by virtue of being possessed and consumed on a second story deck, pavilion or other such open air facility, and that are located in direct proximity to city sidewalks, public places, public property, or public rights-of-way creates safety hazards to the citizens and visitors of Helen, and problems regarding trash, spillage, and other issues detrimental to the city's image and overall economic well being. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Second story decks, pavilions and open air facilities are defined as decks, pavilions or other open air gathering places, which are located on the second story (or higher) above ground level. 
(2)  Adjacent to a city sidewalk is defined as a location in which the closest structural side of a second story deck, pavilion, or other open air structure is within ten linear yards of the city sidewalk at its closest point. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume alcoholic beverages contained in either a bottle, can, or any other type of container other than a styrofoam or flexible plastic cup no larger than 18 ounces; upon any second story deck, pavilion, or other open air facility that is adjacent to a city sidewalk, or is directly located over any area in which either the public may be located or which is the public entryway into the first floor of a building. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any business within the City of Helen, Georgia to permit patrons to possess or consume alcoholic beverages other than in a flexible plastic or styrofoam cup no larger than 18 ounces; or to serve patrons alcoholic beverages other than in a plastic cup; for the consumption upon any second story deck, pavilion or other open air facility that is adjacent to a city sidewalk, or directly located over any area in which either the public may be located or which is the public entryway into the first floor of a building. 
(e)  No beverage of any type shall be permitted to be set, placed or held over the railing, floor, or edge of the second story deck, pavilion or other open air facility as these structures overhang or are directly located over any area in which either the public may be located or which is the public entryway into the first floor of a building. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-04, 4-5-2011) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation authority, § 1.13(1), (2). 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-201 et seq.; malt beverage excise tax, § 6-51; wine excise tax, § 6-101; distilled spirits excise tax, § 6-151; distilled spirits by the drink excise tax, § 6-152; businesses, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to levy, assess and collect ad valorem taxes, § 1.13(1). 
State Law reference— Municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 62-26. - When due and payable. 
Ad valorem taxes shall become due on December 20 each year and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within 30 days after the due date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 30 days prior to the due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at one percent per month from the due date. 
(Code 1987, § 4-101(4)) 
Charter reference— Collection of delinquent taxes, § 6.18. 
Sec. 62-27. - Failure to pay tax. 
The city shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
(Code 1987, § 4-101(5)) 
Sec. 62-28. - Judicial in rem tax foreclosure. 
The city commission, by majority vote, on each delinquent municipal tax case may authorize the city attorney to use judicial in rem tax foreclosure in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 48-4-76. 
At any time in the calendar year, the city manager may propose a delinquent municipal tax case to the city commission at an official meeting for their consideration of the foreclosure on the property. The city attorney will follow the laws of the state to effect the foreclosure procedure. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-04, 10-15-96) 
Secs. 62-29—62-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Lodging tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 62-51. - Levy. 
There is hereby levied, pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-13-51(b)(2), an excise tax at the rate of eight percent of the rent paid for the occupancy of any room or rooms, lodging or accommodations, furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to, the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more consecutive days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(1); Ord. No. 05-07-03, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 09-05-01, 5-19-09) 
Sec. 62-52. - Collection by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of any establishment covered by section 62-51 located within the city to collect the tax on occupants as imposed in section 62-51. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(2)) 
Sec. 62-53. - Registration of operator. 
(a)  Every person engaging in, or about to engage in, business in the city as an operator of any establishment covered by section 62-51 shall immediately register the business with the city manager, on a form provided by the city manager for such purpose. The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city manager. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
(b)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(3)) 
Sec. 62-54. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as provided in section 62-53, the city manager shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(4)) 
Sec. 62-55. - Due date, filing of return. 
All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the city manager monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected. Payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(5)) 
Sec. 62-56. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied under this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction for submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized by O.C.G.A., § 48-8-52. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(6); Ord. No. 16-08-01 , 9-6-16) 
State Law reference— Commission for collecting tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 62-57. - Determination if no return made. 
If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the city manager shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city manager. Notice, interest, and penalty are as follows: 
(1)  Notice of determination. The city manager or designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city manager. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(2)  Interest on amount found due. Amounts found due shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(3)  Specific penalty. The specific penalty shall be five percent of the tax due or $5.00 whichever is greater for each 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(7); Ord. No. 16-8-01 , 9-6-16) 
Charter reference— Collection of delinquent taxes, § 6.18. 
State Law reference— Rate of interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A., § 48-2-40. 
Sec. 62-58. - Required records. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city manager may require. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(8)) 
Sec. 62-59. - Administration and enforcement. 
The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to persons subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person or persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax herein levied. 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(9)) 
Sec. 62-60. - Action for collection of tax. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of the tax required to be collected pursuant to this article becomes due and payable, the city attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(10)) 
Sec. 62-61. - Successors or assignees of operator. 
If any operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this article and subsequent thereto sells out or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. If the purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefor to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(11)) 
Sec. 62-62. - Penalty. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city manager, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1987, § 4-108(12)) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate traffic, § 1.13(29). 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

Sec. 66-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372 and O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., the uniform rules of the road are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city, with like effect as if recited in full herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1987, § 10-101) 
Sec. 66-2. - Speed zones. 

 
State Route 75 within the City Limits of Helen. This section of roadway runs common with State Route 17 from Mile Point 07.50 to 09.19 for a distance of 01.69 miles. 

 
;hn0; (Code 1987, § 10-102; Ord. No. 91-11, 12-17-91; Ord. No. 94-01-1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 98-12-01, 1-13-99; Ord. No. 3310-07-99, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 02-01-01, 02-05-02; Ord. No. 10-11-03, 11-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Authority to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 66-3. - Parking on sidewalks, pedestrian malls prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon any sidewalk or pedestrian mall situated upon public right-of-way. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit the operators of municipally licensed vehicles-for-hire from collecting fares within the confines of their vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 10-103, 7-18-89; Ord. No. 90-10, 1-22-91) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Chapter 67 - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 

Sec. 67-1. - Short title and definitions. 
(a)  Short title. This chapter shall be known and recited as "The Horse-Drawn Carriages for Hire Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Helen, Georgia. 
(2)  Horse drawn carriage. Any hack or carriage which is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule or other beast of burden, for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
(3)  License. The right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a business incorporating the use of a single horse drawn carriage within the corporate limits of the city. Also, the document evidencing same. 
(4)  Company. The holder of a license to operate a horse drawn carriage business under the provisions of this chapter whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
(5)  Driver. Any person who drives or operates a horse drawn carriage on the streets of the city for a licensed company. 
(6)  Driver's permit. The written document issued by the city identifying an individual driving or operating a horse drawn carriage for a designated licensed company within the city. 
(7)  Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public place in the city. 
(8)  Inspector (city manager or his designee). The individual employee or organizational unit of the city charged with the responsibility for enforcing this chapter, except for specific responsibilities otherwise provided herein. 
(9)  Stand. A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been designated by the city manager for the use (exclusively or nonexclusively), of horse drawn carriage. 
(10)  Draft animal. A horse, mule or other beast of burden, used for the drawing of horse drawn carriage. 
(11)  Draft animal's permit. The written document issued by the city identifying a draft animal drawing a horse drawn carriage for a designated licensed company within the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-2. - Licensing of horse-drawn carriage companies; headquarters. 
(a)  License required. 
(1)  No person, firm, corporation, or entity shall operate a business involving the use of a horse-drawn carriage on the streets of the city unless the current year's occupational tax has been paid in accordance with chapter 14 of the City Code, and a license for such business has first been granted by the city pursuant to the provisions contained here in chapter 67. The license shall be effective for only a single carriage, and only for the calendar year stated in the license, unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided by ordinance. 
(2)  Any person, firm, corporation, or legal entity desiring a license required by this section shall submit an application in writing to the city manager on a form to be furnished by the city manager. The application shall be made under oath and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The legal name of the applicant; 
b.  The trade name, if applicable, under which the applicant is to operate; 
c.  All persons having an beneficial interest in the applicant greater than five percent; 
d.  Mailing and physical address of applicant; 
e.  The name and address of a contact person for all purposes under this chapter; 
f.  The number required to be affixed to the carriage pursuant to this chapter; 
g.  The passenger capacity of the vehicle; and 
h.  A photograph of the carriage for which license is applied. 
(b)  License fee. Before any license is granted under this section, an impact, enforcement, and administrative fee for the licensed activity in the amount of $130.00 shall be paid by the applicant. 
(c)  License to be displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The license issued under the provisions of this section shall be placed on display in the horse-drawn carriage, where the license will be in clear view of the passengers at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is for hire. 
(d)  Alteration of license prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a horse-drawn carriage license, or cause or allow the same. 
(e)  Multiple licenses allowable. It shall be permissible for any applicant to hold multiple licenses, and they shall be required to obtain multiple licenses to operate separate carriages. 
(f)  License not transferable. Any horse-drawn carriage license issued under this section is not transferable, either from entity to entity, or from carriage to carriage, and is to be used solely by the applicant to whom issued, and solely for the carriage identified upon the license. 
(g)  Duration of permit. Any horse-drawn carriage license shall be valid for that calendar year. License may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee. 
(h)  Operating regulations. In addition to the license requirements imposed herein, each license holder shall be responsible for the following operating regulations: 
(1)  Compliance with all laws cited as the "Humane Care for Equines Act" O.C.G.A., Title 4, Section 1, Chapter 13, as well as all other state and federal laws and regulations governing equines and humane treatment of animals. 
(2)  No one animal may be worked more than eight hours per day. 
(3)  No draft animal shall be permitted to pull a horse-drawn carriage when the outside temperature exceeds 90 degrees Fahrenheit. The temperature reading shall be conclusively presumed to be that obtained at the communications desk of the city police department as adjunct to the National Weather Service. 
(4)  At the time of permitting of any draft animal, and at anytime, upon demanded by the city inspector, a valid Equine Infectious Anemia (EIA) certification for the draft animal then in service must be produced. 
(5)  Each license holder shall require, and each driver must maintain, a log of the starting and ending times for each driver and each draft animal. Said log should be kept in a bound book form and continuously available upon the carriage being pulled for inspection by the city inspector. 
(6)  No draft animal shall be permitted to pull a vehicle for hire without properly fitting shoes or boots on each properly trimmed hoof, with said shoes or boots to be made only of rubber or similar other synthetic material. No shoes or boots made of iron, drilltech, borium, studs, spikes or any other types of shoes that can cause damage to pavement, concrete, brick pavers, or similarly hard surface types will be permitted. 
(i)  The inspector shall be empowered to inspect all operating practices of any carriage company to ensure continuous compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99; Ord. No. 17-6-01 , 6-20-17) 
Sec. 67-3. - Insurance. 
(a)  Indemnity for benefit of city. Any horse-drawn carriage company operating under this chapter shall hold the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss damages or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to make the city, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any horse-drawn carriage company, its servants, agents, drivers, or other employees, during the operation by the company of a horse-drawn carriage business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(b)  Insurance for benefit of passengers. Any horse-drawn carriage company holding a license to do business shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a horse-drawn carriage. The minimum coverage shall be $300,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $500,000.00 for injury to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, and $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of a horse-drawn carriage company, its servants or agents. 
(c)  Blanket policy. Any company or person operating a horse-drawn carriage in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance for each separate horse-drawn carriage for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or operates more than one horse-drawn carriage, in which event such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the horse-drawn carriages actually owned or operated. 
(d)  Notice when voided. Before any policy of insurance required by this chapter is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, by the licensee in writing, to the city manager at least five days before the same shall take effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-4. - Horse-drawn carriage driver permit required for identification. 
(a)  Permits required. 
(1)  No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who holds a horse-drawn carriage license pursuant to this chapter 67, shall permit a horse-drawn carriage to be driven, at any time for hire, unless the driver of the horse-drawn carriage shall: 
a.  Have a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the state, and that the license is not under suspension or revocation; and 
b.  Have obtained and shall have then in force a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Any person desiring a permit required by this section shall submit an application in writing to the city manager on a form to be furnished by the city manager. The application shall be made under oath and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The age of the applicant; 
b.  Date of birth; 
c.  Address; 
d.  The name and license number of the horse-drawn carriage company for whom the applicant shall operate; and 
e.  A photograph of the applicant. 
(b)  Driver's permit fee. Before any permit is granted under this section, an administrative for the driver's permit in the amount of $35.00 shall be paid by the applicant. 
(c)  Permit to be displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be placed on display in the horse-drawn carriage then being operated by the holder of the permit, where the permit will be in clear view of the passengers at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is for hire. 
(d)  Alteration of permits prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit, or cause or allow the same. 
(e)  Multiple permits allowable. It shall be permissible for any person to hold multiple driver permits, and they shall be required to obtain multiple permits to operate separate carriages. 
(f)  Permit not transferable. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under this section is not transferable, either from person to person, or from carriage to carriage, and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued, and solely for the carriage identified upon the permit. 
(g)  Duration of permit. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit shall be valid for that calendar year. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-5. - Horse-drawn carriage draft animals permit required for identification. 
(a)  Permits required. 
(1)  No draft animal shall be allowed to draw a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who holds a horse-drawn carriage license pursuant to this chapter shall permit any draft animal to draw a horse-drawn carriage at any time for hire, unless the license holder of the horse-drawn carriage shall have obtained and shall have then in force a horse-drawn carriage draft animal permit issued under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Any person desiring a permit required by this section shall submit an application in writing to the city manager on a form to be furnished by the city manager. The application shall be made under oath and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The name and description of the draft animal; 
b.  Date of birth of the draft animal; 
c.  Name and address of the owner of the draft animal; 
d.  The name and license number of the horse-carriage company for whom the draw animal shall labor; and 
e.  A photograph of the draft animal. 
(b)  Draft animal's permit fee. Before any permit is granted under this section, and administrative fee for the draft animal permit in the amount of $65.00 shall be paid by the applicant. 
(c)  Permit to be displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be placed on display in the horse-drawn carriage then being drawn by the permitted draft animal, where the permit will be in clear view of the passengers at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is for hire. 
(d)  Alteration of permits prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a horse-drawn carriage draft animal, or cause or allow the same. 
(e)  Multiple permits allowable. It shall be permissible for any draft animal to be permitted multiple times, and they shall be required to obtained multiple permits to draw separate carriages. 
(f)  Permit not transferable. Any horse-drawn carriage draft animal's permit issued under this section is not transferable, either from draft animal to draft animal, or from carriage to carriage, and is to be used solely by the draft animal for which it is issued, and solely for the carriage identified upon the permit. 
(g)  Duration of permit. Any horse-drawn carriage draft animal's permit shall be valid for that calendar year. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-6. - Identification and marking generally. 
Every horse-drawn carriage shall have a sign, clearly visible and readable, painted or affixed upon the rear of each vehicle. The sign shall contain the full name of the horse-drawn carriage company operating the vehicle. Additionally, the sign shall conform with all sign standards for the city and be permitted by the city in the same manner as all other signs. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-7. - Numbers generally. 
There shall be painted or affixed on each side and on the rear of each horse-drawn carriage a number of such uniform size and color as is, in the sole discretion of the city, appropriate for identification, and applied to the carriage by the city designee. The number shall be a separate and distinct number from that on any other public vehicle in the city. The number shall be assigned to such horse-drawn carriage by the city manager, or his designee, at the time of application for license, and shall not be altered or changed without consent of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-8. - Safe mechanical condition of horse-drawn carriage required. 
Every horse-drawn carriage operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is in service. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-9. - Cleanliness of horse-drawn carriage required. 
Each vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept neatly painted, and in clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris, and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-10. - Vehicle inspections required. 
Each horse-drawn carriage may be inspected by the inspector for compliance with the provisions of the chapter and shall pass the inspection before the vehicle may be used as a horse-drawn carriage in the city. Each horse-drawn carriage involved in an accident shall be inspected by the inspector before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. Inspections of the horse-drawn carriage may be done at any time by the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-11. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
No license holder, driver, or any other person associated with a horse-drawn carriage shall charge a greater sum for the use of the horse-drawn carriage than that published and advertised as the rates for such vehicle, which shall be displayed in each vehicle. Rates shall be displayed conspicuously at each entrance to the carriage, so as to be in clear view of all passengers. The specific location and size of the rate posting must be approved by the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-12. - No horse-drawn carriage to be left unattended. 
It is unlawful for any driver of any horse-drawn carriage to, or for the license holder thereof to permit, the vehicle to be left unattended at any time. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-13. - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to overtly solicit passengers for hire. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-14. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
No horse-drawn carriage shall transport more persons at a single time than the seating capacity of his horse-drawn carriage, as identified in the license. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-15. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-16. - Property left in horse-drawn carriage by passenger. 
Any horse-drawn carriage driver or operator, discovering in any horse-drawn carriage under his control, personal property which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such horse-drawn carriage, shall report the loss, and deliver all the property to the police department within two hours after the discovery of the property. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-17. - Safety equipment required. 
(a)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with electrically powered lights or lanterns, and reflectors of not less than two inches in diameter or four square inches if square or rectangular. Such lights shall be in use when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from a distance of 500 feet. At a minimum, lights shall be located on all four side corners of the vehicle, and at a height no less than two feet, nor more than six feet, above the road surface. At a minimum, there shall be a total of eight reflectors which shall be mounted one on the outside of each shaft, two on each side, and two on the rear. A DOT approved slow moving vehicle sign shall be attached upon the rear of the vehicle so as to be clearly visible from a rear approach. 
(b)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with a functional and operative friction braking. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-18. - Area of operation. 
The city manager shall set a repetitive route or routes for horse-drawn carriage, however, such election shall not prohibit pick up and transport of prearranged passengers for hire who request transport deviating from established routes. The city manager shall also designate the location of stands and the number of carriages which may be located at each stand at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-19. - Sanitation requirements. 
Draft animal manure and urine must immediately, and without any delay whatsoever, be treated with a chemical deodorizing solution, and manure must be removed immediately, and without any delay whatsoever, from the street by the license holder or some person immediately available on behalf of the license holder. Each carriage must be equipped with a suitable scoop shovel and airtight container for the temporary storage of removed manure. Horse diapers, designed, affixed, and maintained to prevent excrement from being deposited on the street surface, must be used at all times upon draft animals. All manure must be disposed of properly. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-20. - Traffic violations. 
(a)  Horse-drawn carriages shall be prohibited from stopping in traffic or delaying any on-street traffic for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers or for any other purposes. 
(b)  All vehicles subject to this chapter shall operate the vehicles in accordance with the traffic laws of the city, as well as the state. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn carriage to willfully impede the normal flow of traffic on any city street, alley or thoroughfare, and are required to travel at the extreme right of the road surface when followed by any other vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-21. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. In addition, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued under this chapter. Every transport for hire in violation of this ordinance shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-22. - Commission hearing on revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  When in the opinion of the commission or city manager, grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a license pursuant to this chapter may exist, the licensee shall be served by the chief of police or other officer with written notice to appear at a show-cause hearing before the commission on a weekday not less than five days and no more than 30 days from the date of such service. The notice shall contain the grounds alleged. The hearing shall constitute a separate and distinct called meeting. 
(b)  The standard of proof to be applied by the commission at the hearing in determining whether or not grounds exist for the suspension and/or revocation of a license is preponderance of the evidence. A preponderance of the evidence is defined as evidence upon the issues involved, which, while not enough to wholly free the mind from a reasonable doubt, is yet sufficient to incline a reasonable and impartial mind to one side of the issue rather than the other. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Sec. 67-23. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective and enforceable on January 1, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 99-12-02, 12-2-8-99) 
Chapter 68 - MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-08-01 , adopted Sept. 15, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 68, §§ 68-1—68-27, and enacted a new Ch. 68 as set out herein. The former Ch. 68 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-08-02 , adopted Oct. 7, 2014. 

Sec. 68-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings given in this section. 
Vehicles for hire. Any and all automobiles, including taxicabs and ride share drivers, designed and used for the purpose of transporting less than 10 passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage, or length of time, not operating from a fixed terminal on a fixed route. 
(Ord. No. 15-08-01 , 9-15-15) 
Sec. 68-2. - Requirements. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A., § 40-5-39. No person shall operate a motor vehicle for hire within the city limits of Helen, Georgia unless such person: 
(1)  Has a for-hire license endorsement pursuant to this Code section (O.C.G.A., § 40-5-39) and has liability insurance coverage in the amounts required by law for the class of motor vehicle being operated for hire and the requirements for limousine carriers, ride share networks and drivers, and taxi services, as applicable; or 
(2)  Has a private background check certification pursuant to this Code section (O.C.G.A., § 40-5-39) and has liability insurance coverage in the amounts required by law for the class of motor vehicle being operated for hire and the requirements for limousine carriers, ride share networks and drivers, and taxi services, as applicable. 
Any driver of a vehicle for hire, that fails to meet the requirements of O.C.G.A., § 40-5-39 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, pursuant to O.C.G.A., § 40-5-39(g). 
(Ord. No. 15-08-01 , 9-15-15) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority relative to utilities, § 1.13(9). 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-126 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Technical codes, § 34-801. 
State Law reference— Water system authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(7). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-26. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1987, § 20-117) 
Sec. 70-27. - Control, supervision. 
The municipal water works shall be under the immediate control and supervision of the city manager or designated official who shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of the water works, subject to the approval and confirmation of the commission. 
(Code 1987, § 20-101) 
Sec. 70-28. - Inspections. 
The city manager or designated official may at any reasonable time examine the condition of the city owned water pipes and fixtures up to and including the water meter. 
(Code 1987, § 20-102) 
Sec. 70-29. - Application for water service. 
Application for the use of water shall be made to the city clerk by the owner or agent of the property to be benefited, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the water may be required. 
(Code 1987, § 20-103) 
Sec. 70-30. - Connection charge, tap-on fee. 
(a)  Upon the application for a new connection charge that includes the fee for tap and service connection by any consumer within the corporate limits of the city, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee as spelled out below. 
(b)  The city shall own and maintain the water line from the main to the curb box and the property owner shall own and maintain the service line from the curb box to the premises served. 
(c)  All work upon the service line shall be performed by a licensed plumber. 
(d)  Fees. 
(1)  All installations (including backflow preventor): 
¾ inch meter ..... $  600.00 
1 inch meter ..... 1,000.00 
2 inch meter ..... 3,000.00 
Larger than 2 inch ..... 5,000.00 
In addition the applicant shall also pay the city's actual cost of the connection to the city water system, including all direct and indirect cost of materials, labor and equipment, as determined by the city from time to time. All fees for connection to the water system shall be paid as a prerequisite for approval of said connection to the water system. The city may accept a deposit reflecting the estimated cost to the city of connecting the user to water, pending final determination of actual cost after the work has been completed. No water service shall be established until all fees have been paid in full. 
(e)  On a building with multiple units there may be a water meter for each unit or a single meter if authorized by the city manager. 
(f)  All water tap on fees are to be paid when a development or building plan is approved. 
(Code 1987, § 20-104; Ord. No. 88-2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 99-09-01, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 04-04-01, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 70-31. - Standby sprinkler connection charge. 
Upon an application for a standby sprinkler connection by any consumer or upon the formal adoption by the commission of a required standby sprinkler connection for any consumer class, such connection charge shall be $675.00 per connection. Installation shall be done by tradesmen licensed as pipe fitters by the state, under the inspection of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 20-105) 
Sec. 70-32. - Unauthorized connections and disturbances. 
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public water line, or appurtenance thereof including meters and meter boxes without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. Permits shall only be granted to persons authorized by the plumbing code to do such work. 
(Code 1987, § 20-106) 
Sec. 70-33. - Water meters. 
(a)  Each building or structure using city water shall have a water meter installed by the city. All such meters are the property of the city. 
(b)  The city shall install its meter at or near the property line when feasible, or at the city's option, and the owner's consent, within the property line. When the meter or meter box is placed within the property line, a suitable place, which is unobstructed and accessible at all times to the city's personnel, shall be provided by the owner. 
(c)  In the event a city meter shall be placed within the property line, by the consent for such placement, the owner thereof grants to the city a permanent easement, ten feet either side of the city's water line, and a radius ten feet from the meter itself, for the purpose of maintenance, replacement, repair, inspection, and meter reading. The city shall have no liability to the owner for any damage suffered by the city's reasonable and proper use of the easement, and the city shall be under no obligation to restore the property following reasonable maintenance, replacement, or inspection. 
(d)  Private water meters may be installed within the property line, and inside the water flow from any city water meter, however the city shall have no responsibility therefor, and the owner and consumer shall be fully, and solely, responsible for such meters and any water loss or other damage resulting from any private water meter. 
(e)  No person shall connect to the city's water system without having a back-flow prevention devise properly installed 
(Code 1987, § 20-107; Ord. No. 01-11-01, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 70-34. - Service line regulations. 
No more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line. Only galvanized or PVC schedule 40 pipe shall be used for the installation of a service line and all service lines shall be installed at a depth at least 40 inches below the surface of the ground. Each service line shall contain a stop and waste cock where the water may be turned off. 
(Code 1987, § 20-108) 
Sec. 70-35. - Water waste prohibition. 
(a)  Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs, faucets and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. When any such waste occurs, the water service may be terminated. 
(b)  Except as provided for in subsection (c) below, only ultra-low flow plumbing fixtures compliant with the following maximum permitted water flow rates shall be installed when erecting a new structure, or altering an existing structure to effect its repair or renovation, or making an addition to an existing structure, or replacing malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucets, showerheads, toilets or urinals in an existing structure: 

 
(c)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing structure shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (b) above when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing structure does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system serving toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing structure; 
(2)  When the plumbing or sewage system within an existing structure, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by subsection (b) were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  The plumbing fixtures to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(d)  The owner, or his agent, of a structure undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (c) above shall obtain the exemption by applying to the city manager or designee in writing, on such forms as may be determined by the city manager or designee. A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 20-109, 2-26-91) 
State Law reference— Water conservation requirements for plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
Sec. 70-36. - Restriction on outdoor water[ing] of landscape. 
(a)  Restrictions. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(A)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(B)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(C)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(D)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(E)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(F)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(G)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(H)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(I)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(J)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(K)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(L)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(M)  Hydro seeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in ordinance. The city manager shall enforce this ordinance and shall have the authority to city manager authorize such departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(c)  Further restrictions. In cases of further water shortage or scarcity, the commission may by resolution place such further restrictions upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkler purposes as the commission deems necessary to further water conservation and water supply enhancement. 
(Code 1987, § 20-110; Ord. No. 10-12-01, 12-21-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
State Law reference— Outdoor Water Ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7. 
Sec. 70-37. - Charges for turning water on. 
A new residential account that is accepted by the city will be assessed a $15.00 administrative fee along with a $200.00 deposit. A new commercial account that is accepted by the city will be assessed a $15.00 administrative fee along with a $500.00 deposit for restaurants and lounges, a $1,000.00 deposit for hotels, motels and water parks, and a $300.00 deposit for all other commercial accounts. 
For properties with new owners which need a temporary connection to ascertain the condition of the premises, an account application a temporary connection will be accepted by the city upon payment of a nonrefundable administrative fee of $50.00. A designated date and time will be provided to the applicant for the temporary connection, and the water will be connected for a 24-hour period. The applicant shall be responsible for water charges incurred during said 24-hour temporary connection period. 
If the water supply to any premises is disconnected due to nonpayment of the account, a reconnect fee will be assessed. The reconnect fee during regular business hours of Monday through Friday 8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. will be $30.00 for the first occurrence within a 12-month period and $50.00 for the second occurrence within a 12-month period. After regular business hours and on weekends an additional $25.00 fee will be assessed to have the service reconnected. 
All water deposits will be held in a non-interest bearing account until such time as the account holder request that the service be disconnected and all amounts due are paid in full. 
(Code 1987, § 20-115; Ord. No. 93-8-2, § 20-115, 9-14-83; Ord. No. 99-06-02, 7-20-99; Ord. No. 07-02-01, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 11-12-01, 1-5-12) 
Sec. 70-38. - Charges for turning water off. 
If a customer requests that the water supply be turned off for any reason, a charge of $10.00 shall be made for turning the water off. 
(Code 1987, § 20-116) 
Sec. 70-39. - Use of city water hydrant. 
(a)  Any person desiring to withdraw water from a city fire hydrant shall make application to the city clerk for a water hydrant permit. At the time of application, the applicant shall be required to pay a deposit of $750.00 in the form of cash or bank certified check, for the use of the city's hydrant flow meter. Upon return of the meter to the city, payment for the water use shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance shall be returned to the applicant. In the event the water use shall exceed the deposit, the excess shall be immediately due and payable. 
(b)  If the connection to the city's water system is to be used for the filling of a tank or any type container, the tank or container must be inspected by the water department operator for a back-flow prevention device. No person shall connect to the city's water system without having a back-flow prevention devise properly installed. 
(c)  Any person who does not return the hydrant meter to the city's water department within 30 days of the estimated return date stated on the permit shall be subject to forfeit the deposit. 
(d)  The use of the city's water hydrants shall be prohibited for the purpose of filling any water retention pool (e.g. swimming pool). Pools may be filled from approved metered connections to the city's water system. In order to protect the city's water supply, any filling of pools shall be limited to a maximum of 20,000 gallons in a 24-hour period. 

 
In case of a water shortage, the commission may by resolution place any restrictions upon the use of water for the filling or maintenance of water retention pools. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-01, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 07-12-01, 1-2-08) 
Secs. 70-40—70-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Service charges authorized, § 6.15. 

Sec. 70-51. - Water rates. 
As needed, the city commission shall by resolution set the rates for monthly water service charges. 
Charges shall be classified as follows: 
Residential inside the City of Helen. 
Residential outside the City of Helen. 
Commercial inside the City of Helen. 
Commercial outside the City of Helen. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, § 20-112, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 93-12-01, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 96-11-02, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 70-52. - Billing. 
All water bills shall be mailed on the first day of the month and due on or before the 25th day of the same month. If not paid by such date, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and paid by the water user. 
(Code 1987, § 20-113; Ord. No. 93-8-2, § 20-113, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 70-53. - Discontinuance of service. 
If any bill for water is not paid in full, to include arrears, by the fifth day of the month, following the month in which the bill was rendered, then water service shall be discontinued. In no case shall water service be reinstalled until the bill, to include arrears, has been paid in full. 
(Code 1987, § 20-114; Ord. No. 93-8-2, § 20-114, 9-14-93) 
Charter reference— Collection remedies, § 6.18. 
Secs. 70-54—70-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— General authority relative to sewers, § 1.13(10), (24). 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; technical codes, § 34-801. 
State Law reference— Sewage collection and disposal systems authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(6). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city manager or authorized official. 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quality of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste pipe, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building (house) sewer, beginning ten feet outside the building wall. 
Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system, or other point of disposal. 
City means the area within the city limits, or any other area within jurisdiction of the city, as specified by statute, ordinance or other valid authority. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into any watercourse, canal, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the degree of acidity of alkalinity on a scale of 14.0 where a numerical reading of 7.0 is absolutely neutral. Acidity is measured in descending cardinals and alkalinity in ascending cardinals from 7.0. 
Private sewage disposal system means an individual septic system as approved by the city and the county health department. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, and with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer located on a public right-of-way or easement and directly controlled by public authority. A public sewer is presumed to terminate at the customer's property line or at the edge of the right-of-way or easement or at the highest elevation of the stacked vertical sewer. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries sewage and excludes stormwater, surface water and groundwater. 
Sewage means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
Sewage treatment facility means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewers means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sludge means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration proposed during normal operation. 
Storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Y sewer shall mean any termination of a public sewer where such vertical stack has two openings. 
(Code 1987, § 19-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-102. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1987, § 19-110) 
Sec. 70-103. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The administrator and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The administrator and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved and general law. 
(Code 1987, § 19-109) 
Sec. 70-104. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any septic tank, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage unless approved by the city, and the county health department. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, shall be required at the owner's expense to install in accordance with the plumbing code of the city suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of the dwelling, and the property can be served by gravity flow. 
(Code 1987, § 19-102) 
Sec. 70-105. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Before the commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain approval from the administration and the county health department. Construction of private sewage disposal systems shall be in accordance with rules and regulations for individual sewage disposal systems, as defined by the state department of public health, as effective at the time of application pursuant to this subsection. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the administrator and the county health department. The county health department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and the applicant for the permit shall notify the county health department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made no later than five working days after receipt of the notice by the county health department. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all regulations of the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the lot size and soil conditions do not meet the requirements of the county health department. No such system shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain in good working order private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available, within 200 feet, of a dwelling served by a private sewage disposal system, the dwelling owner, at his expense, shall have a direct connection made to the public sewer in compliance with this article within 90 days of notice to the owner by the city of the availability of such service, and any private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and filled with bank run gravel or soil, unless the administrator approves the private sewage disposal system for grease trap purposes. 
(Code 1987, § 19-103) 
Sec. 70-106. - Sewer rates. 
As needed, the city commission shall by resolution set the rates for monthly sewer service charges. 
Charges shall be classified as follows: 
Residential inside the City of Helen. 
Residential outside the City of Helen. 
Commercial inside the City of Helen. 
Commercial outside the City of Helen. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 19-106, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 93-12-01, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 96-06-01, 7-15-96) 
Charter reference— Fees authorized, § 6.15. 
Sec. 70-107. - Sewer fees. 
(a)  Residential tap-on fees. The fee for a single-family residential (house only) sewer hookup is $500.00. There shall be a limit of no more than two units on each single connection to a Y stub (one family unit per opening on the end of the Y stub). 
(b)  Commercial and multifamily tap-on fees. Tap-on fees shall be based on the type of proposed business as provided below. If there is a change in the type of business at a later date, the sewer tap-on fee may be increased. All sewer tap-on fees are to be paid when a development or building plan is approved. 

 
(c)  All sewer tap-on fees are to be paid when a development or building plan is approved. 
(Code 1987, § 19-107; Ord. No. 06-05-02, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 70-108. - Protection of facilities from damage. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage collection and treatment facilities. 
(Code 1987, § 19-108) 
Secs. 70-109—70-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 70-126. - Permit. 
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. Permits shall only be granted to persons authorized by the plumbing code to do such work. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(1)) 
Sec. 70-127. - Indemnification of city. 
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(2)) 
Sec. 70-128. - Separate sewer for each building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, upon written authorization by the city manager. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(3)) 
Sec. 70-129. - Use of old sewers in new buildings. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the water and sewer superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(4)) 
Sec. 70-130. - Construction specifications. 
The side, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, pointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code of the city, or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof the materials and procedures set forth in latest approved specifications of the ASTM and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such specifications are available in the administrator's office. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(5)) 
Sec. 70-131. - Lifting permitted to gain flow. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(6)) 
Sec. 70-132. - Connections to public sewer. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code of the city or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any connection to a Y part of a public sewer shall be not less than four inches in diameter. No more than one family unit may connect to either side of a Y part of a public sewer. The administrator shall have caused to be made any projections of flows from multifamily or commercial establishments in making decisions on the number of separate connections that shall be required to the public sewer from any single building in the event of either new construction or alterations to the use of any building. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the administrator before installation. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(7)) 
Sec. 70-133. - Inspection required; supervision of connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the administrator when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the administrator or appointed designee. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(8)) 
Sec. 70-134. - Excavations; barricades and lights, restoration. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard in accordance with the state manual on uniform traffic control devices, and as prescribed by the city manager. No streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property shall be excavated or disturbed until a permit for this has been obtained. Restoration of public property shall be in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(9)) 
Sec. 70-135. - Connections from inflow sources prohibited. 
There shall be no new connections to the sanitary sewer system from inflow sources. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(10)) 
Sec. 70-136. - Compliance with O.S.H.A. requirements. 
All applicable and pertinent requirements made by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration shall be met prior to and during installation. 
(Code 1987, § 19-104(11)) 
Secs. 70-137—70-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 70-151. - Discharges to storm sewer, natural outlets. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial waste waters to any sanitary sewer. Absolutely no sanitary waste water shall be discharged into the storm sewer system under any circumstances. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the administrator. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the administrator, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(1), (2)) 
Sec. 70-152. - Prohibited wastes. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, other petroleum products, or any other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity as to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or to create any hazard in the receiving water of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood, metal shavings, metal, glass, rags, plastics, wood, hair, fleshings, unground garbage, whole blood, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, waxed paper products, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow of sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage collection and disposal facilities. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the water pollution control division. 
(5)  All ground paper products unless such products have been processed through grinders approved by the administrator and the county health department, and are within applicable standards set forth by the state. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(3)) 
Sec. 70-153. - Restricted substances. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the administrator that such wastes can damage either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property; or can constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the administrator will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment facilities exceeds the limits established by the administrator for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the administrator as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the administrator in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride, and sodium sulfate, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load of the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting sludges. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 300 parts/million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis, or for any sample period having a five-day BOD in excess of five times the average influent value for the sewage treatment plant during the previous calendar year. 
(11)  Any waters or wastes having a suspended solids content in excess of 300 parts per million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis or having a suspended solids content for any sample period greater than five times the average influent value for the sewage treatment facility. 
(12)  Any of the following hazardous and obnoxious gases shall be limited to a maximum concentration of 1.0 part per million: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide. 
(13)  Any toxic materials and heavy metals shall be limited to the following concentrations: 

 
(14)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(4)) 
Sec. 70-154. - Right of city to reject wastes, require pretreatment, etc. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 70-153, and which in the judgment of the administrator may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the administrator may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to a condition acceptable for discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by standard sewer service charges. 
If the administrator permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the administrator and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(5)) 
Sec. 70-155. - Interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the administrator and/or the county health department they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, and/or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection and shall be regularly maintained. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(6)) 
Sec. 70-156. - Maintenance of treatment facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(7)) 
Sec. 70-157. - Control manhole, meters, etc. 
When required by the administrator, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the city manager. The manhole shall be installed and maintained by the owner at his expense, so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(8)) 
Sec. 70-158. - Measurements, tests, analyses. 
All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no special control manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(9)) 
Sec. 70-159. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. Such agreements shall be subject to approval by the commission. 
(Code 1987, § 19-105(10)) 
Secs. 70-160—70-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-09-02, adopted October 15, 1996, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. II, Div. 3, §§ 70-130—70-134. In order to prevent duplication of division and section numbers, the editor has redesignated said provisions as Art. II, Div. 4, §§ 70-171—70—175. 

Sec. 70-171. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this drought contingency plan is to establish hierarchy of water use priorities and procedures for allocating limited water supplies so that, in the event of a shortage of water, the city can insure that the water available is put to the highest priority use. 
(b)  Conditions that put priority water use system into effect. The governing authority of Helen, using the drought condition indicators listed in this plan as a guide, will put the priority water use system into effect when it is reasonably believed that such action is necessary to protect the public welfare. The conservation stage adopted and the specific conservation measures mandated will be based on the judgement of the governing authority of Helen. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-02, 10-15-96) 
Sec. 70-172. - Water conservation stages. 
(a)  Stage I—Minor drought. Stage I will be implemented in response to the onset of relatively minor drought conditions. The general goal will be to improve water use habits and to encourage the use of water-saving devices. The consumption reduction goal of this water conservation stage is ten percent. 
(1)  Drought condition indicators. 
a.  Water demand for more than one day exceeding 80 percent of the permitted maximum daily water withdrawal rate. 
b.  Water demand for more than one week exceeding the permitted monthly average water withdrawal rate. 
(2)  Conservation measures. 
a.  Expand the public education program to explain the drought condition, conservation measures to be implemented, and the other water conservation stages. 
b.  Encourage voluntary installation of retrofit kits for water-saving devices in existing structures. 
c.  Request voluntary reduction of all water use. 
d.  Cease water line flushing and hydrant testing. 
e.  Limit recreational water use, including but not limited to the operation of water parks, the operation of water slides, non-domestic uses in miniature golf courses, and the filling of swimming pools and decorative fountains, through the use of an odd/even day usage based on addresses. 
f.  Limit outdoor water use including non-commercial car washing, garden irrigation, and landscape watering through the use of an odd/even day usage based on addresses. 
(b)  Stage II—Moderate drought. Stage II will be implemented in response to the onset of moderate drought conditions. The general goal will be to restrict water use for non-essential purposes. The consumption reduction goal of this water conservation stage is 25 percent. 
(1)  Drought condition indicators. 
a.  Water demand for more than one day exceeding 90 percent of the permitted maximum daily water withdrawal rate. 
b.  Water demand for more than two weeks exceeding the permitted monthly average water withdrawal rate. 
(2)  Conservation measures. 
a.  Continue all Stage I conservation measures. 
b.  Prohibit recreational water use. 
c.  Prohibit outdoor water use including non-commercial car washing, garden irrigation, and landscape watering. 
d.  Restrict the service of water in restaurants to customers requesting it. 
(c)  Stage III—Severe drought. Stage III will be implemented in response to the onset of a severe drought. The general goal will be to severely limit non-essential water use to maintain sufficient water for essential uses. The consumption reduction goal of this water conservation stage is 50 percent. 
(1)  Drought condition indicators. 
a.  Water demand at or exceeding the permitted maximum daily water withdrawal rate. 
b.  Monthly average water demand for any month exceeding the permitted monthly average water withdrawal rate. 
c.  Flow immediately downstream of Unicoi Lake of less than 5.90 cfs (cubic feet per second). 
d.  Water level in Unicoi Lake below the normal pool elevation of 1619.6 feet msl (mean sea level). 
(2)  Conservation measures. 
a.  Continue all Stage II conservation measures. 
b.  Restrict industrial water use, including commercial car washing and laundries, to limited days and/or hours of operation. 
c.  Prohibit industrial water use, including commercial car washing and laundries. 
d.  Prohibit all public water use if not required for health or safety. 
e.  Prohibit the use of water-cooled air conditioners without recirculation, except when health and safety are adversely affected. 
(d)  Stage IV—Water emergency. A water emergency will be deemed to exist when there is doubt on the part of city officials that water can be provided for essential health and safety needs without intervention by the governing authority. 
(1)  Water emergency indicators. 
a.  Water system pressure below 20 psi (pounds per square inch) other than a temporary pressure drop associated with fire flow, a line break, or similar situation. 
b.  Distribution tanks less than quarter full in conjunction with a lack of ability to provide treated water at a rate equal to demand. 
c.  Failure of one or more major elements of the water system that is expected to lead to a loss of water service in a widespread area prior to repairs being made. 
(2)  Conservation measures. 
a.  Implement and/or continue all Stage III conservation measures. 
b.  Prohibit any water use not required for health or safety. 
c.  Terminate service to selected portion of the system if it can be done without jeopardizing health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-02, 10-15-96) 
Sec. 70-173. - Enforcement. 
All violations of mandatory or emergency restrictions shall result in the suspension of water service to the violator for the duration of the period of restrictions and such other sanctions as may be enacted by the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-02, 10-15-96) 
Sec. 70-174. - Low flow protection. 
(a)  The city shall not withdraw water from Unicoi Lake if such withdrawal results in a flow immediately downstream of the dam of less than 5.90 cfs. 
(b)  If the flow entering Unicoi Lake is less than the 7Q10 flow (the minimum average flow for seven consecutive days with a ten-year recurrence interval), then the city shall allow the flow entering Unicoi Lake to pass through the lake. 
(c)  Prior to the beginning of withdrawal of water from Unicoi Lake, the city shall establish or shall cause to be established two staff gauges or other flow monitoring devices, as approved by EPD. One shall be located immediately upstream of Unicoi Lake and the other shall be located immediately downstream of Unicoi Lake. The city shall monitor these flow-measuring devices at least daily as an aid in the protection of low flows. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-02, 10-15-96) 
Sec. 70-175. - Water storage for critical drought and emergency conditions. 
The city will maintain its existing water wells for use during drought and emergency conditions. The combined yield of the existing wells is 0.40 mgd (million gallons per day). 
(Ord. No. 96-09-02, 10-15-96) 
Secs. 70-176—70-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 70-180. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all new construction of wells which are the supply sources for the city water systems and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, 3-20-07) 
Sec. 70-181. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following words phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Hazardous waste or material. Any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill. A disposal site where solid waste including putrescible waste, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, 3-20-07) 
Sec. 70-182. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, 3-20-07) 
Sec. 70-183. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, 3-20-07) 
Sec. 70-184. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a permitted under section 70-183 of this article: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving building permitted under section 70-183 of this article. 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites. 
(6)  Storm water infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks. 
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, 3-20-07) 
Sec. 70-185. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to a non-conforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, 3-20-07) 
Secs. 70-186—70-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 70-201. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-202. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-203. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: [6] 
City means the City of Helen, Georgia. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— Other than "city" and "personal identifying information," definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2. 

Sec. 70-204. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, and residential solid waste. 
(c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(d)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(e)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-205. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique to that account. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-206. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(c)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-207. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet (in the event that such technology should subsequently become available and utilized by the city) are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website (in the event that such technology shall subsequently become available and be utilized by the city) shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-208. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
1.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's death master file. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-209. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to city manager. If, in his or her discretion, the city manager deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager, in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by city manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within seventy two hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to city manager. If, in his or her discretion, the city manager deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the city manager may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-210. - Updating the program. 
The city commission shall periodically review and, as deemed necessary by the commission, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city commission shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-211. - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city commission for consideration by the commission. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city manager will determine the appropriate training for all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city manager his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-212. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Secs. 70-213—70-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 70-221. - Short title. 
Treatment of Address Discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-222. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-223. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Helen, Georgia. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. See 16 CFR § 681.1(b). 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-224. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-225. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 70-226. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 08-10-01, § 2, 10-21-08) 
APPENDIX A - PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-07-04, adopted August 16, 2005, amended the Code by removing App. A, §§ 1.100—1.700, 2.101—2.114, 3.100—3.120, 4.100—4.301, 5.100—5.600, 6.100—6.113, 7.100—7.500, 8.100—8.300, 11.100—11.103, 12.100—12.103, 13.100—13.500, 14.100—14.103, 15.100—15.1200, 16.100—16.300, and 17.100—17.300. Former App. A contained the personnel polices and procedures of the city, as adopted by reference by Ord. No. 93-4-1 on May 11, 1993, and subsequently amended. The personnel polices and procedures will be maintained by the city clerk as a separate volume, in both printed and electronic media form, and available for review and inspection by the public at all times during business operation at city hall. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1987 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1987 Code, which code was current through August 11, 1987, which are included herein. Sections of the 1987 Code, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1987 Code, which code was current through August 11, 1987, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1987 Code. Ordinances adopted since August 11, 1987, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 