CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BUTLER, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2014 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS of the CITY OF BUTLER, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ William B. Whitley 
Mayor 
____________ 
Austin E. Guinn, Mayor Pro-Tem 
Deborah Williams 
Amanzie Jenkins 
Glenn Harris 
Charles M. Gassett (Chas) 
City Council 
____________ 
Mincey & Mincey 
City Attorneys 
____________ 
Vicki P. Wainwright 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Butler, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the prior Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-002, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-001. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-001 and 6-002 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-001.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel Walker, Code Attorney, and Nicole C. Fluitt, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Vicki Wainwright, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Butler, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Butler, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Butler, Georgia. 2014. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Content of Act/Resolution 
LOCAL AND SPECIAL ACTS AND RESOLUTIONS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF GEORGIA 1988 
1988 Vol. 2—Page: 4202 
Sequential Number: 148 
Short Title: CITY OF BUTLER — NEW CHARTER. 
Law Number: No. 986 
Origin: (House Bill No. 1810). 
Type: AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Butler; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for city officials and other personnel; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for taxation and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Act No. 987, originating as House Bill No. 1810 in the 1988 legislative session, provided a new charter for the City of Butler. Sections listed below are from the original act, unless a section-specific editor's note indicates later amendment or creation. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The City of Butler in Taylor County is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Butler." References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Butler. The city shall have perpetual existence. The city may contract and be contracted with, may bring and defend actions, and plead and be impleaded in all courts of law and equity and in all actions whatsoever and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
Section 1.02. - City boundaries. 
The corporate limits of the City of Butler shall extend one mile in every direction from the Taylor County courthouse in said city, thereby forming a circle, the center of which is the Taylor County courthouse. 
Section 1.03. - Corporate powers. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the mayor and council, shall include the power: 
(1)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; 
(3)  To appropriate and borrow money to provide for payment of the debts of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any municipal purpose or for matters of national or state interest; and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with applicable state law governing bonds issued by municipalities; 
(4)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city; 
(5)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the mayor and council under applicable state law; 
(6)  To acquire, construct, operate, distribute, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a waterworks system, sewerage system, a natural gas system, and a community antenna television system, both inside and outside the corporate limits, subject to the provisions of applicable general law. For water and gas furnished and for all sewerage and sanitary service rendered said city may prescribe the charges, rates, fares, fees, regulations, and standards and conditions of service to be provided and shall have a lien against any property of the persons served, said lien to be enforceable in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes; 
(7)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services including but not limited to those stated in this section, not to exceed periods of 20 years. The mayor and council may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Public Service Commission; 
(8)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, education, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under applicable state law; 
(9)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(10)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse; and to exercise all necessary and proper means to keep the city limits free from garbage, trash, and filth. Charges or fees may be imposed to cover the costs of such services which, if unpaid, shall constitute a debt which shall be subject to a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes; 
(11)  To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience, or general welfare of inhabitants of the city; 
(12)  To define a nuisance in the city and to provide for its abatement. The judge of the municipal court shall have jurisdiction of all nuisance abatement proceedings in the city. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this state or any valid ordinance of the city to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expense upon his failure or refusal to abate the same within ten days after written notice and hearing from the city to do so; 
(13)  To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the public streets of the city as provided by ordinances; or the mayor and council may provide for the commitment of city prisoners to any county work camp or jail or to any other governmental agency, by agreement with the appropriate county officers or any other government agencies; 
(15)  To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition, by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when such animals or fowl are not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(16)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(17)  To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(18)  To provide that upon the conviction of the violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation, or order, any person shall be punished as provided by ordinance but not exceeding the limitations prescribed by this charter; 
(19)  To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising said city, its advantages, and resources so as to bring new capital, commercial, manufacturing, and other enterprises into the city; and also to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for the support of public hospitals and libraries; 
(20)  To regulate and control public streets, public alleys, and ways; and in the discretion of the mayor and council by ordinance to alter, open, or close public streets and public alleys and ways; and 
(21)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter, as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under the Constitution or general laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to cities under the Constitution or applicable state law. 
Section 1.04. - Ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in said city, not inconsistent with this charter, are declared valid and of force until amended or repealed by the mayor and council of said city. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY GOVERNMENT 

Section 2.01. - Establishment of city government. 
The corporate governmental powers of the City of Butler shall be vested in a mayor and five councilmen to be known as the "Mayor and Council of the City of Butler." The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large and the councilmen shall be elected by the qualified voters of their respective districts and the mayor and council shall exercise their powers in such manner as prescribed by this charter, the Constitution and applicable general laws of the State of Georgia or, if not so prescribed, in such manner as prescribed by the duly established ordinances of the City of Butler. 
Section 2.02. - Qualification for mayor and councilmen. 
To be eligible for the office of mayor or councilman, elected or appointed, a person must be at least 21 years of age; must meet the requirements of a qualified elector for members of the General Assembly, as prescribed by state law; must be a registered voter in the City of Butler; and must be a bona fide resident of the City of Butler and, if a councilman, of the election district from which he seeks election for one year next preceding the time and holding of the election in which he offers as a candidate. 
Section 2.03. - Elections. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue to serve until the special election provided for in subsection (d) of this section is held and their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  For the purpose of electing the five members of the city council, the City of Butler shall consist of two council districts. District 1 shall contain two numbered posts, designated as Post 1 and Post 2, and District 2 shall contain three numbered posts, designated as Post 3, Post 4, and Post 5. The election districts shall be as follows: 
Council District: 1 
TAYLOR COUNTY 
VTD: 0001 1 (Part) 
Tract: 9503. 
Block(s): 106A, 112A, 117A, 118, 119, 120A, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 142, 143, 201B, 223A, 228A, 229A, 230, 231, 232A, 233, 234, 235, 245, 246A, 250A, 256, 257 
Council District: 2 
TAYLOR COUNTY 
VTD: 0001 1 (Part) 
Tract: 9503. 
Block(s): 112B, 125, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 242, 251A, 252, 253, 254, 255, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 331, 333 
VTD: 0006 6 (Part) 
Tract: 9503. 
Block(s): 131A, 132, 241, 243, 244, 258, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 332, 334, 335, 336A, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344 
(c)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  The terms 'Tract,' 'Block,' and 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The term 'Precinct' is synonymous with the term 'voting precinct' and means a geographical area designated by Article 7 of Chapter 2 or 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., within which all electors vote at one polling place; 
(3)  Precinct names and designations following VTD designations are included for convenience only; and in the event the description of any council district contains a conflict between the geographical boundaries of any VTD and the boundaries of the following named precinct, the geographical boundary of the VTD as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia shall control; 
(4)  Any part of the City of Butler which is not included in any council district described in this section shall be included within that council district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; and 
(5)  Any part of the City of Butler which is described in this section as being included in a particular council district shall nevertheless not be included within such council district if such part is not contiguous to such council district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that council district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Each person seeking election to the council shall designate the post for which such person seeks election. The person who receives a majority of the votes cast for mayor shall be elected mayor and the person who receives a majority of the votes cast for each post shall be elected to that post. Persons so elected shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast for an office, a run-off election shall be held in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Municipal Election Code.' 
(e)  A special municipal election shall be held in 1992 for the purpose of electing a mayor and five councilmembers. The special election shall be held, unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, as soon as is permissible and reasonably practicable under the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, and under the general laws of this state. 
(1)  At the special election provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection, members of the council representing Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 shall be elected for an initial term expiring December 31, 1995, and until their successors are elected and qualified, and the mayor and members of the council representing Post 4 and Post 5 shall be elected for an initial term expiring December 31, 1993, and until their successors are elected and qualified. The mayor and members of the council elected at the special election provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall take office at the first council meeting following their election. 
(2)  Thereafter, the mayor and all members of the council shall be elected for terms of office of four years at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of their terms of office. 
Editor's note— An Act providing for a new charter for the City of Butler, approved March 24, 1988 (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4202), is amended by striking Section 2.03 in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the above information from the Law No. 806 (Ga. L. 1992, p. 5585), originating as House Bill No. 1800. 
Section 2.04. - Term of office. 
The terms of office for mayor and councilmen shall begin at the first regular council meeting in January next succeeding the election and shall continue until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Section 2.05. - Council. 
The council shall meet in special sessions on written call of the mayor or mayor pro tempore and three councilmen and when notice of which has been served on the other members personally or left at their residences at least 12 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice of a special meeting shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is convened. Only the business stated in the written call may be transacted at a special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members of the city council. A majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum. The city council may provide by ordinance for punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the council. 
Section 2.06. - Mayor as presiding officer. 
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the city council; shall have a vote only in the case of a tie vote by the council; shall have veto powers in which case the mayor shall have five days after meetings of the council in which to file in writing with the clerk his dissent, but the council may at the same meeting or any subsequent meeting within 31 days, pass any such ordinance, order, or resolution, notwithstanding the veto, by a vote of two-thirds of the total number of councilmen, to be taken in ayes and nays and entered upon the minutes; shall be ceremonial head of the city; shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage; may obtain short-term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the council to do so; and shall perform such other duties as may be imposed by this charter and duly adopted ordinances. 
Section 2.07. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The council at the first regular meeting, and after the newly elected councilmen have taken office following each regular election, shall elect from its membership a mayor pro tempore for a term of one year. Upon the city council's failure to elect a mayor pro tempore at its first meeting in January of each year, the incumbent councilman who received the highest number of votes, when last elected, shall be declared mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the mayor during his absence from the city, his sickness, his disqualification, or until the replacement of the mayor by a special election upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of mayor. 
Section 2.08. - Vacancy in office of mayor or councilman. 
(a)  A vacancy shall exist if the mayor or a councilman resigns, dies, moves his residence from the city, or is absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the governing authority, except if granted a leave of absence by the city council which leave shall be entered upon the minute books; or if he is adjudged incompetent or is convicted of malfeasance in office or of a felony or of any violation of election laws. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall appoint a qualified person to fill any such vacancy in the office of councilman, said person to hold office until the next regular election. 
(c)  At no time shall there be more than one councilman so appointed holding office; and if a vacancy occurs on the city council with one member already so appointed on the council, a special election conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. shall be held within a period of 45 days after the office becomes vacant pursuant to a call or a special election as provided by this charter; however, if a special election is called pursuant to this charter, the vacancy previously filled by appointment and the second vacancy shall both be filled for the unexpired terms at such regular election. 
(d)  In the event a vacancy shall occur in the office of the mayor, a special election shall be called and held in the manner prescribed by Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 2.09. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and council may determine the salary of the mayor and councilmen by ordinance; provided, however, no ordinance increasing the salary of the mayor or councilmen shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of mayor and councilmen elected at the next regular election. Each councilman and the mayor, when authorized by the mayor and council and upon presentation of itemized vouchers, shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Section 2.10. - City clerk. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk who shall be ex officio treasurer. He shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the council; attending meetings of the mayor and council and keeping a journal of its proceedings at such meetings, including the names of members present and absent, the vote of each member on each question, each motion considered and the text of each resolution or ordinance considered, and preparing and certifying copies of official records in his office, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinances; and performing such other duties as may be required by the council or mayor. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall require the clerk-treasurer, before entering upon discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in an amount to be decided by the mayor and council but not less than $5,000.00, said bond payable to the City of Butler for the faithful performance of his duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriation, or unlawful expenditures. Said surety bond shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and approved by the mayor and council and the premium thereon shall be paid by the city. 
Section 2.11. - City legislation. 
Any action of the mayor and council having a regulatory or penal effect or required to be done by ordinance under this charter shall be done only by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be in written form before being voted upon. A majority vote of those present shall be required to pass any resolution or ordinance. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall copy them into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose; and the city clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL 

Section 3.01. - Organization. 
The city government shall continue as presently organized, unless and until otherwise provided by ordinance. The mayor and council, by such ordinances, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city; may provide that the same person shall fill a number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
Section 3.02. - Administrative duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the executive head of the city government, responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, and franchises in the city. He may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance not inconsistent with this charter. 
Section 3.03. - City attorney. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as provided by the mayor and the city council. 
Section 3.04. - Oath of office. 
Before a person takes any office in the city government, he shall take before an officer of the state authorized to administer oaths the following such oath or affirmation: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the State of Georgia; that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the charter and ordinances of the City of Butler; and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ____________ . So help me God." 
Section 3.05. - Political activity prohibited. 
No officer or employee of the city other than the mayor and councilmen shall continue in the employment of the city after becoming a candidate for nomination of election to any city office. 
Section 3.06. - City planning and renewal. 
The mayor and council may create and establish a planning commission pursuant to the provisions of general law as they now exist or as they may hereinafter be amended. 
ARTICLE IV. - FISCAL ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of city government shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June of each year, but a different fiscal year may be established by ordinance for the entire city government or for any utility thereof. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for fiscal accounting and reporting of every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 4.02. - Mayor to submit annual budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the mayor and council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year, showing separately for the general funds, each utility, and each other fund the following: 
(1)  The revenue and expenditures during the preceding fiscal year; 
(2)  Appropriations and estimated revenue and expenditures for the current fiscal year; 
(3)  Estimated revenue and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year; 
(4)  A comparative statement of the assets, liabilities, reserves, and surplus at the end of the preceding fiscal year and estimated assets, liabilities, reserves, and surplus at the end of the current fiscal year; and 
(5)  Such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the mayor and council. 
Section 4.03. - Action by council on budget. 
Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the council shall adopt an appropriate ordinance, based on the mayor's budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable. Appropriations need not be in more detail than a lump sum for each department, office, and agency unless otherwise directed by the council. The council shall not make any appropriations in excess of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property, or lives, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, provided the council unanimously agrees that there is such an emergency. If conditions prevent the adoption of an appropriations ordinance before the beginning of the new fiscal year, the appropriations for the last fiscal year shall become the appropriations for the new fiscal year, subject to amendment as provided by ordinance specifically passed for such purpose. 
Section 4.04. - Additional appropriations. 
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus. 
Section 4.05. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the general fund as unappropriated surplus or reserves. 
Section 4.06. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing each improvement. The council shall have the power to accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening lives, health, or property of inhabitants. Such capital improvements budget may be revised and extended each year with regard to the capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(b)  Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the council shall adopt an appropriate ordinance based on the proposed capital improvements budget, with such modification as the council considers necessary or desirable. No appropriations provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority vote of the council. 
Section 4.07. - Annual audit. 
The mayor and council shall employ a certified public accountant to make an annual audit of all financial books and records of the city. The accountant shall file his report which shall be furnished or made available to the mayor and every councilman. 
Section 4.08. - Publication of financial statement. 
As soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year, but within six months after the close thereof, the mayor and council shall cause to be published in a local newspaper a statement of financial condition which shall contain a statement of revenues and expenditures showing all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year. Such statement of financial condition shall be prepared so as to fairly represent the general financial condition of the city, as of the close of the preceding fiscal year. 
Section 4.09. - Property taxes. 
(a)  All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January 1 in each year, shall be returned for taxes on or before April 1 in each year. 
(b)  If such return is not made by the property owner, the assessing authority, which can be either the board of assessors of the city, which shall consist of two councilmen and a property owner, the county assessing authority, or such other authority as the council by ordinance may designate, shall assess such property for taxation from the best information the authority can obtain as to the property's value for the year in default and notify said owner of the valuation, which shall be final, unless the owner shall claim that it is excessive, said claim to be asserted as provided by general law. 
(c)  Any assessment made by the assessing authority, as designated by the mayor and city council, shall, unless otherwise provided by this charter, be subject to arbitration. The arbitration procedures for determining the correctness or validity of any assessment shall be as provided by state law. Taxes shall be due on October 1 of each year and shall become past due or delinquent if not paid on or before December 20 of each year. The mayor and city council by ordinance may provide for an independent city assessment as provided by Georgia law or may elect to use the county assessment for the year in which city taxes are to be levied. If an independent city assessment is made, a board of equalization consisting of three resident property owners of the city appointed by the mayor and city council, with compensation fixed by ordinance, shall hear appeals of taxpayers taken within ten days after the city clerk has sent a notice, by regular mail, or appeals of a new or increased assessment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, appeals involving city property assessments may be taken as now or as may hereinafter be provided by general law. 
Section 4.10. - Tax levy. 
The mayor and council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, and for any other public purpose in addition to a sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations. 
Section 4.11. - Tax due date and tax bills. 
(a)  The due date of property taxes shall be October 1 of each year. The city shall send tax bills to taxpayers, showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties. Failure to send tax bills shall not, however, invalidate any tax. Property taxes shall become delinquent if not paid on or before December 20 of each year, which time may be changed by ordinance, and at which time a penalty of 10 percent in addition to fi. fa. charge shall be added; and, thereafter, such taxes shall be subject to interest at the rate of 9 percent per annum from the due date until paid. On and after the date when such taxes become delinquent, the tax records of the city shall have the force and effect of a judgment of a court of record. 
(b)  The city shall have the right, power, and authority to provide by ordinance for the return of all real and personal property for taxation; to provide for the compelling of such return and to provide penalties for failure to do so; to double tax defaulters, after due notice and hearing to be prescribed by the mayor and council, for the current or any previous year, so long as not in conflict with any limitation prescribed by laws of Georgia; to provide the time or times at which said returns are due; and to provide the time or times when said taxes shall be due and payable. 
Section 4.12. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the same procedure provided by laws governing execution of such process from the superior court or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state, or county taxes. 
Section 4.13. - Transfer of executions. 
The clerk of the City of Butler shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi. fa. or execution issued for street, sewer, or any other assessment in the same manner, upon the same terms, and to the same effect and thereby vest the purchaser or transferee with the same rights as in cases of sales or transfers of fi. fas. as now provided by law; and in all sales of property hereafter made under execution in behalf of the city for the collection of street, sewer, and other assessments, the owner or owners, as the case may be, are authorized to redeem same within the same time and on compliance with the same terms and payment of the same premium, interest, and costs as in cases of redemption of property where sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fa. as the same now exists or as may from time to time be provided by law. 
Section 4.14. - Special assessments. 
The mayor and council may assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates and shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of 10 percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of 9 percent per annum from due date until paid. A lien for such amounts plus fi. fa. charges, interest, and penalties shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes; and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided in this charter for city property taxes. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Section 5.01. - Regular elections. 
The regular election for mayor and city council, or for councilmembers, as the case may be, shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. Officials elected at any regular election shall take office at the first regular council meeting following such election. 
Editor's note— An Act providing for a new charter for the City of Butler, approved March 24, 1988 (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4202), is amended by striking Section 5.01 in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the above information from the Law No. 806 (Ga. L. 1992, p. 5585), originating as House Bill No. 1800. 
Section 5.02. - Qualifications of candidates. 
Any person desiring to become a candidate in any regular election shall file written notice of his candidacy with the municipal election superintendent not less than 15 nor more than 45 days, as prescribed by ordinance, prior to the date fixed for the holding of any such election. Any person desiring to become a candidate in any special election shall file written notice of his candidacy with the municipal election superintendent not less than ten days nor more than 30 days, as prescribed by ordinance, prior to the date fixed for holding any such election. 
Section 5.03. - Nomination petitions. 
Nominations of candidates for public office may also be made by nomination petitions, in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." The mayor and council may provide by ordinance all rules and requirements regulating the use and validity of such petitions. In order for the name of any candidate to be placed on a ballot by nomination petition, said petition must be signed by a sufficient number of valid signatures equal to 10 percent of the number of qualified voters registered to vote in the last general election in the city. 
Section 5.04. - Qualifications of electors. 
Any person meeting the qualifications of an elector for members of the General Assembly under state law who has been a bona fide resident of the City of Butler for 90 days next preceding the election in which he desires to vote, or for such period as may otherwise be provided by Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," shall be qualified to register as an elector in any city election held in this charter. 
Section 5.05. - Applicability of general laws. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the election of all officials of the City of Butler, where provision is made for election by the qualified voters thereof, shall be held in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." Whenever any time period established by the "Georgia Municipal Election Code" is altered so as to change or supersede any time period provided in this charter, it shall be considered that the time periods provided in this charter will be correspondingly changed so as to avoid any conflict between this charter and the general law of the state. 
Section 5.06. - Time of election. 
The polls shall be opened from 7:00 A.M. local time to 7:00 P.M. local time. 
Section 5.07. - Place of elections. 
The polling place or places for holding elections shall be prescribed by the mayor and council and shall be published in the election notice as required by law; provided, however, any change in a polling place shall be effected as provided by Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.08. - Voter registration. 
In all elections held in the City of Butler, whether special or general primaries or elections, the voters, in addition to the qualifications already prescribed, shall be registered as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 5.09. - Rules. 
The mayor and council are hereby authorized to enact by ordinance such additional rules consistent with this charter and general laws as are deemed necessary for the conduct of elections. 
Section 5.10. - Call for election. 
Any call for an election which is required to be made by the laws of this state shall be made by the municipal election superintendent. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 6.01. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City of Butler," which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance; to punish any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the City of Butler constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof; to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations and to prescribe the conditions of forfeiture of the same; and to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary and proper to the conduct of said court. The presiding officer of such court shall be known as the judge. Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. The court shall sit at a place designated by the mayor and council. 
Section 6.02. - Judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge of the municipal court unless he or she has attained the age of 21 years. The judge shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve at the discretion of the mayor and council. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the mayor and council. Nothing contained in this charter shall disqualify the mayor or any councilmember from serving as judge or judge pro tempore. 
(b)  The judge pro tempore shall serve in the absence of the judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, and shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his office, the judge or the judge pro tempore shall take an oath, before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that he will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. This oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the meeting of the mayor and council. 
Editor's note— An Act providing for a new charter for the City of Butler, approved March 24, 1988 (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4202), is amended by striking subsection (a) of Section 6.02 in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the above information from the Law No. 806 (Ga. L. 1992, p. 5585), originating as House Bill No. 1800. 
Section 6.03. - Jurisdiction. 
The judge shall have power to impose fines, costs, and forfeitures for the violation of any law or ordinance of the City of Butler passed in accordance with this charter, for each offense, in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00, to imprison offenders for a period of not more than 60 days, or to labor on the roads and streets or other public works of said city for not more than 60 days, and said judge shall have the power and authority to impose any one or more of these punishments when he shall find that the facts of the case so justify. Said judge shall not have the authority to inflict a greater punishment for contempt than to impose a fine of $200.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 20 days, or any combination of the two. He shall be to all intents and purposes a magistrate so far as to enable him to issue warrants for offenses committed within the limits of the City of Butler, which warrants may be executed by any officer of said city and to commit the offenders to jail or admit them to bail in bailable cases for their appearance at the next term of a court of competent jurisdiction. The municipal court shall also have concurrent jurisdiction with that of magistrates over offenses against the criminal cases of the state committed within the corporate limits. Except as may be otherwise specified, the judge is vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers as to the entire area within the corporate limits of the City of Butler. The municipal court is specifically vested with all jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area within the corporate limits granted by state laws generally to municipal courts and particularly such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. Said judge is authorized to administer oaths. 
Editor's note— An Act providing for a new charter for the City of Butler, approved March 24, 1988 (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4202), is amended by striking Section 6.03 in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the above information from the Law No. 806 (Ga. L. 1992, p. 5585), originating as House Bill No. 1800. 
Section 6.04. - Right of appeal. 
The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Taylor County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the magistrate court; provided, however, any person convicted of an offense shall have ten days to file his appeal. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Section 6.05. - Court costs. 
In all cases in the Municipal Court of the City of Butler, the costs incurred and allowable may be computed under the provisions of the laws of the State of Georgia fixing costs in the magistrate courts of said state, or the mayor and council may establish a schedule of fees to defray the costs of operation; and the city shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the superior court for violations of state law. The mayor and council may also provide a uniform scale of costs of the clerk and police officers of said city and for all services in the arrest and prosecution of offenders in the municipal court and the issuance and collection of tax and other executions and for their collection and payment into the city treasury. The judge is authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses to said municipal court and to issue such other processes as may be necessary to the proper administration of said court. 
Section 6.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the mayor and council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the business of said court; provided, however, that the mayor and council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedures of the operation of the superior courts under the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.01. - Specific repealer. 
(a)  An Act incorporating the City of Butler, approved August 18, 1919 (Ga. L. 1919, p. 849), as amended, is repealed in its entirety, and all amendatory Acts thereto and all prior charters for such city are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
(b)  An Act incorporating the City of Butler, approved April 3, 1972 (Ga. L. 1972, p. 3884), as amended, is repealed in its entirety, and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Section 7.02. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO INTRODUCE LOCAL LEGISLATION 
Notice is given that there will be introduced at the regular 1988 session of the General Assembly of Georgia a bill to provide a new charter for the City of Butler; and for other purposes. 
This 1st day of February, 1988. 
HONORABLE WARD EDWARDS REPRESENTATIVE, 112th DISTRICT 
GEORGIA, FULTON COUNTY 
Personally appeared before me, the undersigned authority, duly authorized to administer oaths, Ward Edwards, who, on oath, deposes and says that he is Representative from the 112th District, and that the attached copy of Notice of Intention to Introduce Local Legislation was published in the Taylor County News which is the official organ of Taylor County, on the following date: February 11, 1988. 
/s/ Ward Edwards Representative, 112th District 
Sworn to and subscribed before me, this 19th day of February, 1988. 
/s/ Connie F. Smith 
Notary Public, Clayton County, Georgia 
My Commission Expires Nov. 21, 1989 
(SEAL) 
Approval Date: Approved March 24, 1988. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-001. - How Code is designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Butler, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code also may be cited as the "Butler City Code." 
(Prior Code, § 1-001) 
Sec. 1-002. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter, as amended, of the City of Butler, Georgia. 
City. The terms "the city" or "this city" means the City of Butler, Georgia. 
Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" means this Code of Ordinances, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; except that the last; except that the last day shall be excluded if it is Sunday. 
Council, city council. The term "the council" or "city council" means the City Council of the City of Butler. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Taylor, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be implied to female and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Joint authority. Whenever a "joint authority" is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Butler" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of the City of Butler, Georgia." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and" and the term "and" may be read as "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner" applied to real estate, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint interest or other fee interest in the whole or a part of such real estate. 
Person. The term "person" includes firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, as well as a natural person. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means an official list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the mayor and council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to include streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city and shall include all parts thereof constituting the designate right-of-way. 
Substantial compliance. A "substantial compliance" with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Prior Code, § 1-002) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-003. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended a mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Prior Code, § 1-003) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-004. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
A.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
B.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, no any suit, prosecution or proceeding for violation of said ordinance pending at the time of the repeal. 
(Prior Code, § 1-004) 
Sec. 1-005. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionally shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 1-005) 
Sec. 1-006. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
A.  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the mayor and council. 
B.  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Butler, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
C.  In the event a new section not heretofore existing is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Butler, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said sections reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
D.  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
(Prior Code, § 1-006) 
Sec. 1-007. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Butler to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 1-007) 
Sec. 1-008. - General penalty; continuing violations; violation as public nuisance. 
A.  Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by an office or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule regulation or order shall be punished by a fine as determined from time to time by ordinance, to imprison offenders for a period of not more than 60 days, or to labor on the roads and streets or other public works of said city for not more than 60 days, and said judge shall have the power and authority to impose any one or more of these punishments when he shall find that the facts of the case so justify. Said judge shall not have the authority to inflict a greater punishment for contempt than to impose a fine as determined from time to time by ordinance or imprisonment not exceeding 20 days, or any combination of the two. All sentences may be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 1-008) 
Sec. 1-009. - Supplementation of Code. 
A.  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code may be prepared on at least an annual basis. A supplement to the Code may include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
B.  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
C.  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
1.  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
2.  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
3.  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers. 
4.  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
5.  Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-010. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
A.  Nothing in the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following in effect at the time of adoption of this Code: 
1.  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
2.  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
3.  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
4.  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded. 
5.  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures for any town officer or town employee. 
6.  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
7.  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
8.  Any appropriation ordinance. 
9.  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
10.  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
11.  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or planning commission, including joint commissions. 
12.  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations. 
13.  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
14.  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
15.  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
16.  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
17.  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
18.  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision. 
19.  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
B.  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-011. - Rates, charges and fees established. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall be considered an amendment to this Code. 
B.  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city Charter, articles II—IV, exhaustively sets out the administrative and governmental structure of the city. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-001. - When council meetings are conducted. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held as determined from time to time in accordance with state law. Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by a majority of the members of the city council, as provided in the Charter, provided that written or verbal notice of said meetings shall be given to each councilmember at least two days in advance unless said notice is waived and consented to by said councilmember. 
(Prior Code, § 3-001) 
Sec. 2-002. - Document copy charges. 
A.  Any person desiring a certified copy of copies of any minutes, resolution, ordinance, court sentence, receipt, document or other record pertaining to the city, or any excerpt from such record, shall pay to the city a fee, as determined from time to time by ordinance, for each such certified copy. 
B.  Said charge shall be paid to the city by the person requesting such copy before the copy shall be released by the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 3-002) 
Sec. 2-003. - Airport manager. 
The county owns the airport thereby releasing the city any direct accountability for this facility. 
(Prior Code, § 3-003) 
Sec. 2-004. - City clerk to be purchasing agent. 
A.  He will supervise the operation of the city office, and in connection with duties as purchasing agent will be responsible for supervising all purchases relating to the operation of all city departments and functions. Upon receipt of purchases requests from the department head, he will thereupon, within authority designated by the mayor and city council, approve purchases requested and issue purchase orders for same. 
B.  He will be responsible for maintaining a proper purchasing system and records. This shall include a receiving copy of the purchase order that must be signed by the department head or his agent receiving such items of purchase before being approved for payment in the accounts payable department. 
C.  He will be responsible for coordination with the department heads, proper maintenance of records on vehicles used in the metering department and for the proper care and maintenance of vehicles in these departments. 
(Prior Code, § 3-004) 
Secs. 2-005—2-026. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-027. - Social security—Authorized. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal security administration, to the employees and officials, thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this Code, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors' insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 761 of the 83rd Congress, and as provided for in chapter 99-21 of the state code. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 3-012) 
Sec. 2-028. - Same—Authority to execute agreements. 
The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the employees' retirement system of the state and officials as provided for in section 2-027. 
(Prior Code, § 3-013) 
Sec. 2-029. - Same—Withholdings from salaries and wages. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 2-027 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agent. 
(Prior Code, § 3-014) 
Sec. 2-030. - Same—Contributions by city. 
The city is authorized to appropriate such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 2-027. Such funds shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state in accordance with regulations established by such agency. 
(Prior Code, § 3-015) 
Sec. 2-031. - Same—Records to be kept by city. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 3-016) 
Sec. 2-032. - Same—Exclusion of employees not authorized to be covered. 
There is hereby excluded from any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 3-017) 
Sec. 2-033. - City attorney and city judge excluded. 
For social security purposes only, the individual performing services in the position of city attorney and city judge on retainer fee basis or other professional persons on retainer fee basis are considered to be in fee service position and are not to be covered by social security (unless they request it) and employees' retirement system of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 3-018) 
Sec. 2-034. - Workmen's compensation for employees. 
The city clerk is authorized to obtain workmen's compensation insurance for all city employees, including volunteer firemen. 
(Prior Code, § 3-019) 
Sec. 2-035. - Retirement plan for employees. 
A.  Upon becoming eligible for participation, a participant may designate one and only one beneficiary on a form provided for that purpose. In so doing, he specifically provides thereby that in the event the participant's employment is terminated by reason of his death prior to his retirement, there shall be paid to his designated beneficiary a monthly death benefit actuarially equivalent to the reserve required for the participant's anticipate normal retirement benefit. In calculating the normal retirement benefit under the provisions of this section, the following assumptions shall be used: 
1.  The participant's age at the time of his death is 65, or his attained age if his attained age is greater than 65; and 
2.  The total credited service shall include the amount of total credited service accrued prior to the date of the participant's death. The death benefit under this section shall be calculated in accordance with the joint trust agreement with the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
B.  Designation of a beneficiary may be changed by the participant in writing on a form provided for that purpose at any time prior to actual retirement. Only the last such designation of a beneficiary prior to retirement shall have effect and any new designation of a beneficiary invalidates, supersedes, and revokes any prior designation. 
C.  Any failure by a participant to designate a beneficiary prior to retirement under the provisions of this article, or any failure of a designated beneficiary to survive the participant, shall preclude the payment of any benefit authorized herein. 
D.  Life annuity factors . Said ordinance is further amended by adding a new section as follows: life annuity factors to be used for computing benefits in the event of death prior to retirement. 

 
E.  The rights and obligations under the plan with respect to persons whose employment or term of office with the employer is terminated for any reasons whatsoever prior to the effective date of this article are fixed and shall be governed by such plan as existed and were in effect at the time of such termination. 
(Prior Code, § 3-022; Ord. of 11-8-1994) 
Secs. 2-036—2-059. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-060—2-076. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-077. - Recreation commission for Butler, Reynolds and Taylor County—Established; membership, terms. 
A.  Under the provisions of House Bill 794, approved February 1, 1946, there is hereby established a county recreation commission. This commission shall consist of a minimum of five members. A minimum of two of the members shall be residents of the city appointed by that council, one of the members shall be residents of the City of Reynolds appointed by that council, and two of the members shall be residents of the county appointed by the commissioners of roads and revenues of the county. 
B.  The terms of office shall be for five years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
C.  Vacancies in such boards occurring otherwise than by expiration of term, shall be filled by the mayor or presiding officer of the governing body only for the unexpired term. 
(Prior Code, § 3-028) 
Sec. 2-078. - Same—Organization, officers; regulatory power. 
Immediately after their appointment, they shall meet and organize by electing one of their members' president and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission shall have the power to adopt by-laws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the cities and county. 
(Prior Code, § 3-029) 
Sec. 2-079. - Same—Authority to accept, handle property. 
The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers, and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the cities and county. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities of the owner. 
(Prior Code, § 3-030) 
Sec. 2-080. - Same—Employment of superintendent. 
The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as superintendent who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the commission deems proper. 
(Prior Code, § 3-031) 
Sec. 2-081. - Same—Budget. 
Annually, the recreation commission shall submit a budget to the governing authority for approval. The commission may also solicit or receive any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 3-032) 
Sec. 2-082. - Same—Annual report. 
The recreation commission shall make an annual report to the governing bodies and such other reports as from time to time may be requested. 
(Prior Code, § 3-033) 
Sec. 2-083. - Same—Repeal of other ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions and intent of this resolution are hereby repealed. 
(Prior Code, § 3-034) 
Secs. 2-084—2-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AREA PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-110. - Established. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality and the West Central Georgia area which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the River Valley regional commission, hereinafter referred to as the area planning commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by state law, and said area planning commission shall be organized and empowered as set out in sections 2-111 and 2-112, inclusive. 
(Prior Code, § 3-035) 
Sec. 2-111. - Membership. 
The area planning and development commission shall consist of three members from each of the counties participating in the area planning commission. Of the said three members from each county, one shall be appointed by the governing authority of the municipality wherein the county seat is located and the other two shall be appointed by the governing authority of the said county. 
(Prior Code, § 3-036) 
Sec. 2-112. - Term of office; vacancies; removal; compensation. 
The term of office for all members shall be two or three years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment that has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Prior Code, § 3-037) 
Secs. 2-113—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PURCHASING CARD AND CREDIT CARD ORDINANCE FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS AND DESIGNATED PERSONNEL 

Sec. 2-121. - Definitions. 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the city council to receive a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the council for the City of Butler. 
City means the City of Butler and/or the council for the City of Butler. 
City purchase card, city p-card or city credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a city official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the city. 
Designated personnel means any employee of the City of Butler designated by resolution of the mayor and council for the City of Butler as an authorized user of a city purchase or credit card. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the council for the City of Butler and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a city purchasing card or credit card. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016, § I) 
Sec. 2-122. - Authorized users. 
The mayor and council for the City of Butler ("city"), in its discretion, may authorize specific city elected officials or designated personnel to use a city purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official or designated personnel may use a city purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the city's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The city will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official or designated personnel to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this article or for any purchases that are not authorized by this article. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016, § II) 
Sec. 2-123. - Card administrator. 
The council for the City of Butler shall designate a city purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
1.  Manage city issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
2.  Serve as the main point of contact for all city purchasing card and credit card issues. 
3.  Serve as liaison to the elected officials and designated personnel authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
4.  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials and designated personnel authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
5.  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
6.  Assist authorized elected officials and designated personnel to dispute transactions when necessary. 
7.  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with the ordinance from which this article is derived, city procurement ordinances and policies, city purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
8.  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
9.  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
10.  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the city's record retention policy. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016, § III) 
Sec. 2-124. - Use of cards. 
A.  Authorized purchases. City purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official or designated personnel only. (Examples of authorized purchases include, but are not solely limited to, the purchase of lodging, fuel, food, non-alcoholic beverages, education and training materials while on city business, or emergency purchases necessary to protect city property.) All purchases are subject to the terms of this article, the city purchasing card and credit card user agreement, city procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials and designated personnel may use a city purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees not designated by resolution of the mayor and council for the City of Butler. The authorized elected official or designated personnel shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the city purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per transaction ..... $500.00 
Per month ..... 1,500.00 
B.  Unauthorized purchases. City purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official or designated personnel. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the city's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the city's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the city purchasing card and credit card user agreement. (Examples of unauthorized purchases includes but is not limited to items for personal use, cash refunds or advances, alcohol or liquor of any kind, or any item otherwise restricted by city policy unless a specific exemption is granted, in writing, by the mayor and city council.) 
C.  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a city purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized city elected official or designated personnel for five years or as otherwise provided by the city's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official or designated personnel may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official city duties. 
D.  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016, § IV) 
Sec. 2-125. - Review of purchases and audit. 
Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls, and other measures prevent and allow detection of misuse or abuse of city issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials, designated personnel, and the staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the city. 
1.  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: The card administrator, in an effort to ensure compliance with city policy and state law, will conduct monthly/quarterly reviews and audits of all government purchasing card or government credit card transactions. The review is designed to ensure compliance, identify non-compliance issues and misuse, and through corrective measures assist the city with improving compliance. The monthly/quarterly review and audit should happen within seven days of the start of a new month/quarter. After completing the monthly/quarterly audit the card administrator shall notify cardholders of any violations or questions the card administrator has that occurred within that previous month/quarter. Depending on the severity of the violation, the card administrator may temporarily suspend or revoke the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card after notification to the cardholder and to the municipal governing authority, but only after consultation with the city attorney. Any unresolved violations shall be reported to the municipal governing authority and the city attorney in writing within five business days of discovery of such discrepancy. 
2.  Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials, designated personnel, and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016, § V) 
Sec. 2-126. - Violations. 
A.  An elected official or designated personnel shall reimburse the city for any purchases made with a city issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this article or the user agreement. 
B.  In the discretion of the city governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this article may result in: 
1.  A warning; 
2.  Suspension of the elected official's or designated personnel's authority to use a city purchase card or credit card; or 
3.  Revocation of the elected official's or designated personnel's authority to use a city purchase card or credit card. 
C.  Nothing in this article shall preclude the city governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016, § VI) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-001. - Definitions. 
The words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings given them in this section unless the context clearly requires a different interpretation. The use of the term "shall" means "mandatory," while the term "may" means "permissive". 
Abandonment means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal. 
Adequate food means palatable, uncontaminated, and nutritionally correct food sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, or significant risk to the animal's health from the lack of it. 
Adequate shelter means a structure having at least three sides, a top, and a bottom, suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind, rain, and other elements with sufficient bedding inside the shelter during cold weather. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water sufficient in the amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent dehydration or significant risk to the animal's health from the lack of it. 
Animal means any living vertebrate other than humans and rodents. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the city council to administer and enforce this chapter. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the designated animal control officer for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Citations means any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation for that violation and ordered to appear in the court of the city. Such citation may be issued by an animal control officer and based upon his own personal knowledge, or upon a sworn written statement of another person who has witnessed the violation. In the latter case, the witness shall be subject to subpoena to testify for the city at the hearing of the case. 
Guard dog means any dog maintained for the purpose of safety or security, which dog is reasonably expected to attack other persons or animals either independently or on command. 
Humane care of animals means the provision of adequate food, adequate water, and adequate shelter to an animal consistent with its normal requirements. 
Impoundment means the action of taking physical control of an animal by an animal control officer and/or other officers empowered to act by law and the transporting of such animal to the animal control facility. 
Inhumane treatment or care of animals means any act, omission, or neglect, which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death to any animal. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccines approved by the state department of public health, administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian with a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian. 
Joint government services means the county and/or the representatives of any municipality in the county may contract and enter into formal agreements with the city for joint animal control services and codes for the shared use of personnel, facilities, and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
Jurisdiction of this chapter means all of the incorporated areas of the city. 
Livestock means all animals so defined by the O.C.G.A. § 4-3-2(1) as follows: all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals, and all ratites, including, but not limited to, birds, ostriches, emus, and rheas. Also included are poultry, deer, giraffe, and other even-toed and hoofed animals. 
Owner means any person, partnership or corporation owning, possessing, and keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed harbored if fed and/or sheltered for seven or more consecutive days. 
Public nuisance means if an animal: 
1.  Is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner without the express consent of the person owning or occupying the other property; 
2.  Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways; 
3.  Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; 
4.  Is repeatedly at large; or 
5.  Trespasses on school grounds. 
Records of appropriate authority includes records of: 
1.  Any designated municipal animal control agency; 
2.  County board of health; 
3.  Federal state, or local court; or 
4.  The city animal control officer designated under this chapter. 
Restraint means: 
1.  Having an animal on a leash or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands. 
2.  Having an animal within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the city. 
3.  Having an animal in a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner, or otherwise authorized by the city. Invisible fence systems may be allowed if maintained in good working order and if they keep the animal contained. Any person using an invisible fence shall post a sign near the entrance to the property indicating an invisible fence is in use. A chain, cable, rope, or other stakeout or tie out device may not be used. 
Running at large means any animal off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
Violations and penalties of this chapter means any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the city ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 4-001; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-002. - Designation of animal control officer. 
A.  The mayor of the city shall designate an individual or department to carry out the duties of the animal control officer as provided in this chapter. 
B.  One animal control agency may carry out the duties of animal control for more than one local government by written agreement. 
C.  Animal control officers are authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter. Law enforcement officials of the city shall cooperate with animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter and with authorizing the animal control officer's entry onto private property to remove stray animals. 
D.  Animal control officers shall not be authorized to make arrests under this chapter unless they are also certified as law enforcement officers by the state. 
(Prior Code, § 4-002; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-003. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass, or otherwise obstruct any animal control officer in the official performance of his duties. 
(Prior Code, § 4-003; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-004. - Keeping of wild or non-domesticated animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep, or permit to be raised or kept, on any property located in the city any wild or non-domesticated animal unless specifically permitted by O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4. 
(Prior Code, § 4-004; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-005. - Livestock exempted from this chapter. 
The keeping, raising and/or producing of livestock in any manner shall be exempt from the provision of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 4-005; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-006. - Restraint of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep under restraint any animal owned by or in the custody or control of such person. 
(Prior Code, § 4-006; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-007. - Creation of public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a public nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 4-007; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-008. - Confinement of female animals in season. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody or control of a female animal that is in season to fail to confine such female animal to prevent contact with a male animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 4-008; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-009. - Animal care. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody of an animal to fail to provide his animals with adequate food, water, shelter, and humane care, and to fail to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. 
(Prior Code, § 4-009; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-010. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in cruelty to animals as prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 16-24-4 and to engage in dog fighting as prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 16-121-37. 
(Prior Code, § 4-010; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-011. - Abandonment of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal. 
(Prior Code, § 4-011; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-012. - Exposure to poison. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose a poisonous substance, mixed with food or other items so that the substance is liable to be eaten by any animal, provided that, it shall be unlawful for any person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed with any vegetable substances. 
(Prior Code, § 4-012; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-013. - Removal of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of an animal to fail to immediately remove excrement deposited by his animal on public property, public walks, or recreation areas. 
(Prior Code, § 4-013; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-014. - Confinement and quarantine of biting animals. 
Any animal that is known to have bitten a person is required to be confined by the owner for the purpose of quarantine for not less than ten days at the expense of the owner. The method of quarantine shall be determined by the county health department in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 
(Prior Code, § 4-014; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-015. - Rabies inoculation for dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat kept in the city to fail to have the animal inoculated against rabies and to have rabies tag attached to the animal's collar. The owner shall be liable for the inoculation of the animal. This provision is adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3 et seq. 
(Prior Code, § 4-015; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-016. - Number of dogs and cats per residential lot. 
It is unlawful for there to be more than five dogs and/or five cats on any residential lot or lots subject to the following exceptions: 
1.  Pet owners currently in compliance with any prior ordinance limiting the number of dogs and cats shall be allowed to continue to keep said number of animals. 
2.  A litter of puppies or kittens will be permitted to remain on owner's property for a period of 12 weeks after their birth. 
3.  Residential lots of five or more acres. 
4.  Foster home operators, breeders, or other individuals who have been granted a waiver. 
(Prior Code, § 4-016; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-017. - Waiver to animal limitations. 
A.  Upon written application and upon review and approval based the criteria set forth below, the mayor and council may grant a waiver of section 4-016. In order to grant a waiver, the board must find that: 
1.  There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances existing that a waiver should be granted. 
2.  Granting the waiver will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to others. 
3.  The waiver will not be injurious to other neighbors or to the general welfare of neighborhood. 
4.  The applicant can demonstrate a special use or need to house animals in greater number than allowed under section 4-016. Examples of such special use or need include, but are not limited to, participation in a licensed animal rescue organization, use of animal for therapeutic or other purposes, and emergency care of pet owned by other persons. 
B.  The written application for waiver shall be accomplished by an application fee as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
C.  The owner shall post a conspicuous sign, large enough to read from any public thoroughfare adjacent to the owner's property, stating that a waiver of the animal limitation section has been applied for and the date, time, and location of the hearing to be held on the application. The sign must be posted not less than 15 days prior to hearing on the application. 
D.  Any decision denying a waiver, may be reviewed by the mayor and city council at their discretion, and any granting of a waiver may be revoked upon a finding that the owner is in violation of the public nuisance provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 4-017; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-018. - Warning notice on premises using guard dogs. 
The owner, tenant, or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located shall conspicuously and prominently post a notice on the outside of the property, which notice shall contain block letters easily read distance of 50 feet, which block letters shall read "Warning Guard Dog". These letters shall be either red or black on a white background. If the dog is kept in a fence, the posted warning shall be placed on the fence at the intervals of not more than 50 feet apart and at the entrance and exit of fence. In the case of apartments, or businesses, the notice shall be posted at every entrance and exit to the apartment or business. 
(Prior Code, § 4-018; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-019. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter will be punished by a fine as determined from time to time by ordinance or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. 
(Prior Code, § 4-019; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Secs. 4-020—4-041. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-042. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
The animal control officer, at the direction of the chief of police and/or police officers, may impound any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this article, whether or not the animal is on private or public property. 
(Prior Code, § 4-051; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-043. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
If the owner of an impounded animal is known or can reasonably be identified, the animal control officer shall notify that person by telephone or by mail within two working days of the impoundment. The owner may claim and take custody of the animal within four working days of the impoundment by the payment of an impoundment fee, and upon providing proof of rabies inoculation. If the impounded animal is not current on rabies inoculation, the animal may be released to the owner who shall have the animal inoculated within five working days of the release and who shall provide a copy of the rabies certificate to the animal control officer. Failure to provide the certificate shall result in new impoundment. 
(Prior Code, § 4-052; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-044. - Impoundment fee. 
The mayor and city council shall set all fees for impoundment and may change them from time to time in their discretion. Impoundment fees are distinct from penalties for violation of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 4-053; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-045. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
If an impounded animal has remained unclaimed for ten days, if injured or suffering and in great pain, and if such animal does not display an identification tag and no determination of the owner can be made from reasonable investigation; the animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of the animal in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-3-5 and other applicable code sections humane and painless a manner as possible or to donate any animal to a public or private nonprofit institution or agency. Disposal of an animal under this section does not relieve the owner from any other liabilities. If the owner is known or ascertainable, the animal control officer shall be authorized to hold the animal for a reasonable time until such owner can be reached. If the owner fails or refuses to reclaim the animal within ten days of receipt of notice of impoundment, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal as provided for above. 
(Prior Code, § 4-054; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Secs. 4-046—4-063. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 4-064. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
1.  Inflicts a serve injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property. 
2.  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potential dangerous dog after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
3.  Inflicts a serve injury on another animal without provocation on public or private property. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, unprovoked, attempts to bite or bites a human being on private or public property. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable both to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and top. If the dog enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence are of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape. Such enclosure shall also provide adequate shelter for the dog. 
(Prior Code, § 4-071; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-065. - Exemptions. 
Any dog being used by a law enforcement officer to assist in official duties shall be exempt form the provisions of this article even if it inflicts injury, if the person injured: 
1.  Was committing a willful trespass or tort; 
2.  Was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog; 
3.  Had tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog; 
4.  Was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Prior Code, § 4-072; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-066. - Violations of this article. 
Provisions regarding the violation of this article, and the penalties therefore, shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28, and other applicable sections of the state code. 
(Prior Code, § 4-073; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-067. - Animal control board. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d) the mayor and city council, hereby establishes an animal control board to conduct all hearings required under this article. The membership, terms, and procedures of the board shall be as the mayor and council of the city shall provide. All members of the animal control board shall be residents of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 4-074; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-068. - Investigation; notice to owner. 
Investigations by animal control officers regarding the classifications of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs, notice to owners, and the classification process of such dogs shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-23 and 4-8-24. 
(Prior Code, § 4-075; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-069. - Procedures for classification. 
Provisions pertaining to procedures for classification of the dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, notice requirements and hearings shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24, or as amended or any other applicable section of the state code. 
(Prior Code, § 4-076; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-070. - Duties of owners of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs; registration fee. 
The provisions of this section shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. In accordance with that section, any person possessing or intending to possess a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must provide the city with proof of liability insurance, issued by an insurer licensed to do business in the state, in an amount of not less than $50,000.00, which policy of insurance must provide coverage against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog during the term of the coverage. A separate policy must be maintained for each dog classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous. In the alternative, the owner may provide a surety bond in an amount not less than $50,000.00, issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state providing payment of the bond to any person who recovers in a court of law for injuries inflicted by the dog up to the amount of the recovery or the bond, whichever is lesser. In addition, the owner of each dog classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall pay an annual registration fee as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 4-077; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-071. - Confinement. 
All provisions permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside a proper enclosure shall be applied by the animal control officer in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26. 
(Prior Code, § 4-078; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 4-072. - Confiscation of dogs. 
All confiscation of dogs shall be done in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
(Prior Code, § 4-079; Ord. of 10-9-2007) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 13, 2018, § I, repealed the former chapter 6, §§ 6-001—6-013, and enacted a new chapter 6 as set out herein. The former chapter 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior Code, §§ 7-001-7-013. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 100 square feet of customer service area within the premises of the applicant, but not less than five parking spaces. Such off-street parking shall have vehicular access to streets and shall be constructed of an all-weather surface. Where no parking space can reasonably be provided on the same lot, any public or private off-street parking lot may be utilized to fulfill such parking requirement, if the public or off-street parking lot is within 150 feet of the premises, and if the patrons of the licensee are allowed to use such lot. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
Church means a permanent building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and the building is situated upon real estate owned by an entity qualified as an exempt religious organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Distance means the measurement in linear feet by the most direct route of travel on the ground in a straight line from the front door of the building enclosing the proposed premises of a licensee under this chapter to the front door of the main sanctuary of any church or the nearest property line of any school or residence. 
Distilled spirits and liquor mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wines. 
Family means any person related to the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this chapter within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, as determined according to the law of the state. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Governing body means the mayor and council. 
Individual means a natural person. 
License means the authorization by the governing body to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package or for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, as may be permitted by the terms of this chapter. 
Licensee means a person, real or artificial, holding any license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means a producer or bottler of beer, wine, or distilled spirits. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Package store means a specific building or facility within the city wherein a license may be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages in their respective consumer containers and not for consumption on the premises. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Pour means to sell for beverage purposes, sell for consumption on the premises, or sell by the drink. 
Premises means the definite enclosed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop, or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold under the terms of this chapter. 
Retail alcoholic beverage license means the authorization by the governing body to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package or for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
School means such state, county, city, church, or other schools as teach subjects commonly taught in the common schools of the state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, dance, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupation, or other special subjects are taught. 
Store manager means that individual who does or will actually manage or operate a package store or restaurant on a day-to-day basis and shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution of, or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale, any alcoholic beverages. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-002. - Moral character. 
A.  In this chapter, the phrase "good moral character" shall be construed to mean the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest, and open manner. 
B.  A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
1.  At the current time he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
2.  He is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
C.  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined, or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
1.  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
2.  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
3.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest, and open manner. 
4.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-003. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purpose of promoting the health and general welfare of the city, establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, protecting and preserving schools and churches, giving effect to existing land use, and preserving residential areas with reasonable consideration being given to the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and the congestion in roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values, protecting against the evils of concentration of retail licenses for alcoholic beverages in one family or corporation, and preventing an undesirable person from engaging or having an interest in alcoholic beverages or the sale thereof in the city, considering the proximity to the proposed location of other establishments selling alcoholic beverages, considering adequate parking availability, and considering the feelings and attitudes of citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location of the premises for which an application for a permit to sell alcoholic beverages has been made. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-004. - Compliance; inspection; inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, at wholesale or retail, any alcoholic beverages within the city, without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city administrator shall appoint one or more persons to conduct periodic inspections of the businesses regulated by this chapter and to report to the city administrator any violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses or other regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law or city ordinance, other than infrequent minor traffic violations. 
C.  Sworn officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business without prior notice to the city administrator. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code and state law. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-005. - Assisting violation. 
Any person who shall assist or aid another in violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by the judge of the municipal court, be punished as provided in the City of Butler Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-006. - Production of records. 
In conjunction with any application for license or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the terms of this chapter, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this chapter, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected under this chapter, the mayor and council shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports, or invoices of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, or proving or disproving violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges, or the like due under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-007. - Prohibitions relating to underage persons; use of false identification; seller's duty to request proper identification. 
A.  Except as authorized in this section, it is unlawful within the corporate limits of the city: 
1.  For a person knowingly, directly or through another person, to furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
2.  For a person under 21 years of age to purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
3.  For a person under 21 years of age to misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
4.  For a person knowingly or intentionally to act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; or 
5.  For a person under 21 years of age to misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
B.  The prohibitions contained in subsections A.1., 2., and 4. of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
1.  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
2.  At a religious ceremony for sacramental purposes. 
C.  The prohibitions contained in subsections A.1., 2., and 4. of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
D.  The prohibition contained in subsection A.1. of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, a driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100—40-5-104, pertaining to proper identification, shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation or complaint form. 
E.  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to this chapter, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
1.  Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
2.  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
3.  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
F.  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection D. of this section in order to verify the age of such person. Failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
G.  Any person who is charged and then convicted for the first time only in the municipal court for the city of violating any prohibition contained in subsection A. of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in accordance with section 1-7, except that any person convicted of violating subsection A.2. of this section shall, upon the first conviction only, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by not more than 30 days' imprisonment or a fine of not more than $300.00 or both. 
H.  No person shall be charged, prosecuted, tried, convicted, or sentenced in the municipal court for any violation of the prohibition set out in subsection A. of this section if such person has previously been convicted of any offense as set out in subsection A. of this section. 
I.  Unless the officer has reasonable cause to believe such person is intoxicated, a law enforcement officer may arrest by issuance of a citation a person accused of violating only subsection A.2. of this section. The citation shall enumerate the specific charges against the person and either the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges or a notation that the person will be later notified of the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges. If the person charged shall fail to appear as required, the judge having jurisdiction of the offense may issue a warrant or other order directing the apprehension of such person and commanding that he be brought before the court to answer the charges contained within the citation and the charge of his failure to appear as required. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to invalidate an otherwise valid arrest by citation of a person who is intoxicated. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-008. - Possession in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, or carry any alcoholic beverage (except in the original package and with the seal unbroken), on any public street, sidewalk, or in any city park, city maintained recreation facility, public parking lot, or semi-public parking lot located within the city limits. The term "semi-public parking lot" shall include any area wherein motor vehicles are parked in plain view of the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, or apartment building. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Secs. 6-009—6-030. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-031. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverage within the city without having first complied with the provisions of this article, and without having obtained a license therefor, granted by the mayor and council as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-032. - License constitutes grant of privilege. 
A.  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere grant of privilege to carry on or conduct a business covered by such license during the term of the license, subject to the terms and conditions imposed by the Charter, this chapter, and other applicable ordinances of the city and the constitution, laws and regulations of the state and the United States of America applicable thereto. 
B.  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the face the following words: "THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE AND IS SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BUTLER AND IS SUBJECT TO LAWS, ORDINANCES, AND REGULATIONS HEREAFTER ADOPTED." 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-033. - Application requirements and procedure. 
A.  Required information. All persons desiring to obtain a license under this article shall make written application to the mayor and council for such privilege, upon forms to be prepared and provided by the city administrator. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the license desired; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of all partners, whether general or limited; if a corporation, the names of all officers thereof, and all stockholders therein if its shares are not registered with the appropriate state and federal regulatory agency; and the names of all persons who have or will have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license, if issued. There shall be attached to and made a part of the application a financial statement detailing the amount of investment by the applicant; the amount and sources of loans, if any, to be used for construction and/or operation of the business; and the collateral used to secure such loan, if any. This statement and the information therein shall be treated confidentially to the extent permitted under the Georgia Open Records Law (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.) and shall be examined only by the city administrator, the mayor and council, and the city attorney. The application shall contain such other appropriate information as may be required by this article or by the mayor and council, and shall be sworn to by the applicant before filing. 
B.  Failure to furnish information; personnel statement; failure to produce persons for interrogation. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records pertinent to the application requested of them by the police department. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. All applicants shall submit a completed copy of the personnel statement Form ATT-17, state department of revenue, alcohol tax and control unit. The applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such application or license issued under the terms of this article. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this article. 
C.  Survey. Each applicant shall submit a survey by a registered land surveyor showing compliance with all distance requirements contained in this chapter. 
D.  Processing time. The city shall require not less than 25 days and not more than 45 days after the filing of the application for processing any application for license under the terms of this article. 
E.  Processing fee. Upon filing of the application with the city administrator, the applicant shall deposit in cash or by certified check a processing fee in the amount specified by the governing body to cover the expense of investigation and processing the application, which fee shall not be refundable and shall not apply against any license under this article. The fee shall be retained for application processing costs and the applicant is responsible for the entire license fee upon approval. 
F.  Payment of license fee. Upon approval of an application for license in accordance with the terms of this article, the license fee shall be paid by certified check prior to the issuance of a license and within ten days after approval. 
G.  Refund of fee upon denial of license by state. If the applicant is denied a license by the state, the license fee shall be refunded. 
H.  Annual questionnaire. The city shall require annual questionnaires to be filled out by current license holders before new yearly licenses are issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-034. - Designation of store manager. 
A.  When a license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage is applied for by any domestic or foreign legal entity lawfully registered and doing business under the laws of the state, the applicant shall also name an individual manager, or an individual member of the management team, who shall be responsible for managing and overseeing the proposed business of selling alcoholic beverages. 
1.  The manager must meet and maintain all requirements of an individual licensee as prescribed by this chapter; provided, however, any domestic corporation or legal entity lawfully registered and doing business under the laws of the state, or any foreign corporation or legal entity lawfully registered under the laws of another state and authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, which seeks to obtain any license under this chapter shall be required to designate a resident of the county as a store manager, or an individual member of the management team, for purposes of the initial application and all annual renewals. 
2.  Should the corporation have a change of management, or should the designated manager relocate so as to no longer be a resident of the county after the initial application, but prior to the annual renewal, the corporate licensee shall immediately notify the city through the city clerk, city administrator, or police chief of such change in writing no less than five business days from said change. For the duration of the time prior to the annual renewal, the corporation shall be permitted to provide the city the name of its authorized agent, who must be a natural person and resident of the state, authorized to receive notice of any violation of its license privileges or receive service of citation or service of process under the laws of the state. At no time shall the designated agent be a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or other form business entity. The authorization described herein shall be delivered in writing with all other elements of the required application. 
3.  The corporation shall be required to designate an individual manager, or an individual member of the management team, who is a resident of Taylor County prior to the annual renewal of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Failure of a corporation or legal entity holding a retail alcoholic beverage license to immediately notify the city through the city clerk, city administrator, or police chief of such a change in its authorized agent shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the licensee's license, and shall be effective immediately upon notice having been provided by the city in writing. 
C.  If such a named authorized agent should cease to possess or maintain all of the qualifications and requirements as are required of an individual license holder for the sale of similar alcoholic beverages, except the county residency requirement, the license of the legal entity or corporation responsible for the authorized agent may be suspended until the corporation or legal entity names an authorized agent who does meet and possess all such qualifications and requirements. 
D.  When a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages is applied for by an individual person or partnership comprised of individual persons, the applicant shall also name a store manager who will be responsible for managing and overseeing the proposed business of selling alcoholic beverages. The manager must meet and maintain all requirements of an individual licensee as prescribed in this chapter, and must be a resident of the city or county. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-035. - Submitting false application. 
Any material omission from, or untrue, or misleading information which is contained in an original, renewal, or transfer application for a license under this article shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-036. - Public notice of application; hearing. 
A.  No application for a license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be acted upon or issued by the mayor and council until after advertisement and public hearing thereon, as required in this section. 
B.  A public hearing upon all applications for a license under this article shall be held before the mayor and council at a regular meeting, not less than 25 days and not more than 45 days after the filing of the application. The applicant for the license shall give notice of the making of any application by advertisement at least once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of hearing on such application, in a newspaper published in the city in which the legal advertisements and notices of the city are published, which advertisement shall be in the following form: 
NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR RETAIL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE 
The undersigned has made application to the Mayor and Council of the City of Butler for a license to sell alcoholic beverages at ____________ . This application will be heard by the Mayor and Council at its regular meeting to be held at 7:00 p.m. on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 
Signed:  ____________  Applicant 
(The applicant shall fill in the correct and appropriate information.) 
C.  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business one or more signs stating the following: 
RETAIL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR. HEARING BEFORE THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BUTLER, GEORGIA, ON THE ____________ DAY OF ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . (Applicant shall fill in the correct date.) 
D.  The signs required by subsection C. of this section shall each be not less than 24 inches by 36 inches and shall face toward all public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public property adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can easily be seen from all public properties adjoining the proposed location. 
E.  Such applicant for retail sales, at the public hearing for such application, shall submit satisfactory proof to the mayor and council that the signs required by section (c) of this section were properly and adequately posted and were adequate to inform the public of the pending application and the public hearing thereon. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-037. - Investigation of application. 
All applications required by this article shall be investigated by the police department and the report of investigation presented to the mayor and council for consideration with the application. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-038. - Standards for granting or denial. 
A.  The mayor and city council, in passing upon any application for an alcoholic beverage license, at the final meeting thereon, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or to deny such application in the public interest and welfare: 
1.  Reputation, character. The applicant's reputation, character, trade and business associations or past business ventures, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
2.  Previous violations of local or state laws regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
3.  Manner of conducting prior alcoholic beverage business. If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder, especially as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
4.  Location. The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. This shall also include: 
a.  The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location; 
b.  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons; and 
c.  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
5.  Number of licenses in trading area. The number of licenses already granted for similar business in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. This shall also include the proximity of the proposed location to any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages of any nature. 
6.  Dancing. If dancing is to be permitted upon the premises for which the license is sought and the applicant has previously permitted dancing upon any premises controlled or supervised by him, the manner in which he controlled or supervised such dancing to prevent any violation of any law, regulation or ordinance. 
7.  Previous revocation of license. If the applicant is a person whose license issued under the police powers of any governing authority has been previously suspended or revoked or who has previously had an alcoholic beverages license suspended or revoked. 
8.  Payment of taxes. If the applicant and business are not delinquent in the payment of any local taxes. 
9.  Congregation of minors. Any circumstances which may cause minors to congregate in the vicinity of the proposed location. 
10.  Prior incidents. Evidence that a substantial number of incidents requiring law enforcement intervention have occurred within a square city block of the proposed location, if within the City of Butler, during the 12 months immediately preceding the date of application. This should also include calls for other emergency services in the area. 
11.  Previous denial or revocation. The denial of an application, or the revocation of a license, occurring within the preceding 12 months, which was based on the qualifications of the proposed location. 
B.  The mayor and city council may, in their discretion, issue or deny any license when there is evidence that the type and number of schools, churches, libraries, public recreation areas, or public housing in the vicinity of the place of business of the licensee causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances. 
C.  If the application is denied, the mayor and city council shall cause a written report to be prepared showing the reason or reasons for the denial. The mayor and city council shall return the application showing its denial, together with the written report, to the clerk of the city who shall notify the applicant of the denial within five days of the denial. Notice to the applicant shall be made in writing, showing the reason or reasons for the denial and the day and time of the next scheduled meeting of the mayor and council. The applicant may appeal the denial of the application by serving notice on the mayor and council requesting reconsideration of the application. The applicant shall serve said notice, in writing, within five days of the receipt of the denial of the application. 
D.  On reconsideration, the mayor and council shall hear evidence offered by the applicant and any entity opposing the issuance of the license. The applicant may be represented by counsel, may offer testimony by witnesses or any other evidence and may question any opposing witnesses. At the close of the evidence, the mayor and council shall either uphold the denial or shall approve the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-039. - General qualifications of licensees. 
No application for a license under this article shall be granted where the application investigation or the evidence presented at a hearing before the mayor and council shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
1.  That the applicant or any person owning a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license for which application is made is of bad moral character, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made, or has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States. 
2.  That the applicant or any person having direct or indirect beneficial interest in the issuance of the license has had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state, relating to the manufacturing, distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages, previously suspended or revoked. 
3.  That the applicant, or any person who shall have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license, as a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application for a license under this article. 
4.  That any applicant for a retail license under this article is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, as computed according to the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-040. - Citizenship and residency requirements. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to an applicant unless such applicant is: 
1.  An individual at least 21 years of age who lawfully resides in the United States and is a resident of Taylor County, Georgia; provided, however, that residency in the county shall not be a requirement if the applicant designates a resident of the county as store manager and such designee is over the age of 21 and lawfully resides in the United States, who shall be responsible for all matters relating to the license; 
2.  A corporation organized under the laws of the state or authorized to do business therein, provided that said corporation shall be required to designate a manager in accordance with the provisions of section 6-034; or 
3.  A partnership, all of whose partners are at least 21 years of age and residents of the state for at least one year preceding the date of application. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-041. - City officials and immediate family ineligible for license. 
It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages to any elected official, city department head, city employee, or such person's immediate family. It shall further be unlawful for any elected official, city department head, city employee, or such person's immediate family to own any whole, partial, or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-042. - Persons convicted of certain crimes or with previous license revocation ineligible for license. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage to: 
1.  A person who has been convicted of a felony, or of a crime involving moral turpitude, or of a crime involving a violation of the ordinances of the city relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of alcoholic beverages or a violation of the laws of the state or the United States pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of any alcoholic beverage, or taxability thereof; or 
2.  A person whose license under this article has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this article revoked for cause within 24 months of the date of reapplication for the license. 
B.  Any licensee who becomes a "prohibited person" as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall, within ten days of such event, make such fact known to the mayor and council and shall surrender such person's license upon demand by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-043. - Interest in license by persons convicted of certain crimes. 
No license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation, joint venture, or other corporate entity, or other entity, where any individual having any interest therein, either as owner, partner, member, or stockholder, or having a direct or indirect beneficial or absolute interest, or the spouse of any such person, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere, within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state, or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations. As used in this section, the term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere to any offense specified in this section, or the forfeiture of a bond. Where there is a conviction of a violation of a municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the mayor and council may, after investigation, waive such conviction as a disqualification. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-044. - Ownership of or interest in multiple licenses. 
No person or individual shall be issued more than two retail alcoholic beverages licenses, nor shall any person or individual be permitted to have a beneficial interest in more than two retail alcoholic beverage licenses issued under this chapter, regardless of the degree of such interest. A license may be granted to one person for the same premises, provided all other provisions of this chapter are complied with. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-045. - Limitation on number of licenses within family or corporation. 
A.  No person or member of such person's immediate family or a corporation shall own, hold or control any interest whatsoever in more than one license in the city. 
B.  As used in this section, an interest in the license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the outright owner of the license, a co-owner of the license, a general or limited partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license, a stockholder in any corporation which owns all or any part of a license, or an owner, lessor, sublessor of, or stockholder in any corporation owning or leasing any real estate which is occupied by a package store, or shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a package store. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this section, no person shall be deemed to have more than one interest in any one license. 
C.  All applications for license, whether original or for renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to all interests, as defined in subsection B. of this section, in package stores. This shall include: 
1.  The names and addresses of all persons with interest in the ownership of the business of selling packaged alcoholic beverages at retail, together with any interest each person or members of such person's immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; 
2.  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; 
3.  The amount of rental paid for such land and building, and the manner in which the rental is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; 
4.  The names and addresses (by affidavit of the owner, lessor, or sublessor of such land and building) of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial, or any other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail package store is to be located; 
5.  A copy of the proposed lease; and 
6.  Any other information requested by the police department or the mayor and council pertinent to the application under investigation. 
D.  Any change in any of the relationships or ownership interest contained on the application must be filed with the mayor and council within 30 days after such change is made, and failure to do so shall be grounds for immediate cancellation and revocation by the mayor and council of any license issued under this article or for the immediate dismissal of any application for a license under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-046. - Wholesale licensees prohibited from interest in other licenses. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or have an interest in any other license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-047. - Payment of outstanding taxes and other debts due city. 
The city administrator shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other party interested in an application under this article has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent, or any other monies owed to the city. No license shall be issued, nor shall a license be renewed, until all such debts are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-048. - Issuance limited to designated areas. 
A.  Wholesaler's license. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages except where the wholesale business is to be located in an area of the city which is zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
B.  Retailer's license. No license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail shall be granted except in an area zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-049. - Ownership of premises or written lease required. 
No retail or wholesale license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant shall either own the premises for which the license is sought or shall have a written lease for the premises for which the license is sought for the full period for which the license is to be issued. If the applicant shall merely lease the premises for which the license is sought, the applicant shall attach a copy of the lease to the application for the issuance of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-050. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
Where a building in which a retailer proposes to operate under the provisions of this chapter is at the time of application for such license not in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city administrator and show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and applicable ordinances of the city. No sale shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with such plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-051. - Time limit for commencement of business; forfeiture of license for nonuse. 
A.  All holders of licenses under this article must, within six months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensee's establishment within six months after the issuance of such license shall cause the automatic forfeiture and cancellation of such license and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
B.  Any holder of a license under this article who shall begin the operation of the business authorized in the license but who shall, for a period of six consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business as authorized in the license shall, upon expiration of such six-month period, automatically forfeit such license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action of the mayor and council, and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-052. - Application for relocation. 
A.  If the holder of any retail alcoholic beverage license for a prescribed location in the city desires to move his retail alcoholic beverage business to another location in the city, the license holder shall make application to the mayor and council for permission to relocate the business. The application shall be in the same form and contain the same information as is required for an initial application for a retail alcoholic beverage license. 
B.  No fee shall be required for the processing of an application for relocation of a retail alcoholic beverage business. 
C.  The applicant for relocation of a retail alcoholic beverage business shall comply with the provisions of this article pertaining to newspaper advertisement and the posting of a sign upon the proposed new location of the business, as if the applicant for relocation of the business were making an initial application for the retail alcoholic beverage license. 
D.  In reviewing and acting upon an application for the relocation of a retail alcoholic beverage business and license, the mayor and council shall be guided by the same factors and considerations as if the application were an application for a new license. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-053. - Transfer generally; "grandfathered" locations. 
A.  Except as provided in this article, no license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage may be transferred from one person to another. Further, no license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage may be transferred from one location or premises to another without the prior approval thereof by the mayor and council in the manner described in this article. 
B.  Any previously licensed location for the sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with this ordinance shall remain valid for a new license application by a new licensee, without regard for a change in any of the distances for the structures outlined in section 6-091 that occurred during the existence of the operation of the business for the prior licensee, so long as said application shall be made within 24 months of the sale, transfer, lease, or other vacancy of the property caused by the prior licensee at said location. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-054. - Transfer on death of licensee; change in partners or stockholders. 
A.  Licenses issued under this article shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this article. 
B.  In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest therein, the license may, with the approval of the mayor and council and subject to the terms of this article, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the heirs at law of the deceased person, if such heirs meet all other qualifications contained in this article. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor, or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of such deceased person's estate and dispose of the license or such interest therein, but in no event to exceed six months. 
C.  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign such partner's interest in such partnership to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this chapter are fully complied with, and then only upon the approval of the mayor and council. 
D.  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee personally will directly receive none of the additional capital investment. Under this subsection, an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved by the mayor and council, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-055. - Renewal. 
A.  Annual renewal required. All licensees under this article shall be required to renew their licenses annually and in a timely manner on or before January 1 of each year. The city shall require simplified annual applications from all previously approved license holders, exclusive of advertisement or waiting periods, but with approval by the mayor and council at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
B.  Late renewal application after deadline. Any licensee under this article that fails to renew their licenses annually and in a timely manner on or before January of each year shall have until January 30 in which to submit a renewal application in the same manner as outlined in subsection A. with the penalty fee of ten percent of the license fee to be assessed for failure to renew such license on or before January 1. There shall not be a suspension of the license during that time. 
C.  Suspension of license and late application after January 30. Any licensee under this article that fails to make a late renewal application pursuant to subsection B. shall have their ability to sell immediately suspended upon written notice having been provided by the city. The licensee shall have until March 1 to file a late renewal application with the form mandated in subsection A. with the penalty fee of 50 percent of the license fee to be assessed. The suspension shall remain in full effect until the party has appeared before the mayor and council to offer a sufficient explanation for the delinquent renewal. 
D.  Failure to renew application. Any licensee under this article that fails to renew their licenses annually in accordance with any of the previous subsections shall have their ability to sell any alcoholic beverage terminated upon the first day of March without any notice to be provided by the city. Said termination shall take effect immediately upon having been provided written notice of same by the city. Additionally, there shall not be any means to file an application for renewal, and the former licensee shall be required to make a new license application in accordance with the provisions mandated by section 6-33. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-056. - Fee schedule. 
A.  The annual alcoholic beverage license fee for each license for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be as prescribed by the mayor and council. 
B.  The annual alcoholic beverage license fee for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city, as authorized under this article, shall be as prescribed by the mayor and council. 
C.  All license fees shall be paid annually, in advance, on or before January 1 of each year. 
D.  The license fee for each license for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city issued after July 1 of any given year shall be one-half of the full annual license fee as provided in this article. 
E.  The license fee schedule is maintained in the office of the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-057. - Payment of fees. 
A.  All annual license fees under this article shall be paid in advance on or before January 1 of each year, and for any new license granted under this article during a calendar year there shall be paid a pro rata license fee from the date the license is issued. 
B.  Each person selling alcoholic beverages in the city, except wholesalers not maintaining a place of business in the city, shall pay an annual license tax as prescribed by the governing body and filed in the office of the city administrator. 
C.  Any person licensed under this article shall be required to renew such license on or before January 1 of each year. A penalty of ten percent of the license fee shall be assessed for failure to renew such license on or before January 1. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-058. - Grounds and procedure for suspension or revocation. 
A.  Procedure. Any license which has been issued or which may be hereafter issued by the city to any licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages, either by package or for consumption on the premises, may be suspended for a time certain or revoked entirely for due cause as defined in this section, such suspension or revocation to be effective only after a hearing held before the mayor and council for the purpose of considering any such suspension or revocation. At least five days' prior written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, including a specific statement of the charges upon which the suspension or revocation is being sought, shall be given to the holder of such license which is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
B.  Hearing and decision. A hearing held before the mayor and council pursuant to this section shall be conducted informally, and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. All testimony shall be under oath. The holder of the license sought to be suspended or revoked shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel, if desired, shall be able to cross examine any witness produced by the city, and shall be able to present witnesses and evidence in such license holder's own behalf. Pursuant to such hearing, a decision to suspend or revoke the license under consideration shall be upon a majority vote of the mayor and council hearing the evidence. The license holder shall be promptly notified in writing of the mayor and council's finding and decision affecting such person's license. 
C.  Grounds. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of any license shall include, but not be limited to, a violation of any laws, regulations, or ordinances, both state and municipal, regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or a violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinance other than traffic ordinances, or for the failure of the licensee or any employee of the licensee to promptly report to the city police department any violation of the law or ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence on the premises, or for the violation of any validly promulgated law, ordinance, or regulation pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages by any employee of the license holder involved in the sale of alcoholic beverages, failure to notify the city administrator or police chief of change in manager, failure of a manager to maintain all qualifications required under this chapter, failure to report a manager's violation, or failure to promptly replace an unqualified manager with a manager property qualified under this chapter. 
D.  Suspension during emergencies. The mayor is hereby authorized to suspend any alcoholic beverage license issued under this article for any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation in which the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. The suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council, or a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting, at which time the mayor and council, by majority vote, may determine that the emergency is ended. 
E.  Fees not to be refunded. When a license is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. 
F.  Appeals. Appeals of the decision of the mayor and council shall be to the superior court of Taylor County, Georgia, filed within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-059. - Automatic revocation of city license upon revocation of state license or permit. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license held by the same licensee to sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverage within the city shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any additional action by the mayor and council or any officer of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-060. - Revocation for violation of state regulations. 
A violation of any rule or regulation pertaining to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages promulgated by the commissioner of the state department of revenue, alcohol and tax unit, by a licensee under the provisions of this article shall be cause for immediate revocation of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-061. - Removal of signs after revocation. 
When any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased shall be immediately removed from both inside and outside the place of business. Upon receipt by the police department of the notice of revocation, the police department shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-062. - Reapplication after revocation of package store license. 
When any license or permit to operate a retail package store under this article is revoked by the mayor and council, no application from the same applicant for such license shall be considered within 24 months of the time of such revocation by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Secs. 6-063—6-090. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATING REGULATIONS FOR LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-091. - Distance from schools, churches, polling places and residences. 
A.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
1.  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
2.  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus; or 
3.  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
B.  As used in subsection A., the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
C.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. 
D.  As used in subsection (d), the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 3, art. 1, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
E.  No person shall knowingly and intentionally sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established for any state or local election days, including primary, special, runoff or general elections. 
F.  All distances required by this article shall be measured in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the state commissioner in current version of Section 560-2-2-.12, Measurement of Distance of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, and unless otherwise modified, shall be the following: 
1.  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; and 
2.  To the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center, or a retail package store; or 
3.  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes. 
G.  All renewal applications shall use the measurements required in the initial application and license. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-092. - Hours and days of operation; hours of consumption of alcoholic beverages sold by the glass. 
A.  Hours of operation for sale of alcoholic beverages by package. No sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall be allowed by a licensed establishment on weekdays and Saturdays except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. The sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall not be allowed on Sundays. 
B.  No outlet manager, nor other employee of an outlet, shall permit violations of subsection A. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-093. - Products for sale, display or offer other than distilled spirits. 
A.  No retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock at its place of business where distilled spirits are offered for sale, any other product, except the following: 
1.  Wines, but only if the retail dealer holds a valid and current license to sell wine at said place of business; 
2.  Malt beverages or beer, but only if the retail dealer holds a valid and current license to sell malt beverages or beer at said place of business; 
3.  Tobacco products, limited to tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, cigarette papers, lighters, matches, and "vapor product" (as that term is currently defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-170(10)); 
4.  Chewing gum and breath mints; 
5.  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
6.  Ice, ice chests, and coozies (individual can and bottle coolers); 
7.  Paper, styrofoam or plastic cups; and wine gift bags which are limited to a size to accommodate one 750 ml size bottle and which contain only products approved for sale or display by this regulation; 
8.  State-approved lottery tickets and related state approved lottery materials, but only if the retail dealer is a state-approved retail lottery dealer location; 
9.  Bar supplies, limited to: 
a.  Cork screws, openers, straws, swizzle stirrers, and bar related glass ware, bar related metal ware, bar related ceramic ware, and bar related plastic ware. 
b.  Cocktail olives, onions, cherries, lemons, limes, or other fruits. 
c.  Beverage alcohol drink recipe booklets, bar guides, and consumer oriented beverage alcohol publications. 
B.  Products co-packaged with alcohol beverages are limited to the items approved for sale or display by this section, but shall not include alcohol beverage products of a different class. 
C.  Retail dealers are not permitted to separate co-packaged products for individual sale. Products packaged together are to be offered for sale and sold as a single unit. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-095. - Police supervision. 
Anyone holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall, at all times, permit the police department to have complete supervision over the conduct of those people patronizing the establishment, and any dealer or licensee refusing to permit the police department to have full supervision, or interfering with such activities or hindering the proper policing of such establishments, will be subject to having the license suspended or revoked in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-096. - Coin-operated devices. 
No holder of a retail license for the sale of any alcoholic beverages, except for the sale of such beverages for consumption on the premises, shall permit on the licensed premises any slot machine, mechanical music box or jukebox, pinball machine, video arcade machine, or other coin-operated or token-operated machine for amusement purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-097. - Allowing underage persons on premises. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow anyone under the age specified by state law to be in, frequent or loiter about the premises of the licensee, unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or adult responsible for said underage person(s). 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-098. - Misrepresentation of quantity, quality or brand name of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees under this chapter or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any manner misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-099. - Display of name of licensee and identification of business. 
Each licensee for the sale of liquor by the package at retail shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the name of the licensee in uniform letters not less than four inches and not more than eight inches in height, and the words "liquor," "liquor store," or "package store." Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-100. - Display of prices. 
Each retail licensee under this chapter shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale; provided, however, that a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed list, may have the price placed on the bottle or on the shelf where alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-101. - Exterior advertisements. 
Exterior advertisements for licensees under this chapter shall be restricted according to state law regarding distilled spirits and according to the zoning ordinances and exterior sign ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-102. - Wholesale transactions and dealers. 
A.  All wholesale dealers or distributors shall be licensed by the state revenue department and shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages in the city. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to retailers licensed under the provisions of this chapter and all deliveries shall be made in conveyances owned and operated by such wholesale dealers or distributors. 
B.  Retail dealers in alcoholic beverages licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not buy or accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages from wholesalers, dealers, or distributors except those who are licensed by the state revenue department. 
C.  All licensed retailers shall store all alcoholic beverages on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. All alcoholic beverage stock shall be available at all times for inspection by the mayor and council or such body's duly authorized representatives. Any alcoholic beverage found in any retailer's stock that is sold or distributed by a wholesaler who is not licensed in accordance with the laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
D.  Upon each delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared, showing the quantities and brands of alcoholic beverages delivered, together with the price thereof and the excise tax due and collected thereon. The original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice and shall keep it for a period of 12 months after the date of delivery. During such 12-month period, such invoices shall be made available for inspection by the mayor and council, or duly authorized representatives of the mayor and council. Upon request of the city, a copy of such invoice shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the city. 
E.  Each retail licensee doing business in the city shall keep and maintain the original invoice of each sale to such licensee or purchase by such licensee from a wholesaler of any alcoholic beverages for at least 12 months after the date of such purchase and shall maintain records to show the sales of alcoholic beverages and any other records required by the city. The city, or its duly authorized representative, shall have the right to inspect the records of each licensee and make a complete audit of the records of each licensee at any time. Failure of a licensee to properly maintain records showing receipt of alcoholic beverages, payment therefor, and payment of the taxes due thereon to the appropriate wholesaler, and records which clearly show the sales, the amount of sales, and the types of sales of each licensee, may, at the discretion of the mayor and council, after a hearing as provided by this chapter, result in the revocation or suspension of such license. 
F.  In conjunction with any application for license, or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the terms of this chapter, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension, or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this chapter, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected under this chapter, the mayor and council shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports, or invoices of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance of such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, or proving or disproving violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges, or the like due under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-103 - Security cameras required. 
A.  Required. Any licensee which sells spirituous liquors for off premises consumption is required to install and maintain a continuous recording security camera system. 
B.  Camera locations. Said required security camera system shall include cameras located at each exit door of the establishment so as to capture images of all ingress and egress therefrom with additional cameras located so as to capture all activity at each point of customer transaction including, but not limited to, cash registers, and teller machines. 
C.  Capability requirements. Said required security camera system shall be capable of producing an identifiable and retrievable image with minimum resolution of 640 by 480 lines on film, tape, CD, DVD, or other removable storage device in a format that can be made a permanent record and enlarged through projection or other means. 
D.  Retention. All recordings and data captured by the security system shall be retained by the licensee for a period of not less than thirty (30) days after such recording. 
E.  Maintenance and inspection. Such security camera system shall be maintained in complete and proper working order at all times. Such security camera system shall be subject to periodic inspection by the City of Butler Police Department. In the event of a crime, it shall be the responsibility of the licensee to produce a recording of the incident within 24 hours. Such recording shall become the property of the City of Butler Police Department for use as evidence. 
F.  Affidavit. At the time that an applicant seeks the issuance of a license for sale of spirituous liquors for consumption off premises, or a licensee seeks renewal of such license, said applicant or licensee shall execute an affidavit stating that the business will have, in the case of an applicant, and has, in the case of a renewal, an operating and functioning security camera system that complies with the requirements set forth hereinbefore. Such affidavit form shall be provided by the City of Butler. 
G.  Violations and penalties. Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and be punished as follows: 
1.  Upon conviction of a first violation/offense, the defendant shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00 and the court may impose a suspension of all alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the City of Butler for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
2.  Upon a second conviction of a violation of any provision herein within 12 months of an initial conviction hereunder, the defendant shall be subject to a fine of not more than $350.00 and a mandatory suspension of all alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the City the Butler for a period of not less than 30 days and not exceeding 60 days. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Secs. 6-104—6-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-121. - Minimum age. 
A.  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages. Permitting violations of this section by the licensee, or repeated violations, shall constitute grounds for suspension, revocation or refusal to renew the license or other action with regard to such license. 
B.  This section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-122. - Employment of persons convicted of certain crimes. 
No licensee shall employ in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person, in any capacity whatsoever, who has been convicted in this state or in any other state, or in the United States, or in any other country, within ten years immediately prior to the application for employment, of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or other charges relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, or any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Secs. 6-123—6-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSUMPTION AND DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-141. - Consumption by licensee or employees. 
It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any employee of a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages to drink any alcoholic beverages while at such licensed location or to be present at such location in an intoxicated condition. Permitting violations of this section by the licensee, or repeated violations, shall constitute grounds for suspension, revocation and refusal to renew the license or other action with regard to the license. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-142. - Consumption on premises of package stores. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to open or consume any alcoholic beverage upon any premises for which a license to sell any retail package alcoholic beverage is issued. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-143. - Removal of alcoholic beverages in open containers from licensed premises. 
A.  No person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by package sale or for consumption on the premises, or any employee or agent of such licensee, shall permit any person to remove from such premises any alcoholic beverage in any open container. 
B.  All premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverage by package sales or consumption on the premises shall post a notice at each exit stating "NO BEER, LIQUOR, OR WINE MAY BE CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER OUT OF THIS BUILDING." 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-144. - Drive-in window or curb service. 
Curb service or other sale of distilled spirits outside the building licensed to sell is hereby expressly prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing and subject to any zoning restrictions governing ingress, egress, and setback requirements, it shall be lawful to sell or dispense distilled spirits from drive-in or service windows. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-145. - Delivery of distilled spirits off of licensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to make deliveries of any distilled spirits by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Secs. 6-146—6-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 6-171. - Tax levied. 
A.  In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon all alcoholic beverage licensees engaged in the city in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, there is hereby imposed and levied upon all such dealers and licensees within the city an excise tax, to be computed and collected as set forth in this article. 
B.  The excise tax levied under this section shall be the maximum amount permitted by state law, such amount presently being the amount prescribed by the mayor and council based upon volume as the tax pertains to malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits, and by the drink as the tax pertains to distilled spirits. A schedule of such excise tax is maintained on file with the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Sec. 6-172. - Collection by wholesale dealers. 
A.  Duties of wholesale dealers; collection and remittance to city. The excise tax imposed by this article shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or delivering alcoholic beverages by the package to any alcoholic beverage licensee in the city shall, as a condition of the privilege of conducting such business in the city, be subject to the following: 
1.  Each wholesaler shall keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of alcoholic beverages by the package to each licensee in the city, such records to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and to be made available on request for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the city. 
2.  Each wholesaler shall collect from each licensee in the city, at time of delivery of alcoholic beverages, the amount of tax due under the terms of this article and hold such amount in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as provided in this article. 
3.  On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city, which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages to or for licensees in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of the report. The report shall show the name and address of each licensee, the quantities delivered to each licensee, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. The report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on the report. 
4.  The excise tax levied in this section is hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city and it is the intent of this chapter to so levy this tax, but require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery by the retailer to the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, as required in this section. If the tax due under this section is not paid on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, a ten percent penalty on the gross tax will be levied by the city against each defaulting retailing licensee for whom the tax is not paid on or before the tenth day of the month. 
B.  Noncompliance by wholesale dealer or distributor. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required in this section, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing. If the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city and the retail licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor for whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having their license suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter. 
C.  Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell at retail within the city any alcoholic beverage on which the taxes provided for in this article have not been paid. 
D.  Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesale dealer or distributor, or other person, to deliver any alcoholic beverage to any retail dealer in the city without collecting, at the time of such delivery, the excise taxes provided for in this article. 
E.  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes provided for in this article, shall be guilty of a violation of this section, and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined or sentenced as provided by the City of Butler Ordinances. Any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having such person's license suspended or revoked, if such person shall be a licensed dealer in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018, § I) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-001. - Enforcement of mandatory statewide technical codes. 
The city shall enforce the mandatory technical codes applicable statewide, comprising the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, under the state Uniform Codes Act. 
Editor's note— As of January 1, 2013, the following technical codes (with Georgia amendments) were mandatory statewide, comprising the Georgia State Minimum Standards Code: International Building Code (2006); International Fuel Gas Code (2006); International Mechanical Code (2006); International Plumbing Code (2006); International Residential Code (2006); International Fire Code (2006); International Energy Conservation Code (2009); and the National Electrical Code (2011). Readers are encouraged to contact the Georgia Department of Community Affairs to learn of technical codes in effect in 2014 and beyond. 
Sec. 8-002. - Permits required. 
Required building and sign permits shall be obtained through the zoning department. 
(Prior Code, § 11-005) 
Secs. 8-003—8-020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Article II was added by instruction of the city. 

Sec. 8-021. - Purpose and authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. for the purpose of maintaining the health and cleanliness of the city, and to ensure safe and sanitary conditions in private property by establishing a method for enforcing minimum standards. This section is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
Sec. 8-022. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, structure or property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term does not include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of such property and all persons and entities who have any interest in such dwelling, building or structure, or the property on which it is situated, based on the records of the public officer and of the county courthouse, and based on a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia, and any party who has filed a notice per O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9. 
Public authority means any housing authority officer or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the city, county or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the town. 
Public officer means the building inspector, health department officer, the city manager, or any other city representative approved by the mayor and council, who are authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other officer or officers appointed by the mayor and council for purposes of this section. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, structure or property to bring it into compliance with the applicable regulations and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
Vacancy means the use of a structure or property is discontinued in excess of 30 consecutive days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
Sec. 8-023. - Findings and applicability. 
A.  It is found and declared that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, structures, and properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses and not in compliance with the applicable standard codes or optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes adopted by the city; or in violation of general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. It is further found and declared that where there is a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use. This city should exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures and/or cause the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such use in the manner provided in this section. 
B.  All the provisions hereof may also be applied to private property where there is an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Sec. 8-024. - Unlawful to own structures or property not compliant with this section. 
A.  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property in the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with this section and all applicable codes in force in the city including such regulations which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or regulations. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner to own any dwelling, building, structure or property which: is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or is otherwise in violation of this section. 
Sec. 8-025. - Enforcement procedure. 
A.  When a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use or when it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. The following described action shall then be taken. 
The officer shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, structure or property summons and a complaint containing a notice that a hearing will be held in municipal court not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or by attorney, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
B.  If, after the hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result or unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
1.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
2.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
3.  If the court finds there is a condition or use of real estate other than addressed above, which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation and the court further finds that such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use, the court may order the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure, and the order may require the abatement of the public health hazard or general nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety. 
For the purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
C.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, improve or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, or to abate the nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, structure, or property to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Time during any court stay on abatement shall not count toward said 270 days. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, structure, or property a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
D.  The amount of the cost of any repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was incurred. Credit for salvaged materials sold, per subsection E. below, shall be given. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order in the office of the Clerk of Taylor County Superior Court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this section. 
The clerk shall record and index such order in the deed records and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing the order with the clerk, and within 90 days of the repair, demolition or closure, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and notice given to the owner and parties in interest and a final settlement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the city tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property per O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1, and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. 
The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
E.  If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage and sell reusable materials at private or public sale, and the proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Such sale may be made without public advertisement and bid. The public officer and city shall have no liability related to such sale, including due to defects. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
F.  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
G.  The redemption amount shall be the full amount of costs as determined above, plus interest, penalties and costs incurred by the city and the tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien shall be per O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80, 48-4-81. 
State Law reference— Abatement procedures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 8-026. - Standards for determination by public officer. 
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions if he finds that conditions exist in or on such building, dwelling, structure, or property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of other residents. Such conditions may include without limitation: 
1.  Dilapidation and non-compliance with applicable codes; 
2.  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
3.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
4.  Other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures, or property unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such municipality such as: 
a.  Disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness; 
b.  The interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle so that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity of the structural members falls outside of its base so as to create a hazardous condition to the occupants of the structure or the population of the surrounding area; 
c.  Due to their unsafe condition the supporting structure and/or nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls must be replaced; 
d.  The floors or roofs have improperly distributed loads or oversized loads or are so weakened as to be unsafe for their present or intended use; 
e.  The structure has been damaged by wind, fire or other causes so as to imperil the safety or the health of the structure's occupants or of the people of the city; 
f.  There are abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, abandoned refrigerators or motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, or any condition which may cause lack of safe ingress or egress to the structure(s); 
5.  Vacant dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed; 
6.  There exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-10. 
Sec. 8-027. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this section, including, among others granted herein, the power to: 
1.  Investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures, or property therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes, or are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or endanger the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
2.  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
3.  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section; and 
4.  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
Sec. 8-028. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures. 
A.  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this section shall be served in the following manner. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall also be served in the following way: 
1.  At least 14 days prior to the hearing, the public officer shall send the complaint and summons via certified mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any. 
2.  For any owner or party in interest whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
B.  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Walton County Superior Court at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and affect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
C.  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Sec. 8-029. - Use of revenues, grants and donations to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-15. 
Sec. 8-030. - Deteriorated structures and premises as nuisances. 
A.  All structures and/or the surrounding property of the structures which are determined to be in violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. In those instances where there is an imminent threat to life or safety, the public officer shall be authorized to immediately post the structure as "unsafe for human habitation." 
B.  If such finding of the public officer is contested by the occupants of the structure, then the public officer shall request an immediate hearing before the judge of the magistrate court in order to secure an order requiring any occupants of the unsafe structures to vacate. The public officer shall then proceed as set forth in this section. 
Sec. 8-031. - Construction of this section with Charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations; appeal. 
Nothing herein shall abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of the Charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred herein shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. Appeal from the municipal court shall be per O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-001—10-018. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 10-019. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to the ordinance shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Prior Code, § 19-001) 
Sec. 10-020. - Due date; filling of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1st of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date for taxes levied by this section shall be April 1st of each year. 
(Prior Code, § 19-002) 
Secs. 10-021—10-043. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 10-044. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
A.  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the full-time equivalent employees of the business or profession. 
B.  Occupation tax schedule. The occupation tax schedule is as established from time to time. It is on file at city administrative offices. 
(Prior Code, § 19-003) 
Sec. 10-045. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Prior Code, § 19-004) 
Sec. 10-046. - Number of businesses considered operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax assessed herein. 
(Prior Code, § 19-005) 
Sec. 10-047. - Professional as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
1.  The occupation tax based on the number of employees. 
2.  A fee as determined from time to time by ordinance per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(Prior Code, § 19-006) 
Sec. 10-048. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Prior Code, § 19-007) 
Sec. 10-049. - Purpose and scope. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 19-008) 
Sec. 10-050. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
A.  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon the beginning of the business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax become delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge, shall be punished pursuant to the general penalty in section 1-008. 
B.  In addition to the above remedies, the chief of police may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Prior Code, § 19-009) 
Sec. 10-051. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 19-010) 
Sec. 10-052. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
A.  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
B.  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Prior Code, § 19-011) 
Sec. 10-053. - Evidence of qualification required. 
Any business that is required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualifications, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Prior Code, § 19-012) 
Sec. 10-054. - Liability of offices and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 19-013) 
Sec. 10-055. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
A.  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained otherwise specially provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 31 each year, and on March 31 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
B.  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk in the city, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax comes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 19-014) 
Sec. 10-056. - Business not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of the tax pursuant to be provisions of other general laws of the state or local law: 
1.  Those businesses by the state public service commission. 
2.  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3. 
3.  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
4.  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
5.  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
6.  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
7.  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
8.  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state of the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
9.  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
10.  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Prior Code, § 19-016) 
Sec. 10-057. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established business. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees to be employed. 
(Prior Code, § 19-017) 
Sec. 10-058. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-059. - Filing of return showing number of employees. 
On or before November 1 of each year, the owner, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the city, a signed return setting forth the average number of yearly employees (full-time or full-time equivalent) of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Prior Code, § 19-019) 
Sec. 10-060. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case, the mayor and council of the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The tax clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city and upon demand of the mayor and the council such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting; a penalty of one percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed for the period of delinquency. 
(Prior Code, § 19-020) 
Sec. 10-061. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, any business type tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation herein provided for is at that time unpaid. In the case of those practitioners where local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Prior Code, § 19-021) 
Sec. 10-062. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or appeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or appeal shall be construed to deny the right of the mayor and council of the city to assesses and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Prior Code, § 19-022) 
Sec. 10-063. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The mayor and council of the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation taxes. 
(Prior Code, § 19-023) 
Sec. 10-064. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of business or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or for attracting or encouraging selected types of business or practitioners of selected occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of a regular meeting of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 19-024) 
Sec. 10-065. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that specific shall control. 
(Prior Code, § 19-025) 
Secs. 10-066—10-088. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE 

Sec. 10-089. - Insurance license fee. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon insurer doing business within the city in the amount determined from time to time by state law. For each separate business location in excess of one which is operating on behalf on such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in an amount as determined from time to time by state law. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Prior Code, § 19-027) 
Sec. 10-090. - License fees insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
From each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee as determined from time to time by state law per location for the year. 
(Prior Code, § 19-028) 
Sec. 10-091. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location for which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 10-089 hereof in an amount as determined from time to time by state law for each such location within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 19-029) 
Sec. 10-092. - Gross premium tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in the amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums", as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-089. 
(Prior Code, § 19-030) 
Sec. 10-093. - Gross premium tax, all other insurers. 
There is herby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an equal amount to 2&frac12 percent of the gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-089. 
(Prior Code, § 19-031) 
Sec. 10-094. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 10-089 and 10-090 shall be payable on the first date of each year. 
(Prior Code, § 19-032) 
Secs. 10-095—10-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND CANVASSERS 

Sec. 10-117. - Solicitor's permits required; application, investigation. 
No person except duly organized charitable organizations shall be allowed to solicit within the city without first having obtained a permit from the mayor and council after making written application to the mayor and council stating the nature and purpose of such solicitation. The city may appoint any person to investigate and advise the mayor and council as to the necessity or need for said permit. 
(Prior Code, § 23-001) 
Sec. 10-118. - Denial or issuance of solicitor's permits, violations. 
Upon authorization, after due hearing, the mayor and council has the right to grant or refuse a solicitor's permit. Should said permit be refused and such a person or persons solicit after refusal of said permit, it shall be a violation of this Code. Each solicitation shall be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as such in the recorder's court. 
(Prior Code, § 23-002) 
Secs. 10-119—10-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 10-182. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permit means the written authority granted authority granted by the mayor and council of the city under this article to engage in the taxicab business in the city, as said business is defined by provisions of this article. 
Person includes any individual, a firm, a co-partnership, corporation, company or association of joint stock association. 
Streets or public streets means any public streets, boulevards, avenues, drives or alleys in the city. 
Taxicab is hereby declared and defined to be any motor driven vehicle for transportation for hire of passengers and which is operated wholly or principally within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 39-010) 
Sec. 10-183. - Scope of regulations. 
The operating of taxicabs within the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations, and restrictions hereafter set forth, and it shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated in the city any taxicab unless a permit for the operation thereof shall have first been issued by said mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 39-011) 
Sec. 10-184. - Permit required. 
No taxicab shall be operated on the streets of the city unless and until the mayor and council has issued a permit for the operation thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 39-012) 
Sec. 10-185. - Application for permit. 
Application for permits shall be made to the mayor and council by a petition which shall set forth the name, address and place of business of the applicant if an individual, and if a partnership the name and business of said partnership, and if a corporation, the trade name under which an applicant does or promises to do business, the name of the insurance company or surety company with applicant has made arrangements to secure his insurance or surety bond as required by this article, and also a financial statement of said company and such other information as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 39-013) 
Sec. 10-186. - Investigation and action on application. 
A.  The mayor and council shall make or cause to be made an investigation including any hearing deemed necessary as to each application or permit for the taxicabs, and in determining whether a permit shall issue, the mayor and council may investigate the fitness of the applicant to engage in the business of operating taxicabs and also shall make or cause to be made an investigation in order to determine whether the demands of public convenience, necessity and safety justify the issuance of such a permit. 
B.  Each and every applicant for a taxi license shall and will be carefully considered by the mayor and city council, and after careful consideration of all the facts and circumstances, any and all applications, in the discretion of the authority aforesaid, they will then grant or deny the applicant a license. 
(Prior Code, § 39-014) 
Sec. 10-187. - Issuance or denial of permit; transferability. 
If the mayor and council determines to grant a permit for the operation of such a taxicab he shall issue the applicant a permit herein provided for, and such permit shall not be transferable except upon the consent of the mayor and the council in writing. If the mayor and council finds and decides that the public convenience, necessity and safety does not justify the issuance of said permit, or that the insurance company or surety company in which applicant has made arrangements to secure insurance as required by the provisions of the proposed policy or surety bond do not give ample protection to the public, or that the application is not a fit and proper person to conduct the taxicab business, then no permit shall be issued, and notice of the action of the mayor and council shall be given to the applicant, setting forth the reason for the refusal of said permit. 
(Prior Code, § 39-015) 
Sec. 10-188. - Insurance or bond required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, driver or chauffeur of any taxicab to drive or operate the same on the streets of said city unless such owner, operator, driver, or chauffeur shall have first procured and filed with the mayor and council a liability insurance policy, issued by a good and responsible insurance company, or surety bond issued by a good and responsible surety company, which said insurance company or surety company must have authority to do business in the state, and possessed of a certificate duly issued by the state, and must have an agent in the city, which said insurance company or surety company must have approved by the mayor and council. The amount of liability insurance or surety bond for each taxicab shall be an amount not less than $25,000.00 for each bodily injury, and $50,000.00 total for each accident, and $25,000.00 for property damage for each accident. In event of conflict between this section and state law concerning minimum monetary limits for automobile liability insurance under state law, state law shall control. Said policy of insurance or surety bond may be in form of a separate policy or separate surety bond for each taxicab, or may be in the form of a "fleet policy" covering all taxicabs operated by such owner, driver or chauffeur, in which latter event said policy of insurance or surety bond shall provide the same liability for each taxicab operated. Every taxicab while in service shall have conspicuously placed therein some sign evidencing the fact that the provisions of this section have been complied with, the form thereof to be prescribed by said mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 39-016) 
Sec. 10-189. - Notice required to cancel insurance or bond. 
No policy of insurance or surety bond as hereinbefore provided shall be cancelled until the expiration of ten days notice of intended cancellation thereof has been given in writing to the mayor and council by registered mail or personal delivery of said notice and a provision therefore shall be made a part of said policy or surety bond. 
(Prior Code, § 39-017) 
Sec. 10-190. - Using cab for illegal purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver or any taxicab operated in the city to permit any person to accompany or use such taxicab for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or other illegal purpose, or to direct, take or transport, or to offer or agree to direct, take or transport any other person with the knowledge or reasonable cause to believe the purpose of directing, taking or transporting, is for prostitution, lewdness or other illegal purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 39-018) 
Sec. 10-191. - Maximum work day for driver. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of any taxicab to drive or operate said taxicab for more than 16 hours in one 24 hours. 
(Prior Code, § 39-019) 
Sec. 10-192. - Dome light required on cabs. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless the same is equipped with a dome light across the top of the taxicab with the word "taxi" written thereon that can be seen in daytime and lighted in night. 
(Prior Code, § 39-020) 
Sec. 10-193. - Notice of violations required. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to notify the mayor and council of any and all violations of any ordinances by any taxicab operator or chauffeur. 
(Prior Code, § 39-021) 
Sec. 10-194. - Business license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on, engage in or conduct the business of operating a taxicab or taxicabs for the transportation of persons within the limits of the city without first having obtained a license from the city as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior Code, § 39-022) 
Sec. 10-195. - Business license tax. 
An annual license tax for each taxicab is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from and paid by every person, firm or corporation, carrying on, engaging in, or conducting the business of operating a taxicab or taxicabs for the transportation of the persons within the limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 39-023) 
Sec. 10-196. - Suspension, revocation of taxicab permit. 
Whenever any person, firm or corporation engaged in the taxicab business or any operator or driver of any taxicab within the city is found to be violating the provisions of this article or the laws of the state, or any other law of the city the chief of police, upon complaint, or upon his own motion, shall issue an order to said person, firm or corporation, operator or driver, to appear at a fixed time and place for investigation and if the mayor and council shall be satisfied, after hearing of the violation, or of the laws of the city, or the state, or any other terms of the permit issued, the mayor and council may suspend for a fixed period in its discretion, or in its discretion revoke the permit issued. 
(Prior Code, § 39-024) 
Sec. 10-197. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited in taxicabs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaged in the taxicab business in the city to have, cause to be had, or permit to be had in any taxicab any quantity of malt, vinous, intoxicating, spirituous, or alcoholic liquors, whether the tax on the same has been paid or not, and the owner of any taxicab in which is found any quantity of such liquors or beverages shall be liable to the same extent as if he, the owner, were in actual possession of such liquors and beverages at such time; provided, that if such liquors are found in any such taxicab both owner and operator of same shall be jointly guilty. This provision with reference to such liquors and beverages shall not apply if such liquors are found on the person of the passenger in such taxicab who is actually riding as a fare-paying passenger, and who is not an employee of the owner of such taxicab. 
(Prior Code, § 39-025) 
Sec. 10-198. - Procedure when alcoholic beverage found in taxicab. 
If any liquors and beverages defined in section 10-197 shall be found in any taxicab used for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire, whether or not same is actually in use at such time for such purpose, the city clerk shall issue a rule to show cause, bearing test in the name of the mayor of the city, requiring the owner of such taxicab to appear at a hearing before the mayor and council at such time and place as shall be stated in said rule; thereupon the mayor and council shall hear evidence as to the issue involved, and if it shall be determined that there has been a violation of this section, the license of such taxicab owner shall immediately be revoked and no other license shall be issued to him to engage in said business until the expiration of year from the date of the revocation of such license. In the event such license is revoked, no refund shall be made by said city on the license issued to such offender. 
(Prior Code, § 39-026) 
Secs. 10-199—10-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 10-220. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meaning as indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than ten persons used to commercially present material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of ten or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more then five percent of its net sale from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarter. 
Good moral character means according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means, for the purpose of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
4.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or in the infliction of pain; 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Prior Code, § 5-001) 
Sec. 10-221. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
A.  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license. Said license fee shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
B.  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to the dancers, as well as a list of current employees for the proceeding calendar year. 
C.  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
D.  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
E.  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
F.  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and not open at all on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to open on Christmas Day. 
G.  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
H.  An adult entertainment establishment shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
I.  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
J.  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
K.  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
L.  No patron shall directly pay or give gratuity to any dancer. 
M.  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
N.  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3 5/10 foot candles per square foot. 
O.  If any portion or subsection of this article or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Prior Code, § 5-002) 
Sec. 10-222. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Prior Code, § 5-003) 
Sec. 10-223. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a license to do so. The fee for the license shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance, to be renewed annually. Licensee must make application yearly prior to expiration of current years license. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Prior Code, § 5-004) 
Sec. 10-224. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Prior Code, § 5-005) 
Sec. 10-225. - Admissions of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admissions of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Prior Code, § 5-006) 
Sec. 10-226. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Prior Code, § 5-007) 
Sec. 10-227. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
A.  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include, as well, work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
B.  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, as well as an investigation fee as determined from time to time by ordinance. Prospective employees must submit to a set of fingerprints on regular city or United States department of justice forms to be taken by the city police department. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee as determined from time to time by ordinance, shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
C.  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city laws and regulations of the state, or rules and regulations of the county shall subject employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
D.  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relations with the owner or license of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Prior Code, § 5-008) 
Sec. 10-228. - Application for license. 
A.  Any person, association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application and a non-refundable fee as determined from time to time by ordinance to be paid to the clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required in this section. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the licensing officer at the time such application is submitted. 
B.  Application is not a license. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Prior Code, § 5-009) 
Sec. 10-229. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The full true name and any other names or aliases used by the applicant; 
2.  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
3.  The previous addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and the dates of residence at each address for the past five years; 
4.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age, such as a birth certificate or driver's license; 
5.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
6.  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
7.  Occupation of employment history and/or business history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
8.  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
9.  All convictions, including ordinance violation, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
10.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership to be filed with the city clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its reasonable managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
11.  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the rental property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
12.  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
13.  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
14.  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
15.  The city shall require the individual applicant to be fingerprinted by the city police department; 
16.  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
17.  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
18.  Address of the premises to be licenses; 
19.  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
20.  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
21.  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Prior Code, § 5-010) 
Sec. 10-230. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible manager officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the office of the city clerk and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, as determined from time to time by ordinance, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Prior Code, § 5-011) 
Sec. 10-231. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city council may grant the license if it finds: 
1.  The required fee has been paid; 
2.  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
3.  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
4.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
5.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
6.  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
7.  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
8.  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
9.  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
10.  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
11.  That the proposed premises is not located in the prohibited proximity to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned or used for residential purposes; 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located: 
i.  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulations of the city, county, state or the United States. 
ii.  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Prior Code, § 5-012) 
Sec. 10-232. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
No license provided for by this article shall be issued or held by: 
1.  An applicant who has not paid all required fees, or property taxes and taxes for a business at that location; 
2.  Any person who is not of good moral character, as defined herein; 
3.  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character, as defined herein; 
4.  Any partnership or association, any of whose offices or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character, as defined herein; 
5.  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character, as defined herein; 
6.  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state, the city or the county. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. 
(Prior Code, § 5-013) 
Sec. 10-233. - License—Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the management services director of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the management services director. The management services director shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such a denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 5-014) 
Sec. 10-234. - Same—Renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year to year basis provided that the licensees continued to meet the requirements set out in this article. All licenses must be renewed by December 31 of each year. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 5-015) 
Sec. 10-235. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued or sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Prior Code, § 5-016) 
Sec. 10-236. - Change of location or name. 
A.  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the management services director and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city code have been met. 
B.  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
C.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 5-017) 
Sec. 10-237. - Appeal—Procedure. 
A.  The licensee shall, within ten days after he has received notification of an adverse determination, submit notice of appeal to the management services director. 
B.  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
C.  The management services director shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for city council action. 
(Prior Code, § 5-018) 
Sec. 10-238. - Same—Council determine procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
1.  Set a hearing date and instruct the management services director to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
2.  Appoint a hearing office and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The management services director shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 5-019) 
Sec. 10-239. - City council hearing. 
When the management services director has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Prior Code, § 5-020) 
Sec. 10-240. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Prior Code, § 5-021) 
Sec. 10-241. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Prior Code, § 5-022) 
Sec. 10-242. - Hearing officers—Report. 
A.  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the board. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the management services director and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the management services director, with addition copies furnished to the police department. 
B.  The management services director shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board meeting occurring not less than 15 days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Prior Code, § 5-023) 
Sec. 10-243. - Same—Action of city council. 
The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
1.  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for taking of additional evidence of specific points, in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
2.  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Prior Code, § 5-024) 
Sec. 10-244. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed an amount as determined from time to time by ordinance per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 5-025) 
Sec. 10-245. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. Such suspension or revocation could possibly be deemed permanent. 
(Prior Code, § 5-026) 
Secs. 10-246—10-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 10-270. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auction means the sale of real or personal property, or both, in which the sale price of the property offered is increased by competitive bids, regardless of the method, until the highest accepted bidder becomes the purchaser. 
Consignment means any transaction where a person places goods into the custody of another but retains ownership until the goods are sold or legally transferred. 
Pawnbroker any transaction wherein there is the lending of money secured by taking possession of jewelry, wearing apparel, household goods or other personal property, with interest charged thereon, shall be regulated according to all laws and legal guidelines set forth by the State of Georgia or federal laws, regulations and/or guidelines set forth by the United States government. 
Refusal, revocation or suspension for just cause means, but is not limited to, a person, firm or corporation who has been previously convicted of any felony, any theft, fraud, receiving stolen property, drug offense in this state or any other state or territory of the United States or violation of this ordinance or any other provision as required by the City of Butler. 
Second-hand dealer means any person, firm, partnership or corporation whose business is the retail buying, selling, buy-back, exchange, dealing in or dealing with second hand articles, including, but not limited to, jewelry, watches, precious stones, gems, gold, silver, other precious metals, musical instruments and equipment, cameras, furs, small collectibles, home and auto equipment, televisions, video equipment, tolls, computers, computer equipment, firearms, auto accessories and other collectible items. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § II) 
Sec. 10-271. - Licensing procedure. 
A.  No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall operate, conduct, or engage in business as a second-hand dealer/pawnbroker unless such person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall first obtain all the necessary licenses needed to operate within the state; nor 
B.  Shall any person, firm, partnership, or corporation conduct business as a second-hand dealer/pawnbroker without obtaining the necessary business licenses from the City of Butler. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § III) 
Sec. 10-272. - Purchasing from minors. 
No second-hand dealer/pawnbroker, nor any person employed by a second-hand dealer/pawnbroker shall directly or indirectly purchase any aforementioned article from anyone under 18 years of age, knowing or having reason to believe him or her to be such, except when said minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, who shall sign the transaction record in person before said dealer. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § IV) 
Sec. 10-273. - Records, inspections, re-sale, changes, alterations. 
A.  Every second-hand dealer/pawnbroker, upon the acquisition of any aforementioned article, shall prepare transaction records upon forms approved by the city, stating full name, ID number and current residence address of the seller, date of the transaction, and a full, accurate and detailed description (to include make, model and serial number) of each article. One copy of the transaction record shall be delivered to the police department before to close of normal business hours each week in which business is transacted. 
B.  Positive identification in the form of an approved governmental photo ID shall be required of the seller and the type of identification used shall be noted on the dealer's record. 
C.  Said dealer shall retain copies of the purchase records in his possession, which, together with any article listed therein, may be inspected at any time by any duly authorized peace officer during regular business hours while making all reasonable efforts not to disrupt the normal course of business. 
D.  All transaction record shall be kept by said second-hand dealer/pawnbroker for a minimum period of one year. 
E.  All items purchased or pawned shall remain on the premises during the waiting period; items will not be placed on the sales floor if the original owner of said product is still within his waiting period on pawned items. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § V) 
Sec. 10-274. - Auction items. 
Any items auctioned, whether in person or otherwise, will be conducted in accordance with the laws, rules and regulation within the state. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § VI) 
Sec. 10-275. - Removal of articles by duly appointed peace officers. 
A.  If the police department or any other duly appointed law enforcement officer determines that an article is needed for evidence in a criminal investigation, said officer shall seize that evidence pursuant to applicable criminal procedures. The second-hand dealer/pawnbroker shall be issued a receipt for the article. 
B.  Pursuant to state regulations regarding the rules of evidence, the aforementioned duly appointed peace officer and or agency shall keep seized articles under the court's direction as long as necessary to permit the article to be used as evidence. At the conclusion of all court proceedings or closure of the criminal investigation the aforementioned officer and/or agency shall notify the original owner, the second-hand dealer/pawnbroker, and any person who may have lawful interest that the property will be released within 30 calendar days to the original owner if no other claim is placed on the property. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § VII) 
Sec. 10-276. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or one year in prison. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § VIII) 
Chapter 12 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 12-001. - Interments. 
All interments in the city shall be in organized, established cemeteries. Anyone violating this shall upon conviction be punished for each offense as prescribed in section 1-008. 
(Prior Code, § 13-001) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-001. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 43-1) 
Sec. 14-002. - Emergency management and response powers. 
A.  Declaration of local emergency. 
1.  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the city. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection 14-002.B of this section. 
2.  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
3.  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city governing authority may, by resolution and in accordance with the city Charter, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
4.  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
i.  The emergency operations coordinator and/or his designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
ii.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the emergency operations coordinator or his designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The emergency operations coordinator is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city governing authority. 
iii.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 14-005 (overcharging prohibited), section 14-006 (registration of building and repair services), and section 14-007 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city governing authority is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 14-004 as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The emergency operations coordinator shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
i.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
ii.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
iii.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
iv.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
v.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
vi.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
vii.  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
viii.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
ix.  To provide welfare benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
x.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
B.  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the City of Butler, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE] ; and 
Whereas, in the judgment of the mayor of the City of Butler, there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Butler, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
1.  That the local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
2.  That the following sections of the City of Butler Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: section 14-005, Overcharging; section 14-006, Registration of Building and Repair Services; section 14-007, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews] ; and 
3.  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from subsections 14-002.A4c, d of this section, or such other measures as appropriate.] . 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE]. 
[Signed] 
Mayor, City of Butler. 
C.  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 43-2) 
Sec. 14-003. - Enforcement and remedies. 
A.  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the emergency operations coordinator or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
B.  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the emergency operations coordinator or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding an amount as determined from time to time by ordinance, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
C.  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the emergency operations coordinator is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
D.  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the city police department. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 43-3) 
Sec. 14-004. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
A.  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city governing authority shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
B.  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
C.  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
D.  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city governing authority may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
E.  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
F.  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 43-4) 
Sec. 14-005. - Overcharging prohibited. 
A.  In general. To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed three months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city governing authority. 
C.  Effective date . This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the governing authority of the city, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 43-5) 
Sec. 14-006. - Registration of building and repair services. 
A.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
B.  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at a rate as determined from time to time by state law per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
C.  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
1.  Name of applicant; 
2.  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
3.  Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
4.  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
5.  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
6.  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
7.  The state sales tax number or authorization; 
8.  The state business license number, if required. 
D.  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city governing authority, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three months. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 43-6) 
Sec. 14-007. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
A.  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
B.  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose re-entry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
1.  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
2.  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
3.  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
4.  Authorized national guard or federal military personnel; 
5.  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
6.  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
7.  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
8.  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
9.  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
10.  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by emergency operations coordinator. 
D.  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
E.  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 43-7) 
Chapter 15 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-001—15-020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 15-021. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-1) 
Sec. 15-022. - Purpose and intent. 
Groundwater is among the nation's most important natural resources. It provides drinking water to urban and rural communities, supports irrigation and industry, sustains the flow of streams and rivers, and maintains riparian and wetland ecosystems. In many areas of the nation, the future sustainability of groundwater resources is at risk from overuse and contamination. Because groundwater systems typically respond slowly to human actions, a long-term perspective is needed to manage this valuable resource. This article is intended to implement rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division known as the "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria" as they specifically relate to groundwater recharge areas (Rule 391-3-16-.02). It is essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the public that the quality of subsurface public drinking water be maintained. Groundwater resources exist in underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface that are capable of providing water for a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface, known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when development occurs within groundwater recharge areas. Certain land use activities, such as septic tanks, underground tanks, and chemical spills, pose a significant threat to the quality of groundwater supplies. Therefore, it is necessary to manage land uses within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats and development impacts are minimized. To this end, this article establishes minimum lot sizes to provide for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems. 

Recharge of Groundwater from Surface Water During Normal and Drought Conditions
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-2) 
Sec. 15-023. - Definitions. 
Acre-foot means the volume (as of irrigation water) that would cover one acre to a depth of one foot. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or providing water for a well. 
DRASTIC means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: The DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility.) 
Hydrologic Atlas 18 means a map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1989, which identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of Georgia as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils." 
Hydrologic Atlas 20 means a multicolored map of Georgia at a scale of 1:500,000, prepared by the Georgia DNR using the DRASTIC methodology and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1992, which shows areas of high, average (or medium), and low susceptibility of groundwater to pollution in Georgia. This map is also commonly known as the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Each significant recharge area shown on Hydrologic Atlas 18 is classified on Hydrologic Atlas 20 as high, medium, or low, and these classifications are relevant in this article. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the Georgia DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the City of Butler. Each significant recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on Hydrologic Atlas 20. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-3) 
Sec. 15-024. - Adoption of Hydrologic Atlas 18 by reference. 
Hydrologic Atlas 18, as defined by this article is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-4) 
Sec. 15-025. - Adoption of Hydrologic Atlas 20 by reference. 
Hydrologic Atlas 20, as defined by this article is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-5) 
Sec. 15-026. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all lands within City of Butler that are mapped as significant recharge areas as defined by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-6) 
Sec. 15-027. - Permit required. 
No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the land use officer for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the land use or building conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to a land use permit or building permit being issued, the land use officer shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-7) 
Sec. 15-028. - County health department approval of permit required. 
No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the land use officer for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the local health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter DHR Manual) and this article. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-8) 
Sec. 15-029. - Minimum lot size. 
Within an area governed by this article, new homes or land uses served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum lot sizes as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in sections A—F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the local health department. 
1.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
2.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area. 
3.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this section. Within an area governed by this article, no subdivision plat shall be recorded until and unless said plat has been reviewed and approved by the land use officer as being in compliance with the minimum lot sizes established by this section. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-1) 
Sec. 15-030. - Mobile home parks. 
Within an area governed by this article, new mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum areas in square feet as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in sections A—F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the local health department. 
1.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area; 
3.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
Within an area governed by this article, no site plan for a mobile home park or manufactured home park shall be considered valid until and unless said site plan has been reviewed and approved by the land use officer as being in compliance with the minimum space sizes established by this section. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-10) 
Sec. 15-031. - Agricultural waste impoundment sites. 
New agricultural waste impoundment sites in a significant recharge area, as specified below, shall contain a liner consisting of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service: 
1.  Any agricultural waste impoundment site located in a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  Any agricultural waste impoundment site within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area which exceeds 15 acre-feet; or, 
3.  Any agricultural waste impoundment site within a low pollution susceptibility area that exceeds 50 acre-feet. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-11) 
Sec. 15-032. - Above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks. 
Within an area governed by this article, new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a minimum volume of 660 gallons shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-12) 
Sec. 15-033. - Hazardous materials handling facilities. 
Within an area governed by this article, new facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local or applicable state fire code requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-13) 
Sec. 15-034. - Stormwater infiltration basins. 
Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in significant recharge areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(1), § 1-14) 
Secs. 15-035—15-040. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 15-041. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Wetlands Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-1) 
Sec. 15-042. - Purpose and intent. 
Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the well-being of communities in the State of Georgia. Nationally, a considerable number of wetlands have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other activities. Without additional regulation, piecemeal or cumulative losses of wetlands will continue to occur over time. Therefore, it is in the interest of public safety and general welfare to avoid damage or destruction to wetlands. The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection by adopting a generalized wetlands map; provide for the withholding of land use and building permits in areas designated as wetlands until a jurisdictional wetland determination is completed; and establish permitted and prohibited land uses within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-2) 
Sec. 15-043. - Definitions. 
Generalized wetlands map means a map of wetlands provided in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map showing wetlands within the City of Butler. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas (see figure below). The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 

(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-3) 
Sec. 15-044. - Adoption of generalized wetlands map by reference. 
The generalized wetlands map, as defined by this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference, and hereby made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-4) 
Sec. 15-045. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all lands within the City of Butler that are shown on the generalized wetlands map, as defined by this article, as wetlands. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-5) 
Sec. 15-046. - Permit required. 
No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the land use officer for a land use, building, structure, or manufactured home, nor shall any regulated activity as defined by this article commence, unless the land use, building, structure, manufactured home or regulated activity conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to a land use permit or building permit being issued, the land use officer shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-6) 
Sec. 15-047. - Jurisdictional wetland determination required. 
If an area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetland as shown on the generalized wetlands map, as determined by the land use officer, no local land use permit or building permit on said wetland shall be issued until a jurisdictional wetland determination has been completed and either of the following occur: 
1.  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that there are jurisdictional wetlands present on the proposed development site, a section 404 permit is required, and either a section 404 permit or a letter of permission is issued by the Corps for the proposed development; or, 
2.  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that jurisdictional wetlands are not present on the proposed development site, and no section 404 permit or letter of permission is required. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-7) 
Sec. 15-048. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: 
1.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
2.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
3.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
4.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
5.  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
6.  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-8) 
Sec. 15-049. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
1.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
2.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2016(2), § 3-9) 
Chapter 16 - ETHICS 

Sec. 16-001. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
1.  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
2.  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
3.  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
4.  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-001) 
Sec. 16-002. - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-002) 
Sec. 16-003. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
1.  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares of equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
2.  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less. 
3.  The person serves as a corporate officer or a member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
4.  The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-003) 
Sec. 16-004. - Prohibitions. 
A.  No city official or employee shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
B.  No city official or employee, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
C.  No city official or employee shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
D.  No city official or employee shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
E.  No city official or employee shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
1.  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
2.  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
3.  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
F.  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
G.  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
H.  No city official or employee shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official or employee if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's or employee's judgment or performance of city duties. 
I.  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
J.  No city official or employee shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
K.  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
L.  A city official or employee shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
M.  A city official or employee shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's or employee's immediate family, or those with whom the official or employee has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
N.  A city official or employee shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure. No city official or employee shall attempt to obligate the city, nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
O.  No city official or employee shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore unless failure to attend was due to extreme and reasonable conditions. 
P.  No city official or employee shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the city, nor shall any city official or employee engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the city on any matter pending before the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-004) 
Sec. 16-005. - Conflict of interest 
A.  A city official or employee may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity or property in which the official has substantial interest. 
B.  A city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
C.  Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-005) 
Sec. 16-006. - Municipal court and ethics officer. 
A.  Municipal court. The municipal court of the city shall hear and render decisions on all properly written verified complaints for officials filed under this article. 
B.  Ethics officer. The ethics officer of the city shall collect and disseminate all properly written verified complaints for city employees filed under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-006) 
Sec. 16-007. - Receipt of complaints. 
A.  Complaints against city officials. 
1.  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the clerk of the municipal court of the city. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court clerk shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
2.  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
3.  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper written form, the municipal court shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the municipal court is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
4.  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
5.  The municipal court is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
6.  The municipal court is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
7.  Findings of the municipal court shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
8.  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date the qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
B.  Complaints against employees. 
1.  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the ethics officer of the city. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics officer shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city employee charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
2.  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
3.  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper written form, the ethics officer shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary action. The ethics officer will notify the mayor and council as soon as possible in regards to the complaint but within no more than seven calendar days. 
4.  The mayor and council are empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint provided by the ethics officer shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city employee. For complaints that are not dismissed, the mayor and council are empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
5.  Findings of the mayor and council shall be submitted in writing. A copy will be given to the city employee as to the determination of the initial findings. This will be a dismissal or a notice of a hearing to be set within 60 days. A copy of the determination will be placed in a separate file other than the employee's permanent personnel file. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-007) 
Sec. 16-008. - Service of complaint. 
A.  Service of complaint for city officials . The municipal court clerk as appointed herein set forth, shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a properly written, verified complaint. Service may be made by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The municipal court shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedure and regulations it establishes, but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the municipal court shall be rendered to the mayor and council within seven calendar days after the completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the municipal court, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of the time deadlines in this section, shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the municipal court or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
B.  Service of complaint for employees. The ethics officer herein set forth, shall cause the complaint to be served on the city employee charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a properly written, verified complaint. Service may be made by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The mayor and city council shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedure and regulations it establishes, but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the mayor and council shall be rendered within seven calendar days after the completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the mayor and city council, the city employee who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city employee subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of the time deadlines in this section, shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the mayor or city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-008) 
Sec. 16-009. - Right to appeal. 
A.  Right to appeal for officials. 
1.  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the municipal court may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
2.  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision of the municipal court. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
B.  Right to appeal for employees. 
1.  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the municipal court may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
2.  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision of the mayor and council. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-009) 
Sec. 16-010. - Penalty. 
Any personal violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
1.  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
2.  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-010) 
Sec. 16-011. - Adoption of ordinance. 
All ordinances and parts of past ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2012, § 14-012) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide application of International Fire Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 

Sec. 18-001. - Fire department to answer calls in the city and within a five mile radius of the corporate city limits. 
The fire department of the city is hereby authorized and directed to answer all calls within the city and all fire calls within a five mile radius of the corporate city limits. 
(Prior Code, § 15-001) 
Sec. 18-002. - Charge for calls inside and outside city. 
There could be a charge to the insurance policy if a fire clause is included in the insured's policy for each fire call answered by the city fire services. The amount of fire service charges will be determined from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 15-002) 
Sec. 18-003. - Damaging fire plugs. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or persons to hit, knock down or otherwise injure a fire plug, either from carelessness or otherwise, and the violator shall be subject to a fine of at least an amount that it will cost to replace same as a minimum fine. 
(Prior Code, § 15-003) 
Sec. 18-004. - Compensation of volunteer department. 
The city shall pay the volunteer fire department per active member for all drills and fires. The amount of compensation will be determined from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 15-004) 
Sec. 18-005. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the prevention of fire, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, as recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1970 Edition thereof and the whole thereof save and except such portions as are hereafter debted, modifies or amended, a copy of which code is attached hereto and made a part hereof, and said code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Prior Code, § 15-011) 
Chapter 20 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-001. - Authorization. 
Article IX, section II of the constitution of the state and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 20-002. - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 20-003. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
2.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
3.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
4.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
5.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 20-004. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
1.  To protect human life and health; 
2.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
3.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
4.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
5.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
6.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
7.  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 20-005. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 20-007. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
1.  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
2.  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
3.  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
4.  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction" commenced before September 2, 2009 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for the community]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 8, 2009 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing , means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. The term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 2, 2009 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 8, 2009 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after December 8, 2009 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
1.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 6) 
Sec. 20-006. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 20-007. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
A.  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 2, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
B.  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 2, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for ("the county") are hereby adopted by reference. 
C.  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
D.  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Butler City Hall, 12 Cedar St., P.O. Box 476, Butler, GA 31006. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 20-008. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 20-009. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 20-010. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 20-011. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 20-012. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 20-013. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as determined from time to time by ordinance or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 20-014—20-044. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 20-045. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 20-046. - Permit procedures. 
A.  Application for a development permit shall be made to the city on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
B.  Upon submittal of an application for development permit to the city, the city administrator shall submit said permit, plans and other related documents to a qualified engineer (as determined by the city) requesting an estimate for completion of all engineering tasks required under this article. Upon approval and payment of the estimated fees, the city administrator and the engineering firm will commence processing of said application for development permit. 
C.  Any and all fees for services rendered by said engineer shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Issuance of a final permit will be conditioned upon payment in full of any such additional fees by applicant. 
D.  Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 20-069.2; and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
2.  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
E.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 20-047. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
2.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
3.  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
4.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 20-007.B, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of sections 20-068 through 20-074. 
5.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 20-046.B. 
6.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 20-046.B. 
7.  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 20-046.D1c and section 20-069.2 or 5a. 
8.  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
9.  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency (FEMA). 
10.  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
11.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
12.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building official at Butler City Hall, 12 Cedar St., P.O. Box 476, Butler, GA 31006 and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 20-048—20-067. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 20-068. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
2.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
3.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
4.  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
5.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
6.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
7.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
8.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
9.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
10.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 20-069. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
1.  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 20-068.4, "Elevated Buildings". 
2.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
3.  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 20-047.7. 
4.  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
i.  Individual lots or parcels; 
ii.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
iii.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
iv.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. section 20-068.6.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
i.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
ii.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
iii.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 20-069.A4 of this section. 
5.  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 20-007, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 20-069.A4 of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 20-070. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 20-007, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
1.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 20-007, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections 20-070.2 and 20-070.3 of this section shall apply. 
2.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
3.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 20-068.4 "Elevated Buildings". 
4.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
5.  The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 20-071. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 20-007, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
2.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 20-069. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 20-072. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 20-007, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 20-068.4, "Elevated Buildings". The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
2.  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 20-046.1c and 20-046.1b. 
3.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 20-073. - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
B.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 20-074. - Standards for critical facilities. 
A.  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
B.  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 20-075—20-091. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 20-092. - Variance request procedures. 
A.  The zoning board of appeals as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
B.  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
H.  Conditions for variances. 
1.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
2.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
3.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
4.  They shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
I.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2009, art. 5) 
Chapter 21 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-001. - Jurisdiction of state offenses. 
The city hereby elects to exercise jurisdiction over all those state offenses for which a grant of jurisdiction has been provided by general state law. In the exercise of that jurisdiction, officers writing tickets returnable to the municipal court shall delineate the nature of the offense charged by name and the citation of state law and summons. Offenses to be cited and brought before the recorder's court for final adjudication include: 
1.  Possession of one ounce or less of marijuana, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-30 and 16-3-2. 
2.  Operating a motor vehicle without effective insurance, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-10. 
3.  Theft by shoplifting when the property which is the subject of this theft is valued at $500.00 or less, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
4.  Furnishing alcoholic beverages to and possession and purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-23 and 3-3-23.1. 
5.  Criminal trespass, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2007, § 21-000) 
Secs. 21-002—21-020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES 

Sec. 21-021. - Aiding in jailbreak; helping resist arrest; smuggling items into jail. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner aid or assist any prisoner to break out of any jail where city prisoners are being held, or to aid or assist any person in avoiding arrest by the officers of the city, or furnish to any prisoner, whether in jail or at work on the public works, any article or thing of any sort without the consent of the police. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2007, § 21-001) 
Sec. 21-022. - Billiards, bagatelle; prohibited playing on Sunday. 
It shall be unlawful for any keeper of any billiard or bagatelle table or alley for playing with pins and balls to permit such table or alley to be open on Sunday. 
(Prior Code, § 21-002) 
Sec. 21-023. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-024. - Contemptuous or disorderly conduct toward mayor and council. 
Any person guilty of contemptuous or disorderly conduct towards the mayor and council, or in their presence, shall be punished by a fine as determined from time to time by ordinance or confinement in the city jail not to exceed 20 days. 
(Prior Code, § 21-004) 
Sec. 21-025. - Damaging, defacing park property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the walks laid out in any public park and trespass upon the grass, or face any of the seats, fountains or other property therein, or to cut or whittle thereon with a knife or other instrument, or to write or mark thereon with a pen, pencil or other instrument, or to cut or injure any of the shade trees in said park. 
(Prior Code, § 21-005) 
Sec. 21-026. - Damaging, defacing public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, break or destroy any of the property of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-006) 
Sec. 21-027. - Damaging, interfacing with poles, wires, other fixtures. 
It shall be unlawful to cut, break, or in any other manner molest or interfere with any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole used for the support of electrical wires or to throw at, break, injure, or in any other manner molest or interfere with any fixture, wire, lamp, or other thing placed thereon, or tie any horse, mule or other animal of any sort to any pole. 
(Prior Code, § 21-007) 
Sec. 21-028. - Dead animals. 
No person shall deposit any carcass of any dead animal upon any ground, public or private, within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-008) 
Sec. 21-029. - Discharging or possessing firearms, other weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or gun outside of their home and off their premises, on the sidewalks or streets of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-009) 
Sec. 21-030. - Disorderly conduct. 
A.  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person, within the corporate limits of the city, commits any of the following: 
1.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of or in fear of his safety, life, limb, or health; 
2.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
3.  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; 
4.  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; 
5.  Endangers or interferes with the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm; 
6.  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or of public property; 
7.  Assembles or congregates with another or others and causes, provokes or engages in any fight or brawl; 
8.  Collects in bodies or in crowds and engages in unlawful activities; 
9.  Assembles or congregates with another or other and engages or attempts to engage in gaming; 
10.  Frequents any public place and obtains money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device, or attempts to do so; 
11.  Assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain or attempt to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person; 
12.  Utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscene words or epithets; 
13.  Frequents any place or vehicle where gaming or the illegal sale of possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed, or tolerated; 
14.  Uses "fighting words" directed towards any person, causing said person to become outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
15.  Assembles or congregates with another or others and does bodily harm to another or the property of another or public property; 
16.  By acts of violence or threats thereof, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
17.  Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
18.  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive condition; 
19.  Appears in public in an intoxicated state or condition, whether said intoxication is by alcohol and/or drugs; 
20.  Exposes any part of his body in an indecent or lewd manner; 
21.  Creates loud noises, by and in any manner, which disrupts, disturbs, or otherwise interferes with the peace and tranquility of the public; 
22.  Attempts to hinder, delay, obstruct, or prevent any law enforcement officer from performing his duty; 
23.  Keeps a disorderly house or house of ill fame; all adults residing in the house shall be considered its keeper; 
24.  Lingers or loiters along public sidewalks, streets, or public ways of the city; 
25.  Fails or refuses to remove themselves from the private property of another when requested to do so by the owner or occupants thereof; 
26.  Either alone or in concert with others, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or depriving the owner of possession thereof (or the value thereof), in whole or in part, conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise from a retail establishment, alters the price tag or other price marking of goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment, or wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise, where the property or value thereof is $300.00 or less; or 
27.  Commits such words, acts, or conduct upon public property, upon private property that is open to the general public, or within the cartilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which, under ordinary circumstances, will naturally tend to disturb the public peace, tranquility or decorum, scandalize the community, shock the public sense or morality, or cause a detriment to the health and welfare of the community. 
B.  Continued conduct. Continuation of the disorderly conduct constitutes additional offenses, and each day that the disorderly conduct continues shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
C.  Any person who commits the offense of disorderly conduct within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-008. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2007, § 21-010) 
Sec. 21-031. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-032. - Disorderly houses, etc. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and keep a lewd house or place for the practice of fornication or adultery, either by himself or others, within the city. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of idleness, gambling, drinking or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person, within the limits of the city, to keep and maintain a house of ill-fame, or assignation house, or knowingly permit any house owned or controlled by him to be used or occupied for lewd purposes, or as an assignation house, or to knowingly rent, lease or let any house for such purposes. 
D.  It shall be the duty of the police force to arrest any person who may be found at any lewd house or house of ill-fame within the city, and bring such a person before the recorder's court, which shall, on conviction, punish such person as prescribed inn this Code, provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person who may visit such houses on necessary and legitimate business. 
(Prior Code, § 21-012) 
Sec. 21-033. - Drive-in restaurants; lighting required. 
All proprietor or operators of drive-in restaurants shall be required to provide and maintain sufficient illumination of all parts of drive-in parking lots to render all positions of all persons upon such parking areas of such drive-in lots clearly visible to other patrons and proprietors, from the time of darkness until the time of closing. 
(Prior Code, § 21-013) 
Sec. 21-034. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-035. - Fireworks prohibited. 
No person shall explode or burst any firecracker, sky rockets, Roman candles or any other fireworks of like character within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-015) 
Sec. 21-036. - Gambling. 
No gambling or gambling scheme or device of any kind shall be allowed within the city. Any person caught gambling with disorderly conduct and punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 21-016) 
Sec. 21-037. - Indecent exposure. 
A.  Offenses. A person commits the offense of indecent exposure when he performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
1.  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
2.  Exposure of the genitals; 
3.  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
4.  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; 
5.  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
6.  Urination or defecation; or 
7.  Appears wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
B.  Fines and penalties. A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty as determined from time to time by ordinance, plus fees on the first offense and not more than $200.00, plus fees for each subsequent offense. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of the section, however, the municipal court shall have the same authority as the superior court to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences. 
C.  Defenses . It is a defense under this article if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state constitution. Any defense under this subsection must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2012, § 21-017) 
Sec. 21-038. - Accumulation of junk. 
It is unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant, or other person having possession and/or control of private property to deposit, collect, store, maintain, or permit to be deposited, collected, or stored, to remain upon said private property any junk as defined in this section. A violation of this article shall be punished as provided in the Charter of the city, article VI, section 6.03. 
1.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appliance means any type of machine or device used in and about the home or premises, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, refrigerators, ice boxes, freezers, stoves, washing machines, televisions and radio sets, lawn mowers and other devices of like nature. 
Junk means any abandoned or discarded machinery, appliance, vehicle, equipment, or material of any kind whatsoever. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by means of which any person or property is or may be transported. 
2.  For the purpose of this article, an article of machinery, an appliance, a vehicle, and an article of equipment and other material shall be deemed to have been abandoned or discarded when it has become inoperable and the owner does not intend to repair it and place it back into operation. 
3.  Before any person shall be convicted of violating this section, he shall be given notice in writing that he is required within 30 days for the receipt of said notice, either: 
a.  To repair such junk and put into operation; 
b.  To remove the same from his property; or 
c.  To furnish satisfactory proof that said property has not in fact abandoned, and in being held for useful purpose. 
4.  Each day any junk shall remain upon the property in violation of this section after the expiration of the notice period provided for by subsection 21-038.3 of this section shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent offense and violation of this article. 
5.  The city may also, after the expiration of 30 days from the giving of the notice required by subsection 21-038.3 of this section, abate such condition as a nuisance by filling with the city recorder a complaint signed by the chief of police directed against the person responsible. 
6.  This section shall not be applicable to the operation of any junkyard, salvage yard, car lot or other similar business licensed by the city, where the storage and accumulation of such items are an incident to the operation of such regularly licensed business. 
(Prior Code, § 21-018) 
Sec. 21-039. - Muffler required; noise producing devices on vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the city without said vehicle being equipped with mufflers commonly known as smitties, clear or gutted mufflers or exhaust systems equipped with cutouts, or with noise making device attached to the tailpipe, such as spark plugs or inner tubes or any other noise making devices. 
(Prior Code, § 21-019) 
Sec. 21-040. - Nuisances; maintaining. 
Any person keeping or maintaining a nuisance on premises owned or occupied by him, whether a public place or private nuisance, or allowing such nuisance to continue after receiving notice from the police remove the same from the premises shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 21-020) 
Sec. 21-041. - Obscene, indecent, disorderly conduct or language. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent, turbulent, quarrelsome, boisterous, indecent, or disorderly manner, to use profane, order, morals, peace or dignity of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-021) 
Sec. 21-042. - Obscene, lewd, indecent behavior. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of open lewdness or any notorious act of public indecency, tending to debauch the morals, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-022) 
Sec. 21-043. - Obscene literature. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, within the city, to publish, circulate, give or sell, or cause to be publicly given or sold, any book, writing, print, picture, newspaper, pamphlet or other work of an obscene, licentious, lewd or libelous nature, or to publicly exhibit any lewd, obscene or indecent picture. 
(Prior Code, § 21-023) 
Sec. 21-044. - Open, dangerous wells. 
The owners of all open and dangerous wells in the city must close in, cover, or otherwise abate said nuisances. Upon failure to do so, such nuisance shall be abated by authority of the mayor and council and the cost of abating same collected from the owner. 
(Prior Code, § 21-024) 
Sec. 21-045. - Parades; permission required. 
It shall be unlawful to organize and parade through the city, whether on foot, animal or motor vehicle, without the written permission of the mayor and council. A written requisition for the event stating the date, time, etc., must be submitted along with a current certificate of insurance for no less than $1,000,000.00. This information shall be reviewed by the chief of police and forwarded to the mayor and city council. 
(Prior Code, § 21-025; Ord. of 7-10-2012, § 21-025) 
Sec. 21-046. - Portable truck weighing. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any one to operate, keep, maintain, control, and use portable weighing scales and apparatuses within the confines of the city limits on any streets thereof regardless of whether such street is connected with the state highway system of roads and regardless of whether or not such person is an employee of the state. 
B.  This section is necessary to allow the free flow of vehicular traffic and to keep moved obstructions and congestion injurious and dangerous to the public on the city streets and as granted in the Charter of the city, and which ordinance hereof is not in conflict with the constitution of the state. 
C.  The violation of this section is punishable in accordance with the city Charter; that is for each and every violation hereof the offender against said ordinance shall be punished by a fine as determined from time to time by ordinance, or by imprisonment in the jail of said county not exceeding 30 days, or by working on public streets of said city 30 days, and any one or more of the punishments may be ordered by the presiding judge of the court . 
(Prior Code, § 21-026) 
Sec. 21-047. - Posting signs on posts, trees, poles. 
It shall be unlawful to tack, nail or otherwise place signs on posts, trees, or poles in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-027) 
Sec. 21-048. - Prisoners, probationers and/or community service workers to be regulated under the chief of police or his designated personnel. 
The police department is assigned all prisoners, probationers and/or community service workers serving sentences from the city recorder's court, to be worked under the supervision of said department. This department shall work in conjunction with other inter-city departments in the above mentioned individuals by placing them in needed work areas according to ability. Each city department will be in charge of the above mentioned individuals as designated and will ensure that all time is recorded with the police department or appropriate personnel (to reflect the correct recording of hours worked). Prisoners, probationers and/or community service workers must obey instructions given by the immediate city supervisor. If any problem should arise, the city department chief must notify the chief of police immediately for directive or corrective measure. 
(Prior Code, § 21-028; Ord. of 7-10-2012, § 21-028) 
Sec. 21-049. - Prostitution, lewdness, and assignation—Defined. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assignation includes the making of any appointment or engagement for prostitution or lewdness or any act in furtherance of such appointment or engagement. 
Lewdness includes any indecent or obscene act. 
Prostitution includes the giving or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse for hire, and includes the giving or receiving of the body for licentious sexual intercourse without hire. The term "prostitution" excludes sexual intercourse between a husband and a wife. 
(Prior Code, § 21-029) 
Sec. 21-050. - Same—Maintain house for; securing another for receiving for; transporting for. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to: 
1.  Keep, set up, maintain or operate any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
2.  Offer, or to offer or agree to secure, another for the purpose of prostitution, or for any other lewd or indecent act. 
3.  Receive, or to offer or agree to receive, any person into any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation, or to permit any person to remain there such purpose. 
4.  Direct, take or transport, or to offer or agree to take or transport, any person to any place, structure or building, or to any other person, with knowledge or reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution lewdness or assignation. 
(Prior Code, § 21-030) 
Sec. 21-051. - Same—Committing; soliciting; remain during; aiding or abetting. 
It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to: 
1.  Offer to commit, or to commit, or to engage in, prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
2.  Solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit prostitution, lewdness or assignation with himself. 
3.  Reside in, enter or remain in any place, structure, or building, or to enter or remain in any conveyance, for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
4.  Aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts or things enumerated in sections 21-049 and 21-050. 
(Prior Code, § 21-031) 
Sec. 21-052. - Resisting arrest. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer of the city who, at the time of encountering resistance, shall be in the act of making, or attempting to make, a lawful arrest of such person. The term "resist", as used in this section, is defined as any act of whatever kind and nature designed to prevent the effecting of a lawful arrest. 
(Prior Code, § 21-033) 
Sec. 21-053. - Littering of sewers, drains, streets, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw paper, trash or any other article in any ditch, sewer or street within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-034; Ord. of 7-10-2012, § 21-034) 
Sec. 21-054. - Slot machine. 
It shall be unlawful to own, operate, possess or play any slot machine, or to own or operate any place of business in which is located a slot machine. As used in the section, the term "slot machine" shall mean any machine or device adopted for use in such a way that, as a result of the insertion of a coin or other thing of value, is caused to operate or may be operated, and by reason of any elements of chance or of other outcome unpredictable to him, the user may receive or become entitled to receive any piece of money, credit, allowance or other thing of value. 
(Prior Code, § 21-035) 
Sec. 21-055. - Throwing stones, other missiles. 
No person shall pitch, throw, or cast any stones or missile at or upon any house, window, lamp, electric light or telephone poles or fixtures, or shade trees in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-036) 
Sec. 21-056. - Tickets for standing room in places of amusement prohibited; blocking aisles. 
No proprietor, employer or employee of any moving picture show or other place of amusement in the city shall sell tickets for standing room in theaters, picture shows and such places of amusement, or permit patrons of such places of amusement. 
(Prior Code, § 21-037) 
Sec. 21-057. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-058. - Trains; warning when approaching crossing. 
It shall be unlawful to run a train within the city after approaching within 100 yards of the first public crossing without plainly and distinctly blowing the whistle while the train is in motion. 
(Prior Code, § 21-040) 
Sec. 21-059. - Trees, damaging, defacing, etc. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, by themselves or by their servant, to cut down trees on any public lot or square in the city. Each repetition of such act shall be taken and construed as a separate offense. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to tack or nail any paper, cardboard, tin or any other thing upon any shade tree within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-041) 
Sec. 21-060. - Watching exhibitions, games without paying admission. 
It shall be unlawful to climb on the fence of any fair ground or baseball park, or other like place of amusement, while any exhibition is in progress therein, or to enter any roped-off enclosure wherein any game or exhibition is in progress except at the regular entrance, or to stop any wagon, dray, automobile or other vehicle in the immediate vicinity thereof for the purpose of standing or sitting thereon, and thereby obtaining a view of said game or exhibition, without paying the usual entrance fee charged. 
(Prior Code, § 21-043) 
Chapter 24 - SANITATION AND HEALTH 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-001—24-018. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 24-019. - Litter control and garbage disposal. 
A.  Definitions. 
Litter includes, without limitation, all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description. Public or private property includes without limitation the rights-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
B.  Scope. 
1.  Dumping litter on public or private property. It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city unless: the property is designated by the city for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized to use such property for such purpose; the litter is properly placed into a litter receptacle or container lawfully installed on such property; or the person is the owner or lawful tenant and has properly placed non-oversized litter at curbside for regular scheduled pickups, in a manner consistent with the public welfare. Oversized litter is that which does not fit in a standard garbage collection company supplied bin. 
2.  Prima facie evidence. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any vehicle, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
3.  Rebuttable presumption. Except as provided in subsection 24-019.B2 of this section, whenever any litter is discovered to contain any items which display the name of a person thereon so as to indicate that the item belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person has violated this section. 
4.  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies and officers of the city and any person, officer or constable appointed by the council are authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with the above regulations. 
5.  Misuse or vandalization of container. If a container is clearly marked household garbage only, it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material into the container other than household garbage. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize, any containers provided by the city for the dumping of trash or garbage. Any person who violates this subsection or 24-019.B6 of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
6.  Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: by a fine as determined from time to time by ordinance; in the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile, all litter deposited by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; or in the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up all litter from any public park, private right-of-way or, with the prior permission of the owner, private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter. The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(Prior Code, § 17-001) 
Sec. 24-020. - Garbage containers. 
A.  Required specifications. The owner, agent, and occupant of any premises, improved or unimproved, in the city, wherein garbage shall be created, shall provide a metal and/or plastic cover, water-tight container or containers, each with a tight fitting metal and/or plastic cover, such container or containers to be 30 gallon size and of such numbers as to receive the garbage accumulation of seven day of each premises, and shall place all garbage in said containers, and shall place such containers, or cause them to be placed at such a place on said premises as to afford easy access for the purpose of garbage pick-up. It shall be lawful for such owner, agent, and/or occupant of any such premises to have, maintain, or keep garbage on any premises except in such garbage containers as are provided in this section. 
B.  To be kept covered. Containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when open to receive garbage or to have the contents removed, as provided for hereafter. 
C.  Application to business and residential premises. The provisions of this section shall apply to all public and privates markets, as well as all places of business, hotels, motels, restaurants, and all other premises, whether used for business or residential purposes. Commercial establishments having perishable garbage and refuse shall provide a separate metal and/or plastic, water and fly-tight container for such waste only. Other nonperishable garbage and waste from commercial establishments shall be placed in separate containers or where desirable, owner, agent, and occupant of commercial establishment may build an enclosure or bin in which to place nonperishable garbage and waste, provide enclosure or bin is built so as not to be located on a public street and provided further that said enclosure or bin be constructed so as to ensure that the weather and predators do not remove said garbage and waste therefrom. 
(Prior Code, § 17-002) 
Sec. 24-021. - Location. 
Containers may be kept at any place on the premises convenient to the owner, agent, or occupant except that on pickup date said garbage container shall be placed on the property line adjacent to a public street so as to afford easy access for the purpose of garbage pickup. A container not so located on the pickup date shall not be picked up by the city except in those special instances where city council authorizes garbage pickup at places other than that herein defined. 
(Prior Code, § 17-003) 
Secs. 24-022—24-045. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS 

Sec. 24-046. - Permit required. 
All eating and drinking establishments or places in the city shall be required to secure a permit from the county health department. A person conducting an itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a permit. No business license shall be issued an eating or drinking establishment or place or person conducting an itinerant restaurant within the city before a permit has been granted by the county health department. 
(Prior Code, § 17-004) 
Secs. 24-047—24-065. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 24-066. - Definitions. 
The following word, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Human excreta means the bowel and kidney discharges of the human body. 
Sanitary water closet means any flush toilet properly connected with a public sanitary sewer system or a septic tank. 
Septic tank means an underground cavity with watertight walls into which flows the effluent of sanitary water closets. The term "septic tank" shall be constructed to mean a structure built in strict accordance with the plans and specifications of the county health department. These plans and specifications are adopted by the city. 
Septic tank absorption field or drainfield means an underground system of pipes, leading from the septic tank, consisting of open jointed concrete or clay pipe, so distributed that the effluent from a septic tank is oxidized and absorbed by the soil. This system shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications of the county health department. 
(Prior Code, § 17-006; Code 1987, § 10-20; Ord. of 6-13-1959, § 1) 
Sec. 24-067. - Facilities for human excreta disposal required. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, to maintain, or use or permit the use of any residence, place of business or other building or place where persons reside, congregate, or are employed, which is not provided with means for the disposal of human excreta, either by sanitary water closet or a septic tank, provided that the means for disposal of human excreta shall be provided for each residence, place of business, or other building for the exclusive use of the occupancy therein. 
(Prior Code, § 17-007; Code 1935, § 96; Code 1987, § 10-21; Ord. of 6-13-1959, § 2(A)) 
Sec. 24-068. - Septic tank permit; approval. 
Before septic tank and drainfield construction, the person in charge of such construction shall obtain a permit from the county health department. After construction is completed and before it is covered with earth, an inspection shall be obtained and approval granted by a representative of the county health department. 
(Prior Code, § 17-008; Code 1987, § 10-22; Ord. of 6-13-1959, § 2(G)) 
Sec. 24-069. - Connection to private system required pending availability of public sewer. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with this article. When such a sewer is so available, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any septic tank or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Prior Code, § 17-009; Code 1987, § 10-23) 
Sec. 24-070. - Privies prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a privy or dry closet in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17-010; Code 1935, § 95; Code 1987, § 10-24) 
Sec. 24-071. - Sanitary method of disposal required. 
Every residence and building in which human being reside, are employed or congregate, shall be required to have a sanitary method of human excreta disposal: namely, either a sanitary closet connecting with the city sewage system, or if not available a septic tank of typed approved by the department of public health of the state. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any human excreta within the corporate limits of the city except in a sanitary water closet connected with the city sewage system or in a septic tank of type approved by the department of public health of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 17-011) 
Chapter 26 - SOIL EROSION 

Sec. 26-001. - Title. 
A.  Established. This chapter will be known as "City of Butler Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Section." 
B.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
District means the county soil and water conservation district. 
Erosion and sediment control plan (the "plan") means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from land-disturbing activity. 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Filling means the placement of any soil or other solid material on natural ground surface or excavation. 
Finished grade means the final grade or elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of the ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in this chapter 
Local planning commission means the city planning and zoning commission. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under this section. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, entity, joint venture, public or private corporation, LLC, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Slope means degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Structural erosion and sediment control practices means the practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vegetative erosion and sediment control measures means the measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any areas adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-001) 
Sec. 26-002. - Scope and exclusions. 
A.  This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A., § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in nominal soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum standards as set forth in this chapter. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 12, ch. 5, art. 2, entitled the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include the raising, harvesting, or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving one acre or less which is not part of a land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of more than one acre; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one acre or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections 26-002.A1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state toll-way authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter; provided further that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state toll-way authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1 except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and toll-way authority is a secondary permittee for a project within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development of sale under the state general permit in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holder; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
B.  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements , the issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-002) 
Sec. 26-003. - Application procedure. 
A.  Generally. The landowner, developer and designated planners and engineers are encouraged to review the general development plans and detailed plans of any unit of government that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They are also encouraged to become acquainted with the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinances, this article and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the boundaries of the city. 
B.  Compliance. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the confines of the city without first obtaining a permit from the issuing authority of the city to perform such activity. 
2.  The application for permit shall be submitted to the issuing authority. Applications for permits will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sediment control plan. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the date specified in section 26-002.A4. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 26-001. 
3.  A fee, in the amount as determined from time to time by ordinance shall be charged for each application. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the applications and plan to the Ocmulgee River soil and water conservation district or its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sediment control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. 
C.  No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district. Such district review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct, review, and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district permits. 
1.  A permit will be issued after the district has determined that the plan for erosion and sediment control complies with the requirements of section 26-004 and after the issuing authority has determined that the plan complies with all ordinances, rules and regulations in effect within the city. 
2.  Permits will be issued or denied as soon as practical after the application is filed with the issuing authority but in any event not later than 45 days after the receipt of a completed application. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished the applicant. 
3.  If the tract is to be developed in stages, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
D.  A permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, with the permit conditions or with this chapter. 
E.  Data required. The applicant's erosion and sediment control plan shall include, as a minimum, the following information for the entire tract of land to be disturbed, whether or not the tract will be developed in stages: 
1.  A narrative description of the overall project. This narrative shall include: 
a.  An anticipated starting and completion dates of each sequence and stages of land-disturbing activities and the excepted date the final stabilization will be completed. 
b.  A description of the sediment control program and sediment control practices. 
c.  An adequate description of general topographic and soils conditions of the tract as available from the issuing authority of the Ocmulgee River soil and water conservation district. 
d.  A description of the zoning classification of adjacent property and a description of existing structures, building, and other fixed improvements located on surrounding properties. 
e.  A description of the maintenance programs for sediment control facilities including inspection programs, vegetative establishment of exposed soils, method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste material removed from control facilities and disposition of temporary structural measures. 
2.  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations bearing the signature/seal of applicant and containing: 
a.  A site location drawing of the proposed project, indicating the location of the proposed project in relation to roadways, jurisdictional boundaries, streams and rivers. 
b.  A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be performed. 
c.  A topographic map containing contours at an interval and scale that will depict the existing and finished grades, existing and proposed watercourses, and the proposed features of the development. 
d.  A plan for temporary and permanent vegetative and structural erosion and sediment control measure. 
e.  Specifications of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in accordance with the standards and specifications of this article. 
f.  Computation, timing schedules and other supportive data required for review of applicant's plan. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-002) 
Sec. 26-004. - Principles and standards. 
A.  Implementations . Excessive soil erosion and resulting pollution can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not included by this article shall contain provisions for applications for application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. These provisions shall be incorporated into the Ocmulgee River. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the standards and specifications of this article. The application of measure shall apply to all features of the sire, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sediment pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
B.  General design principle . The permittee shall follow sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resulting sedimentation consistent with the following principles. 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in the run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basin, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any case, that such crossing are kept to a minimum. 
C.  Standard and specifications. 
D.  Plans for land-disturbing activities. Plans for land-disturbing activities shall contain soil erosion and sediment control plans and specifications which conform to the publication entitled Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, which is on file in the office of issuing authority. The publication is hereby incorporated by reference in this article. 
E.  Maintenance. 
1.  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the owner. 
2.  Sediment basins that are hazardous of life or property shall be fenced and posted in accordance with the standards and specifications incorporated by reference in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-003) 
Sec. 26-005. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
A.  Administrative remedies. The suspensions, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance, resolution, or regulation adopted or propagated pursuant to this article; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the council within ten days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by the decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Taylor County. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-003) 
Sec. 26-006. - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
B.  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities, defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with the permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon the person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be complied. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity falls to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
C.  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credential, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-004) 
Sec. 26-007. - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the issuing authority or its agents, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
C.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is in violation of the district approved erosion and sediment plan, terms of the permit or any portion of this article. Violators will be subject to EPA/EPD regulations and civil penalties. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-005) 
Sec. 26-008. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor imposed any liability upon the (county) or (district) for damage to any person or property. 
(Ord. of 9-1-1988, § 27-006) 
Chapter 28 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-001. - Littering prohibited. 
No person shall place any garbage, rubbish, trash, paper or any litter of any kind whatsoever upon any street, sidewalk, alley, park, lane, or other public grounds of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 29-001) 
Sec. 28-002. - Obstructing ditches, drains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to fill up any ditch or drain in any of the streets or alleys of the city or to purposely place any obstruction therein to prevent the free flow of water. 
(Prior Code, § 29-002) 
Sec. 28-003. - Obstructing streets, sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to convert any public street, sidewalk or alley in the city to his use, or place any obstruction in or upon them, or either or them such as wood, barrels and boxes, merchandise, timber or lumber, except necessarily for building purposes, and such obstruction shall be moved by the police or the street department at the expense of the owner or owners thereof or the person causing obstruction. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the placing of goods, wares, merchandise, produce, boxes, barrels or other articles on the sidewalks within three feet from the wall of a building owned by the person placing such article. 
(Prior Code, § 29-003) 
Sec. 28-004. - Obstruction to vision at intersections. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any lot, parcel or piece of land within the city to allow any obstruction to vision in the triangle formed by the lines of two intersecting streets, or a street and an alley, and a line joining points of intersection by permitting any vegetation to grow or be maintained between the heights of three feet and ten feet above the grade of the center line of the intersection, or by construction or maintaining any fence or other structure which constitutes an obstruction to view within the triangle. 
(Prior Code, § 29-004) 
Sec. 28-005. - Street name signs—Changing without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any sign designating street, avenue or other public place by a different name than that by which it is generally and legally known, or to refuse to remove the same from their property when requested to do so by an officer of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 29-005) 
Sec. 28-006. - Same—Injuring or removing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to injure, deface or remove any of the street signs posted at or near the corner of the streets in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 29-006) 
Secs. 28-007—28-032. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 28-033. - Definitions. 
The term "public place" as employed in this section shall be construed to mean a street, alley, sidewalk or other public property owned by the city or under its supervision. 
(Prior Code, § 29-012) 
Sec. 28-034. - Permit to excavate—Required. 
A.  No person shall dig or excavate in any public place within the city or install, repair or replace any property or equipment in such public place, or do any other work in or on an public place, which requires the removal or breaking of the surface or under part of any such public place, unless and until such person shall first secure, in the manner provided in this chapter, permission to do so. 
B.  If any person shall do any of the acts referred to in this section without first having secured permission to do so in the manner provided in this chapter, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in article I of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 29-013) 
Sec. 28-035. - Same—Application. 
Each person desiring permission to dig or excavate in any public place shall file with the city clerk a written or printed application, setting forth the character and location of such work to be done in any such public place, the probable number of square yards of surface to be removed and the probable date of beginning and the completion of the work. 
(Prior Code, § 29-014) 
Sec. 28-036. - Same—Fees and deposits. 
In the event the application for the permit to excavate is qualified to perform the work himself, including replacing the street to its condition prior to the excavation, there shall be no charge for the insurance of the permit, If the city must fill and resurface the street or public way, the applicant shall deposit with the city at the time of the application, a sum of money which shall be fixed by the city engineer and shall be based on the cost per square yard of replacement plus ten percent. 
(Prior Code, § 29-015) 
Sec. 28-037. - Same—Grant or refusal. 
Each application, as referred to in section 28-035 shall be delivered by the city clerk to the city engineer, who shall without unreasonable delay, either grant or reject such application. Upon rejection of the application, the applicant shall have the right to present the matter to the mayor and council, the deposit of money referred to in section 28-036 shall be returned to the person who deposited the same. 
(Prior Code, § 29-016) 
Sec. 28-038. - Failure to complete or restore. 
Upon the failure of any person, whose application to dig or excavate shall have been granted and who shall have begun work, to complete the same without delay, or upon the completion of such work, to restore the public place to the same or as good a condition as the same was before such work done, or to comply with any reasonable rules or regulations of the city engineer from time to time given to such person for the completion and restoration of such public place, such person shall upon conviction, in addition to other penalties, forfeit to the city any deposit of money so made with the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 29-017) 
Sec. 28-039. - Restoration of city. 
Upon the failure of any person to make such repairs as herein required in the manner or in the time required, the city engineer is empowered and authorized to cause such repairs to be made and such public place to be restored to its original condition, and the cost thereof, plus ten percent thereof, shall be charged to and paid by such person who failed to make such repairs, and such sum of money shall constitute and be a debt due from such person to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 29-018) 
Sec. 28-040. - Use or refund of deposit. 
The deposit of money made under section 28-036 shall stand as a guarantee and may be employed by the city for the replacement of such public place in as good condition as the same was immediately before the excavation or digging, and upon default of the person so making such deposit to restore immediately the public place to as good condition as the same was immediately before such excavation or digging was done by him, the city engineer may employ the whole or any part of such deposit of money necessary for such restoration. Upon the restoration of the public place to such condition as the same was immediately before such digging or excavating, the city clerk shall, upon the certificate of the city engineer, restore to the person so making such deposit such sum of money so deposited, or in case any part thereof is employed by the city for such restoration of such public place, upon such certificate, the city clerk shall refund such part of such sum of money remaining. 
(Prior Code, § 29-019) 
Sec. 28-041. - Prompt work. 
All digging or excavating to be done, as done, as provided in this article, shall be promptly started and completed without delay after permission shall have been granted, and such public place shall be, immediately upon the completion of such work, restored to the same or as good condition as the same was before such work was done thereon. Such work or restoration shall be at all times and in all respects in compliance with orders and supervision of the city engineer from time to time given to such person for such purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 29-020) 
Sec. 28-042. - Warning devices; posting permit. 
Upon the granting of an application for permission to dig or excavate in any public place, and in all other cases provided for in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the applicant, before beginning any such work, to enclose the place where such work is being done or otherwise afford adequate protection to street traffic. He shall post and keep posted at such place a placard showing that work is being done under permit granted by the city, with sufficient other information thereon to given ample warning to those using such public place that the same is out of repair or being repaired, and in addition thereto, he shall place sufficient markings at night by a red light, to notify those having the right to used the same that such a public place, or part thereof, is enclosed. 
(Prior Code, § 29-021) 
Sec. 28-043. - Decisions of mayor and council final. 
Any controversy between the person making a deposit in order to dig or excavate in any public place and the city clerk or city engineer respecting any of the duties to be performed by any of them, may be submitted, the action of the mayor and council thereon shall be binding on all the parties. 
(Prior Code, § 29-022) 
Secs. 28-044—28-059. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD ADDRESSING 

Sec. 28-060. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide a uniform system of assigning addresses for all properties and buildings throughout the city in order to facilitate provision of adequate public safety and emergency response service, and to minimize difficulty in locating properties and buildings for public service agencies and the general public. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-061. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address program administrator means the official of the city charged with the administration of this article, including his authorized representative, the police chief or such person as may be designated by the city council, shall serve as the address program administrator. 
Address program administrator assistant means the official of the city charged with assisting the address program administrator. The address program administrator assistant shall be the city clerk or such other person as designated by the city. 
Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter of persons for residential or business use. When separated by division walls from the ground up without openings, each such enclosure may be deemed a separate building. Buildings without divisions, as described in the article, that are used as multifamily or multiuse facility may, at the discretion of the address program administrator, be assigned more than one address. 
Concurrence means the mayor and council shall have the right to disapprove any action of the address program administrator by a majority vote. If the mayor and council shall fail to act within two regular meetings after the action of the address program administrator, the mayor and council shall be deemed to have concurred with the action. 
Driveway means a private way, beginning at the property line of a lot abutting a public road, private road, easement or private right-of-way, and leading to a building, lot or physical location. 
Private road means any one-way or two-way road for ingress and/or egress, serving two or more properties, but not for use by the general public. 
Public road means any road, street, highway, thoroughfare, or other way of passage that has been irrevocably dedicated to the public or in which the public has acquired rights by prescription, without regard to whether it is open for travel. 
Road address means the combination of numbers and road names assigned under the terms of this article which identifies a particular building, lot or other physical location. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-062. - Administration and application. 
The address program administrator and program assistant, with concurrence of the mayor and council will be responsible for interpretation and administration of the article including: 
1.  Assigning all numbers for properties and buildings. 
2.  Maintaining a database of addresses of each property and building. 
3.  Designation of individuals unit addresses within multiple housing units in conformity with this article. 
4.  Recommending to the mayor and council such changes to this article or the road name system as may be necessary to facilitate the perpetuation and efficiency of the address system. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-063. - Display of road address numbers. 
A.  Each location noted on the master address list for E911 shall be required to purchase an address sign as described herein. The city shall bill the residents or owner of the business the sum of $15.00 for each sign installed. The signs shall be installed on a metal post and metal sign with the display of official reflective address numbers so that they are clearly visible from the street or road on which the driveway to the property presents. The following criteria shall be used to properly display the numbers. 
1.  Address numbers must meet the minimum size requirements indicated as follows: 
a.  Post upon which they are mounted must bear reflective letters four inches in height. 
b.  Residences and businesses, in the incorporated areas of the city must place a post bearing a six inch by 12 inch sign with white reflective address numbers four inches in height, and in immediate proximity to the driveway or private road that leads to such residence or business. 
2.  Numbers for a multiple dwelling complex or nonresidential building shall be four inches in height and shall be placed on a post. Individual units within a multiple dwelling complex shall be required to display on a unit reflective numbers, which are four inches in height on the front door or immediately adjacent to the door. 
3.  On corner lots, the house number shall face the street named in the address. 
4.  The address program administrator and program assistant, with the concurrence of the mayor and council, will have the right to authorize and approve alternate methods of displaying numbers which meet the intent of the article when strict adherence to these standards cannot be met or impractical. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-064. - Types of numbers. 
The following two types of numbers are to be used under this article: 
A.  A primary number is to be assigned to each street frontage of each improved property. The primary number must be posted on that property if the property is occupied by a dwelling unit; structure or active use and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified. 
B.  Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures and uses coexist on the same parcel of land. Examples of secondary numbers include apartment projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit developments, recreational vehicle parks, recreational areas, shopping centers and other uses where the use of secondary numbers would clarify the location of a unit or use for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers, the address program administrator shall work with the owner, manager or person in charge of the project to determine a logical numbering system. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-065. - Roads. 
Exempt and excluded structures: 
A.  The intent of this section is to exclude from this article those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life if destroyed by fire or other events. 
1.  The following structures shall be excluded from the provision of this article. 
i.  Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address, such as a barn, poultry building, outbuilding or equipment storage building. 
ii.  Storage and accessory buildings for use of the occupant of another building on the same property. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices or the nominal workstation of an employee or such building that requires a separate mailing address, shall be exempt. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-066. - New road names. 
A.  No new public roads in the incorporated area of the city shall be named without approval of the mayor and council. 
B.  No private road names shall be recognized by this article or added to the city's list of road names without the approval of the mayor and council. 
C.  The name of any public and/or private road shall not duplicate or be confusingly similar to an existing road name. This restriction shall not apply to extensions of existing roads. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-067. - Implementation by city departments. 
Every department and official under the jurisdiction of the mayor and council shall withhold non-emergency service until the occupant, owner, or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid assigned number. Non-emergency service includes any service except law enforcement, fire, rescue, or emergency medical service. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 28-068. - Enforcement. 
Owners or occupants of properties with existing structures which do not comply with this article will be notified and requested to meet the requirements within 60 days from the date of notification. A warning notice will be issued by registered mail or certified mail after the 60 days if the requirements have not been met. The owner or occupant who does not comply with this article within 30 days after delivery of a warning notice shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted. Prosecution for violation of this article shall be upon citation, as provided in O.C.G.A. 15-10-62 and 15-10-63, in the municipal court of the city. Any person, business, establishment, congregation, group, hunting camp or other legal entity violating any of the above ordinances may be given a summons and tried in municipal court of the city. The address program administrator is authorized to issue citations for the enforcement of the provision contained within the article, as provided by O.C.G.A. 15-10-63. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Chapter 30 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-001. - General requirements and minimum standards. 
A.  A well designed subdivision means little to a prospective lot buyer until he can see actual physical transformation of raw land into lots with all the necessary improvements provided. Likewise, a well designed subdivision is not an asset to the community until the necessary improvements have been installed. In order that prospective lot purchasers may get usable products and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, every subdivider/developer shall be required to make the improvements outlined in this chapter in accordance with the specifications herein or otherwise adopted by the city council. The improvements may be made by the appropriate local authority at the expense of the subdivider/developer or the subdivider/developer can make the improvements with the approval of the appropriate local authority. 
B.  All existing roads in the city are hereby classified as shown on the official city street map adopted by the city council. Any improved road and any new road shall, upon acceptance and dedication, be classified by the city engineer subject to review by the city council. 
C.  Future thoroughfare and other street plans shall be shown on the official city street map. All roads and other features of the thoroughfare plan for the city shall be platted by the subdivider/developer in the location and to the dimension indicated on the thoroughfare plan adopted by the city council. 
D.  Approval of any proposed development may be denied, if the city council determines that such developments would necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for the provision of maintenance of such roadways. 
E.  Where proposed subdivisions and proposed developments about existing or dedicated or platted streets and the right-of-way of said streets are inadequate, the subdivider/developer shall provide to the city a deeded right-of-way to meet the minimum standards and proposed routing of the roadway. Right-of-way shall be provided from the centerline of the existing public city roadway along all lands abutting said roadway or right-of-way on both sides of the centerline when property lies along both sides of the roadway. The subdivider/developer is responsible for the length of city street through the length of the development. The subdivider/developer shall give the required right-of-way as follows: 
1.  If the subdivider/developer owns property on both sides of the city street, the right-of-way will be taken equally from each side of the centerline. 
2.  If the subdivider/developer only owns property on one side, the additional required right-of-way shall be taken from the subdivider/developer's property. 
F.  The subdivider/developer shall submit construction plans and a cost estimate to the planning and zoning office. The plans shall be reviewed by staff and the planning and zoning commission. Once the planning and zoning commission approves the plans, the subdivider/developer shall pay the amount set by the planning and zoning commission into the appropriate paving fund. It will be the incumbent upon the subdivider/developer to furnish and install a driveway or driveways from the existing, or dedicated or platted ways to each prior to the sale of the lot or the issuance of any building permits for the lot. 
G.  The subdivider/developer shall incur the cost of construction and installation of all required public improvements as shown upon the developer's approved construction plans including but limited to drives, roads, storm drainage systems, fire hydrants, dry fire hydrants, water lines and sanitary sewers. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-001) 
Sec. 30-002. - Getting started; preconstruction plat approval. 
A.  Platting authority. The city shall be the official platting authority. As the official platting authority, it hereby delegates to the zoning administrator the power and authority to approve or deny all preliminary and final plats in accordance with all the regulations of the city. 
B.  Pre-application review. Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the jurisdiction of the city is proposed, the subdivider should consult early and informally with the zoning administrator for advice and assistance. The subdivider may submit sketch plans, date showing existing conditions with the site and its vicinity, and proposed layout and development of the subdivision. The zoning administrator shall return, within 30 days, the submitted sketch plans to the subdivider where the plans do not comply with the regulations set forth in this resolution. No fee shall be charged for the pre-application review and no formal application shall be required. 
C.  Procedure for preliminary plat approval. 
1.  Following the pre-application review of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator the following: 
a.  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat; 
b.  A minimum of nine copies of the preliminary plat and other documents as specified in subsection 30-002.C2a of this section; and 
c.  A preliminary plat filing fee. 
2.  The zoning administrator shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this resolution. 
a.  Preliminary approval following review of the preliminary plat and other related material, the zoning administrator may express preliminary approval noting the conditions of such approval on a minimum of nine copies of the preliminary plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider, one copy to the city engineer, one copy to the water and sewage authority, and one copy to be added to the records of the city. Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
b.  Expiration time. Preliminary approval shall expire and be of no further effect 12 months from the date of the preliminary approval unless the time is extended by the zoning administrator. 
c.  Disapproval. Following the review of the preliminary plat and other related material, the zoning administrator may find reasons detrimental to the public safety, health, and general welfare, or in conflict with adopted plans to the city which require disapproval. Disapproval shall be made on two copies of the preliminary plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider who may re-apply for preliminary plat approval. 
D.  Preliminary plat specifications. 
1.  Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller that 200 feet to one inch. 
2.  Sheet size. Sheet size shall not be greater than 18 inches by 24 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on a sheet of paper this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet at a reduced scale. 
3.  Ground elevations. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, and contour lines as shown on the county topographical maps. 
4.  Information to be provided on the preliminary plat. 
a.  Name and address of each owner of record and of each subdivider; 
b.  Proposed name of subdivision; 
c.  North point, graphic scale and date; 
d.  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision; 
e.  Boundary lines of tract; 
f.  Names of owners of record of adjoining land with its approximate acreage; 
g.  Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract, including the size and width of each; 
h.  Proposed layout including streets, alleys, and easements with both approximate dimensions and proposed street names; lot lines with approximate land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses; and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings; 
i.  Block numbers and lot numbers or section designation and lot numbers; 
j.  Provisions for drainage as required herein and/or by the city engineer; 
k.  Notation as to whether water supply service and sewage service are provided publicly or privately; 
l.  Minimum building front yard setback lines; 
m.  Location of streams, lakes and swamps and land within the elevation of the regulatory floodplain as required in section 30-045 of these regulations; 
n.  Existing zoning district classification of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining properties; and 
o.  Inscription stating "Not for Final Recording." 
5.  Preliminary plat approval of single-family attached developments. 
a.  The zoning administrator will require that all attached dwelling units shall conform to requirements of the following information: 
i.  Number of units; 
ii.  Minimum and maximum lot width; 
iii.  Proposed building setbacks; 
iv.  Proposed parking layout; 
b.  The applicant shall make application for plat approval, appear before and comply with all requirements of the city. 
i.  Approval from the fire department. A signed certification of approval from the city fire department shall be placed on the primary plat. 
ii.  Approval of the city engineer. A certifications for "approval of layouts only" signed by the city engineer shall be placed on the preliminary plat as follows: 
"This preliminary approval is for layout only. City of Butler does not, by this approval, accept the dedication, if any, of drainage easements and assumes no responsibility for their maintenance. " 
City Engineer: ____________    Dated: ____________ 
iii.  Approval from the health department. A signed certification of approval of the county health department shall be placed on the preliminary plat. 
6.  Preliminary plat exemptions. The zoning administrator may not require a preliminary plat under the following conditions: 
a.  When the subdivision includes less than three lots; 
b.  Minor re-subdivision of land; 
c.  Combining of previously platted lots; or 
d.  Loan plats where the lot has been previously recorded. 
7.  Certification of preliminary approval. A certificate of approval of the preliminary plat by the city shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"In that the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the City of Butler on the ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ ." 
Zoning Administrator: ____________    Dated: ____________ 
E.  Procedures for final plat approval. 
1.  Application for final plat approval. After the preliminary plat of proposed land subdivision has been given preliminary approval by the zoning administrator, the subdivider may, within one year or within such additional time as may be granted by the zoning administrator, submit to the zoning administrator the following: 
a.  An application requesting review and approval of the final plat; 
b.  Nine printed copies of the final plat with signed certifications and other documents as specified in section 30-002.C2a; and 
c.  A final plat filing fee. 
2.  Review of final plat. The zoning administrator shall check for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat, with all applicable conditions, and with the regulations of this resolution. The zoning administrator may find the final plat in conflict with the tentatively approved preliminary plat or with this resolution requiring the disapproval of the final plat. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be given to the applicant and one copy of such reasons shall be added to the records of the city. No certificate of approval will be given. The final plat may be resubmitted as a new application (additional filing fee required) for final plat approval after the corrections noted by the zoning administrator are made. 
F.  Final plat specifications. 
1.  Conformance with the preliminary plat. The final plat shall conform to the conditions of the tentatively approved preliminary plat. 
2.  Original tracing specifications. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on any acceptable tracing material and shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Plat Act, section [1](a). The scale shall be the minimum of 100 feet to the inch and a sheet size of not less than 8&frac12 by 11 inches nor greater than 17 inches by 22 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. 
3.  Additional specifications. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  North point, graphic scale, and date; 
b.  Tax map designation; 
c.  Names of owners of record of adjoining lands; 
d.  Location of streams, lakes, swamps, and land within the elevation of the regulatory floodplain required in section 30-045; 
e.  Tract boundary lines, municipal or county lines when included within the subdivision, right-of-way lines, lines of street easements, property lines of residential lots and other sites with sufficient data to determine readily and to reproduce on the ground location, bearing, and length of every street, lot line, but not limited to the length of an arc; internal angles and bearings of the tangent distances for the centerline of curved streets. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest one hundredth of a foot and all angles shall be given to the nearest minute; 
f.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by field survey, giving distances to the nearest minute, shall be balanced and closed with an apparent error of closure not to exceed one in 10,000; 
g.  Widths and names of all streets and alleys within the new subdivision shall be shown on the plat; 
h.  Land-lot and land-district numbers shall be shown; 
i.  Lots shall be numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically or section labeled appropriately; 
j.  Each lot shall have a house number which has been designated by the city; 
k.  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for the public use shall be shown on the plat; 
l.  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers shall be described on the plat; and 
m.  Minimum building front yard setback lines shall be shown. 
4.  Final plat approval of single-family attached. The zoning administrator will require that all provisions of the preliminary plat, or amendments or additions thereto, receive approval of the city council. All final plats shall conform to sections 30-001 through 30-008 and shall reflect "As-Built Conditions." 
5.  A surveyor's certificate. A signed certification by a registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and the plat shall be placed on final plat as follows: 
The field data upon which this map or plat is based has closure precision of one foot in ____________ an angular error of ____________ per angle point, and was adjusted using the ____________ rule. This map or plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____________ feet. The linear and angular measurements shown on this plat were obtained by using a ____________ and ____________ . 
By: ____________ ____________ GA. Registered Land Surveyor No. ____________ 
6.  An owner's certification. 
a.  With dedication. A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
Owner Certification: State of Georgia City of Butler 
The undersigned certifies that he/she is the owner of the land shown on this plat and acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedication to public use forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as streets, alleys, easements, or parks. 
____________  Owner(s) 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
b.  Without dedication. When no dedication of land is made, the following shall be placed on the plat: 
The undersigned hereby certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on this plat and he acknowledges this plat and allotment of this plat to be his free act and deed. 
____________  Owner(s) 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
7.  Fire department certification. A signed certification of the fire department shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
a.  Approval of the city fire coordinator 
____________  Fire Coordinator 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
Or, 
b.  Approval subject to installation of proper water mains and fire hydrants. The city fire department. 
____________  Fire Coordinator 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
8.  Health department certification. A signed certification on the county health department shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
a.  Approval of this plat by the department of health is solely for the purpose of permitting it to be recorded in the county superior court clerk's office. Said approval does not imply nor is it intended to grant permission to any person to construct and build or to install a sewage disposal system on property covered by this plat. 
Approved for recording purposes only Taylor County Health Department 
____________  Authorized Signature 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
b.  Health department approval relates to general subdivision lot layout only. Individual approval is required for each lot prior to construction. 
c.  Restricted to public sewers and public water supply. 
Approved by the Taylor County Department of Public Health 
____________  Authorized Signature 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
d.  The blanks on the certification statement of the county health department shall be completed by the director of environmental health or his representative, so as to indicate whether approval is based upon the use of individual sewage systems, individual water supplies, a community sewage system, a community water supply or a combination thereof. 
9.  A certificate of approval by the city engineer. A signed certification of the city engineer shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
I certify that the final plat layout meets the platting requirements of the City of Butler engineering department. The city of Butler does not, by this approval, accept the dedication, if any, of drainage and easements and assumes no responsibility for their maintenance. 
____________  City Engineer 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
10.  Certification and final approval by the city. Certification of final approval by the zoning administrator shall be placed on the final plat only after every item in sections 30-001 through 30-008 have been completed with and shall state the following: 
I certify that all the requirements for the Final Approval of this Plat have been fulfilled in accordance with the Resolutions of the City of Butler. 
____________  Zoning Administrator 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date 
G.  Recording of the final plat. Upon approval of the final plat by the zoning administrator, the owner, or his agent, shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the city prior to conveyance of any lot in the subdivision. 
H.  Procedure for appeals. Appeals may be taken by an aggrieved party, any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city, affected by the zoning administrator of the city council according to the following rules: 
1.  Any person, firm, or corporation, aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator in administering this resolution, may file in writing his appeal with the full city council within 30 days of the decision. The city may, in conformity with the provisions of this resolution, reverse, or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions, or determination of the zoning administrator at the next regular meeting; and 
2.  Any person, firm, or corporation, aggrieved by the decision of the council shall have any and all further rights afforded by law. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-002) 
Sec. 30-003. - General design requirements. 
A.  Suitability of land. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion, or which is for topographical, geological or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other uses that will continue to increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction. 
B.  Name of development. The name of the development must have the approval of the zoning administrator. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing development. 
C.  Access. Access to every development shall be provided over a public street as may be required by the zoning administrator. 
D.  Through traffic. Minor streets shall be so designed that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-003) 
Sec. 30-004. - General requirements for streets and other rights-of-way. 
A.  City street system. All new or extended roads shall be designed and constructed to complement the existing or planned system of city streets. To this end, the city council shall have the authority to specify the location and alignment of all new streets or rights-of-way therefore as may be proposed or offered for public ownership, development and/or maintenance. 
B.  Paving, stripping and signing requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide for paving all streets within the subdivision in compliance with this chapter as well as all other state and federal requirements. In addition, the developer shall stripe said streets and roadways in accordance with D.O.T. requirements for secondary roads and shall provide all normal traffic, safety and street signs for the development/subdivision, intersection thereof and all intersections with existing public streets or roadways. 
C.  Continuation of existing streets. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width as set forth in section. 
D.  Connections with future developments. Streets shall be reserved at strategic locations to provide for access to adjoining properties which may be developed in the future. Each street connection shall intersect property lines at a 90 degree angle. The zoning administrator shall determine if a temporary turnaround is needed with said turnaround conforming to requirements of a permanent cul-de-sac. 
E.  Street names. Street names, when applicable, shall require the approval of the zoning administrator. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already in existence and already named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those existing streets. 
F.  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
G.  Cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sac or dead end streets, shall not be greater in length than 800 feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 50 feet. 
H.  Development along major streets, limited-access highway or railroad right-of-ways. Where a development abuts or contains an expressway, freeway, arterial or collector streets, or a railroad right-of-way, the council may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street, or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of intervening land, with a non-access reservation suitably platted. Due regard should be given to requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to expressways, freeways, or arterial streets, but only to an accessible street in which case the commission may require double frontage lots. 
I.  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the project in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and where the commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
J.  Alleys. The requirements for providing alleys within a development are as follows: 
1.  Alleys shall be provided in multifamily, commercial and industrial districts, except where other definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-street parking, loading and unloading consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed; 
2.  Alleys shall not be provided in single-family and two-family residential developments unless the developer provided evidence satisfactory to the commission of the need for alleys; 
3.  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall provide sufficient radius to permit safe vehicular movements; and 
4.  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the council. 
K.  Reserve strips and easements. 
1.  Reserve strips controlling the access to streets shall be prohibited except where this control is definitely place in the hands of the city under conditions approved by the council. The council may control access to expressways, freeways, arterial and collector streets by requiring applicable lots to face and have access to only minor streets. 
2.  Easements of the required width located along the side or rear of lot lines shall be provided, as is necessary for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width. Parallel streets may be required by the commission in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-004) 
Sec. 30-005. - Right-of-way width requirements. 
A.  Collector streets: 80 feet. 
B.  Local streets without curb and gutter: 60 feet. 
C.  Local streets with curb and gutter: 60 feet. 
D.  Alleys: 20 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-005) 
Sec. 30-006. - Street design requirements. 
A.  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible with no street intersection being at any angle of less than 75 degrees. 
B.  Right-of-way radius. The street right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be at least 20 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the council may require a longer radius. 
C.  Additional width of existing streets. Developments that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if needed to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in section 30-004. 
D.  The developer will provide a street paved to city specifications from the nearest existing paved road to the furthest point of the development. 
E.  The developer will provide the city engineer with the construction costs from the nearest paved street or roadway to the farthest point of the development along with a certified length of paved street or roadway. The city engineer will divide the cost of the street or roadway by the linear feet and determine a cost per foot. Future developers along said street or roadway will reimburse the developer one half the cost per linear foot per side of said road from the beginning point to the ending point of their development. Each year following acceptance of the street or roadway by the city, the price per linear foot is reduced one tenth the original price. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-006) 
Sec. 30-007. - Design standards for blocks and lots. 
A.  Design lengths and widths. Block lengths and widths shall be determined based on the following requirements: 
1.  Blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet nor less than 400 feet in length. 
2.  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth. Except where abutting upon major streets, limited-access highways, or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impractical, in which case the council may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
B.  Lot sizes. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements set forth in the zoning districts in which the land to be developed is located. Corner lots shall have adequate width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both abutting streets. 
C.  Building lines. A building line, meeting the front and side yard setback requirements of the zoning district in which the development is located, shall be established on the lots. 
D.  Lots abutting public street. Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street. Driveways shall be installed by the developer prior to the sale of any lot. 
E.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separations of developments from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet and across which there will be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-007) 
Sec. 30-008. - Provision for public land. 
A.  Dedication or reservation for public use. Where features of the comprehensive plan, such as school sites, parks, playgrounds, and other public spaces are located in whole or part in a proposed development, or when these features have not been anticipated by the comprehensive plan, but are considered essential by the council, such features shall be dedicated or reserved by the developer. Provided, however, that no more than ten percent of the total area of the proposed development, exclusive of street right-of-ways, shall be required for dedication or reservation to fulfill the requirements of this section. 
B.  Land not required or suited for public use. Whenever a plat proposes the reservation of land for, or the dedication of land to, public use, and the council finds that such land is not suitable for public use, the council may either refuse to approve said plat or it may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. The council shall waive the reservation or dedication provisions whenever the public body directly responsible for land acquisition executes a written release, stating that such planned feature is not required or is not to be acquired. In the absence of such a waiver, the council shall disapprove plats when planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan or deemed essential by the council, are not incorporated into the plat. 
C.  Dedication. The developer may deed restrictively the land to be used for a specified public use to the city by submitting, with the final plat and documents, a deed to the property involved, clear of all liens and encumbrances, and transferable to the division of the city government which will have ultimate control over the use of such property, provided that the governing body is not obligated to accept. 
D.  Reservations. In the event the developer feels that a donation through dedication would work as unusual hardship on him, he may elect to reserve the area in question. Whenever the land reserved is not purchased, acquired, optioned, or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a three-year period from the date or recording the development plat or at the time that at least 50 percent of the available lots are built on and occupied, the developer may claim the original reservation and cause it to be developed in a manner suitable to the developer subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-008) 
Secs. 30-009—30-034. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 30-035. - Monuments. 
The developer shall place permanent reference monuments in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Right-of-way monuments. Iron pins shall be embedded at least two feet into the ground on street right-of-way lines at street intersections and at least each point where the right-of-way line changes direction. Such iron pins shall be at least five-eighths of one inch in diameter. They shall be spaced so as to be within sight of each other. The top surface of each marker shall be approximately level with the ground surface. 
2.  Property line monuments. Iron pins shall be embedded at least two feet into the ground at each lot corner, at each point where the property line changes direction, and no more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line. Where property lines follow rivers and streams, the meander lines shall be established and monumented not less than 20 feet back from the bank of such river or stream, except that when such corners or points fall within a street, or a proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed on the right-of-way line of such street. Such iron pins shall be at least five-eighths of one inch in diameter. The top surface of such irons shall be approximately level with the ground surface. 
3.  Lot lines extending into rivers and streams. The lines of lots that extend into rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins not less than two feet long and five-eighths of one inch in diameter. Such iron pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the lot line with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-009) 
Sec. 30-036. - County road classifications. 
A.  Roads within the city are hereby classified according to their inherent and relative function. 
1.  Local street/road—Residential. A public street, or right-of-way therefore, which is not under the jurisdictional control of the state or the county, nor intended for such control, and which is not considered to be significant to intra-county vehicular travel and which provided or is intended to provide vehicular access to land in use or intended for use primarily for residential purposes. 
2.  Local street/road—Commercial/Industrial. A public street, or right-of-way therefore, which is not under the jurisdictional control of the state or county, nor intended for such control, and which is not considered to be significant to intra-county vehicular travel and which provides or is intended to provide vehicular access to land in use or intended for use primarily for commercial and industrial purposes, or which accommodates or is intended use is primarily for such purposes. 
3.  Collector route. A public road, or right-of-way therefore, which is not under the jurisdiction control of the state or the county, and which is considered to be significant to the intra-county vehicular travel. 
4.  State route. A public road, or right-of-way therefore, which is under the jurisdictional control of the state, is intended for such control and acceptable to the state for such control. 
5.  Private driveway. A drive, or any designated right-of-way, or easement therefore, for vehicular access from public rights-of-way to private property, which is not under the jurisdictional control of the state or county nor intended or acceptable for such control, and which is not owned and maintained or intended to be owned and maintained by the county as a public road. 
B.  Classification authority. 
1.  The city council shall have the authority to classify all streets or roadways and rights-at-way within the city that are owned and operated by the city or which are subject to city maintenance by public use and designation: The classification of all such streets or roadways and rights-of-way thereof shall be as identified on the road classification map of the city as shall have been prepared and adopted by the county commission. 
2.  The city council shall classify all new or proposed streets or roadways and rights-of-way thereof. Until such time as a new or proposed street or roadways or right-of-way thereof shall have been classified by the city council, it shall be deemed a private drive and therefore not subject to improvements and maintenance as a public road. 
3.  No new or proposed street or roadway or right-of-way thereof shall be accepted and approved as a public street or roadway until and after it shall have been classified by the city council in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-010) 
Sec. 30-037. - Special classification of streets for construction. 
All streets shall be classified for construction purposes only as follows: 
1.  Class I street. A Class I street shall be paved, curbed, and guttered in accordance with the specifications required herein, and shall be required in zoning district R1, R2 and R2A, but may be so located in other zones if the developer so desires. Right-of-way width requirements shall be in accordance with section 30-005. 
2.  Class II street. A Class II street shall be paved in accordance with the specifications required herein, but curbs and gutters shall be required. A Class II street shall be required as a minimum for all streets except those in zoning district R3. Right-of-way width requirements for a Class II street shall be as required in section. 
3.  Class III street. A Class III street designation is provided for purposed streets that are to serve commercial, industrial, large scale and/or nonconventional developments. 
a.  Class III streets shall be designed by the developers to accommodate the anticipated loads and volumes. 
b.  As a minimum, the base land paving design and right-of-way widths shall meet the requirements for a Class I street, however, after plan review the city engineer may waive the curb and gutter requirement. 
c.  The design of Class III streets shall be approved by the city engineer at the time of the approval of the construction plans. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-011) 
Sec. 30-038. - Additional street design requirements. 
A.  Grades, horizontal curves, tangents, and slight distances. The following street design requirements shall be adhered to in addition to other requirements stated herein: 

 
B.  Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to achieve the minimum stopping sight distance. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-012) 
Sec. 30-039. - Basic construction requirements for all classes of streets. 
The following improvements shall be made before the city council may accept a street or roadway or right-of-way thereof for public ownership and maintenance. Whenever a specification of the state department of transportation is referred to in this article said reference is made to the appropriate section of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, 1993 edition, as thereafter amended and supplemented. 
1.  Preparation of right-of-way. 
a.  The full width of all rights-of-way shall be shaped to approximate required grades, alignment, and other specifications such that base and wearing surfaces can be constructed which will not damage abutting property. Abutting property shall be suitable sloped to the right-of-way line. Due regard shall be shown for desirable tress and other vegetative matter not impairing visibility. 
b.  Before grading is started, the entire area of the right-of-way shall be cleared of all exposed stumps, logs, weeds, roots, rubbish, loose boulders, and other debris or otherwise objectionable material protruding from the ground surface. 
c.  All tree stumps, boulders, and other obstructions shall be removed to a minimum depth of two feet below the finished surface of all slopes and the area to which base material is to be applied. Rock, whenever encountered, shall be scarified or removed to a depth of 12 inches, below the sub-grade. 
d.  All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed 12 inches in loose and compacted to 95 percent dry density by a sheepsfoot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to a roller shall be mechanically tamped. 
2.  Embankments and erosion control. Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all shoulders and slopes within the right-of-way shall be stabilized to retard erosion and drainage facilities open or temporary slope drains constructed to accommodate and direct acceptable surface water runoff, all to be compliance with the county soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. At a minimum, the developer shall provide permanent type grassing. 
3.  Storm drainage. 
a.  An adequate drainage system based on a 25 year rainfall frequency for cross drains and longitudinal drainage systems and ten year rainfall frequency for side drain systems shall be provided. Pipe material shall be as follows: 
i.  Reinforced concrete pipe; 
ii.  Bituminous coated corrugated metal pipe; 
iii.  High density polyethylene pipe. 
b.  Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be sufficient length to permit the full width of the required street or roadway including shoulders and ditch slopes. 
c.  Cross drains shall be built on straight line and grade, and shall be laid on a firm base, but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with spigot ends pointing in the direction of the water flow. Ends shall be properly fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. Drains shall be placed at sufficient depth below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in case shall the top of the drain pipe be less than one foot below the roadway base. 
d.  Drainage ditches shall be constructed along both sides of the roadway. All ditches shall be two feet deep and have an invert of two feet. The front slope of the ditch shall have a horizontal to vertical ratio of not less than 3:1, and a back slope of not less than 2:1. All ditches shall be stabilized to retard erosion. 
4.  Sub-grade. This work shall consist of placing, mixing, compacting and shaping the top six inches of soil. This work also includes sub-grade stabilization. 
a.  Compaction. 
i.  The entire surface shall be plowed, harrowed and mixed to a depth of at least six inches. After the material has been thoroughly mixed, the sub-grade shall be compacted at 95 percent of the maximum density. Suitable rollers are required. 
ii.  Compaction tests shall be made by a certified engineer or from a certified laboratory. Tests are to be made along the road bed at 500 feet intervals. Any areas that do not meet with the specified compaction, shall be excavated and replaced with suitable materials. 
iii.  Test results shall be submitted to the city building inspector as conducted. All costs for compaction tests shall be incurred by the developer. 
b.  Sub-grade material. All streets shall consist of Class I or II soil. If such material is not available on site, it shall be furnished by the developer. All sub-grade and base will be load tested with an 18 ton tandem dump, or equal, to cover sub-grade or base thoroughly by lapping the tires one width each pass to assure no settling, cracking or pumping occurs prior to any paving. This is to be witnessed by the city engineer or the designated representative of the city. 
5.  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities, including water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, and all service connections related thereto, shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the street and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. Where the utility mains are off the pavement, the developer may elect to omit the installation of service connections providing that, at such time as these service connections are needed, they shall be jacked across the street without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. 
6.  Slopes and shoulder improvements. The minimum ratio for all fill or cut slopes shall be two to one and the minimum width for all shoulders from back edge of curb, if installed, shall be six feet. All shoulders shall slope one-half inch to the foot (see typical section , figure 1). When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-013) 
Sec. 30-040. - Roadway base and paving. 
A.  The following minimum requirements shall be adhered to for the surfacing and paving of streets and roads. 
1.  Base course. The pavement bases of Class I and Class II streets, not including the surface courses, shall be one of the following types and shall be of the following minimum thickness as designated for each street classification: 

 
a.  All base courses shall be compacted to 100 percent dry density. 
b.  Base course for Class II streets shall extend not less than six inches beyond the edge of paving. 
c.  Materials for graded aggregate base course and the construction of same shall meet all applicable requirements of D.O.T. specifications sections 310.01 through 310.05, inclusive. 
d.  Material for sand clay base course and the construction of same shall meet all applicable requirements of D.O.T. specifications sections 303.01 through 303.05, inclusive. 
2.  Prime coat. A prime coat shall be applied to all finished base surfaces before the paving course is constructed. 
a.  The prime coat shall be applied at a rate of twenty-five hundredths of a gallon per square yard. 
b.  The minimum acceptable material shall be cut back asphalt of a grade as required by the city engineer or the designated city representative based on the temperature and the texture of the base. 
c.  The prime coat shall be applied in accordance with all applicable requirements of D.O.T. specifications sections 412.01 through 412.04, inclusive. 
d.  After the prime coat has properly cured, a permanent surface course shall be applied to the roadway base. 
3.  Surface course. The paving of Class I and Class II streets shall be one of the following types and shall be designated for each street classification: 

 
a.  Portland cement concrete paving shall be in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  A five inch concrete slab is required that uses a 5.75 bags/cubic yard mixture and provides 3,500 pounds per square inch minimum compression strength and approximately a minimum average strength of 4,300 pounds per square inch, to be compatible with a modulas of rupture 550 P.S.I. If concrete paving is placed without tied in concrete shoulders or curbs, at least one-half inch of slab thickness is required to ensure compliance with minimum compression and minimum average strength requirements provided herein. 
ii.  Transverse joints should not be spaced further apart than 15 feet. 
iii.  All other road preparation and construction requirements not in conflict with these specific requirements shall be required for the use of concrete paving as an alternate. 
iv.  Not less than 30 days notice of use of this alternative shall be given to the city by written notice to the city engineer. 
b.  All materials for the construction of bituminous asphaltic concrete paving shall be in accordance with all applicable requirements of section 400 of the D.O.T. specifications. Specific requirements for equipment and placement of materials shall be discussed at the pre-construction conference. 
c.  Materials for and the construction of triple surface paving shall be in accordance with all applicable requirements of D.O.T. specifications sections 424.01 through 424.05. 
4.  Minimum pavement width. All Class I and Class II minor streets shall have a minimum width of 28 feet from back of curb to back of curb, or 22 feet from edge of pavement to edge of pavement if no curbs and gutters are installed. All other street width pavements shall be determined by the city council as required. 
5.  Pavement breaks for utility connections. No paved streets shall be open cut to install any utility or drainage facility. 
6.  Curbs and gutters. Either the regular six inch or four inch rollover concrete curbs and gutters with a minimum overall width of 24 inches shall be constructed on all Class I streets. Cement concrete valley gutter shall be permitted across minor streets at street intersections only when no storm sewers are available as determined by the zoning administrator. Valley gutters shall be at least six feet in width. Whenever driveway openings are provided for lots abutting the street, the driveway shall be six inches thick and a minimum of the ten feet in width at the sidewalk or at the street right-of-way line. The driveway shall have a three foot radius at the curb line. Where ditches are used for drainage, culverts and driveways providing access to each lot shall be installed. Culverts thus installed so as to be resistant to damage from future construction or maintenance activities. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-014) 
Sec. 30-041. - Installation of utilities. 
A.  Water. Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected with the public water system or with an alternate water supply approved by the county health department. The lines shall be constructed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plat. The lines shall be installed in conformance with the technical standards as established by the city council, or other local governments. 
B.  Sewer. A publicly connected sanitary sewer system shall be installed when the cost of installing such a system does not exceed 150 percent of the cost of installing septic tanks for all lots in the development and where said system is available from a public agency subject to regulation by the city council, or other local governments, or as the result of a contract between that council and another public agency or body. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewerage system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of septic tank and disposal fields approved by the county health department. All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the department of public health of the state and the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-015) 
Sec. 30-042. - Sidewalks and street signs. 
A.  Sidewalk dimensions. Unless otherwise specified, all sidewalks shall be four inches thick with a minimum width of four feet. A 24-inch grass planting strip shall be provided between the back of the curb and the sidewalk. For Class II streets, the sidewalk shall be located on the right-of-way line side of the drainage ditch located parallel to the street. All sidewalks shall slope one-half inch to the foot toward the curb. 
B.  Street signs required. All new or existing roads, public or private, which are included in a development shall be furnished and installed with street name signs as specified in section 30-042. All necessary traffic signs (slow, stop, caution, school bus stop, etc.) will be furnished and installed at proper locations. Materials for signs will be approved by the city council, and all expenses incurred will be borne by the developer at no cost to the city. 
C.  Location of street identification signs. All streets shall be designated by name on a metal street sign post approved by the city council with such metal post having nameplates of metal set one above the other with a clearance of seven feet. The post shall be so located as to be visible for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At cross-street intersections, two street sign posts shall be located diagonally across the intersection from each other. Only one street sign post shall be required at T sections. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-016) 
Sec. 30-043. - Administrative procedures. 
A.  The administrative procedures for installing the development improvements required herein shall be as follows: 
1.  Control of work and inspections. The city engineer or agent shall have the authority to control the construction of all streets or roadways. In exercising such authority, the city engineer or agent shall decide all questions concerning the acceptability of materials and construction methods. The city engineer or agent shall have the authority to inspect all construction work done and materials used to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. Whenever the city engineer or agent finds that materials and/or work performed are not in compliance with this article, he may require the removal, replacement otherwise require the correction of the nonconformity. However, the city engineer or agent may not waive or reduce the requirements of any provision of this article. After completion of all the construction and installation of the specifications as described herein, as determined by the city engineer, the zoning administrator will notify the developer in writing that an inspection has been made and that the 12-month maintenance period is effective from the date of the inspection. 
2.  Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. No road shall be approved and accepted by the city council for public ownership and maintenance, and no subdivision plat containing such a road shall be given final approval until one of the following conditions shall have been met. 
a.  All streets, roadways, right-of-way and drainage facilities are designed and constructed consistent with the provisions of this article and so approved by the city public works supervisor; or 
b.  The city council shall have accepted a surety bond in an amount equal to 1&frac12 times the estimated cost of all required streets, roadways, rights-of-way, and drainage facility improvements which may be made by the city council without using public funds therefore. The city council shall determine the estimated cost of required improvements. 
3.  Prior to acceptance of street and/or drainage improvements, the land owner shall provide a suitable maintenance bond approved by the city to assure that said roadway or drainage improvements are still in full compliance with city requirements for one year from date of approval of road, in an amount equal to 20 percent of the construction cost. 
4.  Cost of improvements. 
a.  Developer's responsibility. The developer shall incur the cost of construction and installation of all required public improvements based on the following: 
i.  Streets. Incur the cost for the construction of streets up to 28 feet in pavement width from back of curb to back of curb, 24 feet in pavement width from edge of pavement to edge of pavement if no curbs and gutters are installed. 
ii.  Water and sewer systems. Incur the cost for the installation of all water and sewer systems which are required to serve the new development and tie in with the existing water and sewer system, based on the specifications set forth herein. 
iii.  Sidewalks. Entire cost. 
iv.  Monuments. Entire cost. 
v.  Traffic control and street signs. Entire cost. 
b.  City council's responsibility. The city council shall partially participate in sharing the cost of construction and installation of required public improvements for the following conditions: 
i.  Streets. The city council shall not share any of the cost of constructing streets. The city council shall not share any cost for improvements to existing city streets or roadways which must be improved for development of the property along said streets or roadways. The cost of bringing the existing street or roadway to the standards set-forth in this article, are the sole responsibility of the developer. 
ii.  Water and sewer system. Incur cost for any difference in the cost of the laying of oversized pipe and outfall systems which are needed in excess of the required water and sewer facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision as determined by the city council. 
c.  Property owners responsibility. Whenever the city council is petitioned in writing by the property owners to upgrade a Class II street to a Class I street, the property owners shall then incur the entire cost for said improvements based on the footage along the property line of each lot abutting the street which is being improved. 
d.  Estimated cost for construction and installation. The current unit prices in effect at the time of submission of plans shall be used in determining the total estimated cost for construction and installation or required public improvements in new subdivisions. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-017) 
Sec. 30-044. - When construction may begin. 
Construction and installation of any required public improvement as described herein shall not begin until the preliminary plat has been approved and engineering construction plans and specifications as outlined herein have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer as being in conformity with these regulations. The city engineer shall be sent a copy of such preliminary plat by the developer or his authorized representative with the applicable approvals certified thereon. A preconstruction conference shall be held by the city engineer prior to construction with the developer or his representative in attendance. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-018) 
Sec. 30-045. - Construction plans to be filed with the city engineer's office. 
A.  Four copies of all plans for streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, showing the proposed plans, profiles and applicable cross sections of each shall be submitted to and approved by the engineer's office as being in conformity with these regulations prior to commencing construction of any new system. The plans shall be prepared from an actual engineering field or photogrammetric survey, and show all proposed improvements. The plans shall be prepared on standard plan and profile sheets and shall show the following: 
1.  Plans. 
a.  Indicate direction of north; 
b.  Indicate right-of-way line, centerline, departing lot lines, lot numbers, development limits and limits of construction; 
c.  Indicate centerline curve date, including delta, radius, and tangent; 
d.  Indicate approved street name; 
e.  Indicate stations at every 100 feet on centerline. Indicate stations at point of curve and tangent at the beginning and end of all returns, at centerline intersection and at development and section limits; 
f.  Indicate the width of right-of-way and relation to centerline; 
g.  Indicate state route number on all existing streets to which connection is to be made when applicable; 
h.  Indicate all existing or proposed drainage easements; 
i.  Indicate direction of drainage flow in streets, storm sewer, valley streets, streams, sub-drains and the like; 
j.  Indicate all turnaround construction, with easements as indicated in the preliminary plat; 
k.  Indicate all storm sewers and appurtenances. Identify storm sewer appurtenances type and number. Station on plan must conform to stations shown on profile. Headwalls must be provided and shown; 
l.  Indicate the contributing area in acres at all culvert pipes, curb inlets, and other entrances; 
m.  Indicate location of any and all springs either within or draining to the street right-of-way and indicate proposed treatment of same. All springs will be capped and piped in a minimum six inch diameter perforated pipe encased in washed gravel and connected into the nearest storm sewer, or natural drain; 
n.  Indicate location of all streams of drainage ways related to the street construction; 
o.  Indicate proposed drainage ditches for the full length in all easements. Furnish detailed typical section and type of stabilization to be provided; 
p.  Indicate proposed stream locations or relocations. Show existing and proposed locations. Furnish detailed typical section and type of stabilization to be provided. Stone or concrete rip rap will be used where stream velocity exceeds six feet per second; 
q.  Indicate size and type or class of pipe to be installed both in right-of-way and outside right-of-way; 
r.  Indicate paved ditches and easements at toe of fills, when required by design criteria; 
s.  Indicate paved roadside ditches when required; 
t.  Indicate guard post or guard rail where required; 
u.  Indicate traffic barricades and/or "No Thru Street" signs; 
v.  Indicate the size of all driveway entrance culvert pipe, i.e., 18 inches or 24 inches, according to computed size, for each lot; 
w.  Indicate protection of ends of curb and gutter by providing for erosion control; 
x.  Indicate typical paving section designation; 
y.  Add any notes that may be necessary to explain the intent and purposes of the plan or profile; 
z.  Minimum easement widths for placed pipe or culverts will be determined as follows: 

 
2.  Profiles. 
a.  Profiles to be submitted on standard plan and profile sheets. Special studies may be submitted on cross-section paper 20 inches wide by 36 inches long (20 inches by 36 inches) and shall have a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet (1" = 100') horizontally, and one inch equals ten feet (1" = 10') vertically; 
b.  Existing centerline profiles to be shown and identified on all proposed: 
i.  Streets; 
ii.  Storm sewers; 
iii.  Stream relocations; 
iv.  Drainage ditches; and 
v.  Outfall of storm sewer to existing streams. 
c.  Where terrain is exceptionally rough, additional profiles on either side of the centerline may be required; 
d.  Stations shown on profile must agree with stations shown on plans; 
e.  Grade line of proposed street construction must include: 
i.  Elevations at beginning and end of all vertical curves; 
ii.  Length of vertical curves with elevations and stations of vertical points of intersection; 
iii.  Elevations computed every 50 feet; and 
iv.  Elevations at all centerline intersections of streets, at all street centerline intersections with boundaries of subdivision at all culverts and storm sewer crossings, and at all curb inlets; 
f.  When proposed street is an extension of, or is connecting with an existing street or roadway, show existing centerline profiles for 200 feet minimum distance to ensure proper grade tie; 
g.  If a difference exists in elevations or proposed curb grades, identify curb elevations at top of right curb, and top of left curb; 
h.  If a cul-de-sac is to be used as a temporary turnaround at the temporary end of a street, the proposed grade and existing profiles shall be carried through to provide for the future extension of the proposed street, i.e., 300 feet beyond the property line; 
i.  When a proposed street parallels or is located near an existing stream or open drainage way: 
i.  Furnish profiles of top of bank or stream computed water elevations and invert (or flow line) of stream or open drainage way; 
ii.  Show relation of proposed street grade to existing profiles of stream or open drainage way; and 
iii.  Street construction must not encroach on the floodplain limit of the stream and must be designed to be not less than two feet above the projected 100-year flood high water elevation; 
j.  Show proposed culvert or storm sewer crossings and sanitary sewer crossings at the proper location and grade on all street profiles; 
k.  Storm sewer to be shown in profile with the following required information: 
i.  Profile of proposed finished grade; 
ii.  Profile of existing ground at centerline of storm sewer; 
iii.  Percent of grade of proposed storm sewer; 
iv.  Size of proposed pipe or structure; 
v.  Station to be shown every 100 feet and at all appurtenances; and 
vi.  Show curb inlets, etc., with proposed elevations for the tops and inverts, or tabulation in plain view may be permitted if all structures are identified. Show all existing stream crossings; 
l.  Profiles of streams that are not to be piped shall include: 
i.  Profile of top bank on both sides where difference in elevation exists; 
ii.  Profile of flow line (invert) of stream bed; 
iii.  Profile of computed water elevation; and 
iv.  Where land included in development is subject to flood, cross-sections, topography and spot elevations will be required as part of the floodplain study. Floor elevation for all residential dwellings shall be at least three feet above the 100-year flood level; 
m.  Show existing ground at centerline and proposed computed grade of invert on all streams where relocation of channel is proposed; and 
n.  Give datum reference for elevations used. 
3.  Additional details. 
a.  A registered engineer's current stamp will be on all sheets, together with the necessary certificates for same required by the state board of professional engineers and land surveyors. 
b.  The developer's names addresses, and telephone numbers. 
c.  Proposed layout including lot lines with dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and street widths, indicated clearly from either face to face or back to back of curb lines (specify); and easements for sanitary sewer, storm water drainage, or pedestrian access. 
d.  Location and results of percolation tests for lots not to be served by sanitary sewers as required by the county health department. 
e.  Location of land subject to flooding, indicated by a flood crest contour (100-year floodplain). 
f.  Location of all sanitary sewer lines and laterals with appurtenances (specify type). 
g.  Location of tract showing land district and land lot, giving acreage of tract being developed. 
h.  Any request for deviations from the above regulations or any questions concerning these, or the code or the standards will be addressed to the engineer. 
i.  All plans shall show the total length of paved streets or roadways being dedicated as a public thoroughfare. This figure, along with other applicable street or roadway construction items, will be used in establishing the value of the maintenance bond. 
j.  Plans will not be accepted for review by the zoning administrator unless accompanied by a signed certificate from a registered professional engineer certifying that all the items above have been complied with or showing by itemized list where approved deviations exist. 
k.  The city engineer will be given a definite date by the developer as to when construction is to begin and the anticipated time duration of the contract. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008, § 31-019) 
Chapter 32 - TAXATION 

Sec. 32-001. - Clerk to assist in assessing inventories. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to assist the tax assessors in obtaining any information available from the state concerning business inventories, in order that such inventories shall be assessed at actual value. 
(Prior Code, § 33-001) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities concerning motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; powers of municipal courts concerning misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-001. - Authority of mayor and council to regulate traffic. 
The authority to make and enforce all rules and regulations governing traffic and the use of streets of the city be vehicles and pedestrians, shall be vested in the mayor and council, and the mayor and council shall have full power to designate directions to traffic, time limits, and locations for parking, reservation of parking places, maximum and minimum speeds insofar as same shall not conflict with the laws of the state, to establish through streets, truck routes, and stop crossing, and to install such street signs and indicators and markings as shall be necessary or advisable for the operation and enforcement of such rules and regulations. No such rule or regulation shall be effective unless and until appropriate signs, indicators or marking are installed. 
(Prior Code, § 35-001) 
Sec. 34-002. - Uniform traffic act; adoption by reference. 
Pursuant to the O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372, 40-1-1 through 40-1-5 and 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality, with like effect as if recited in full herein. 
Sec. 34-003. - One-way streets designated. 
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be one-way streets and vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited: Main Street from its intersection with Broad Street to its intersection with Ivey Street. 
(Prior Code, § 35-003) 
Sec. 34-004. - Permits for parades and processions. 
No funeral, procession, or parade containing 50 or more persons or five or more vehicles, excepting the Armed Forces of the United States, the military forces of this state, and the forces of police and fire department, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in the accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are forth in this chapter which may apply. 
(Prior Code, § 35-004) 
Sec. 34-005. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant of a type designated by the chief of police, or by burning lights. 
(Prior Code, § 35-005) 
Secs. 34-006—34-028. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 34-029. - Authority to place, maintain, etc.—Electric traffic control. 
As an aid in facilitating the movement of traffic on the streets of the city and in reducing accidents, the chief of police and the city electrician are hereby authorized and directed to place and maintain electric traffic-control devices and signals at such locations as may be designated from time to time by resolutions of the commission of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 35-006) 
Sec. 34-030. - Same—Other traffic control devices. 
The chief of police of the city shall place and maintain, other than electrically operated, traffic control devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and such ordinances, and with the approval of the city manager, may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Prior Code, § 35-007) 
Secs. 34-031—34-048. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 34-049. - Speed restrictions. 
A.  No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
B.  Where no special hazard exists, the following speeds shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of such a limit shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and is unlawful. 
1.  Fifteen miles per hour in passing hospitals and in passing school while schools are in session and in passing churches the hours of service therein. 
2.  Twenty-five miles per hour within the corporate limits, except as herein otherwise provided. 
3.  Thirty-five miles per hour within the zones designated, and when signs are posted at either end of a speed zone. 
4.  The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the force going prima facie limits shall not receive the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or by reason of when special hazard exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions, and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Prior Code, § 35-008) 
Secs. 34-050—34-071. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 34-072. - Parking lines, angle, and parallel parking. 
On streets where white lines are shown for guidance, parking must conform with such lines. The driver must park his vehicle entirely within the boundaries designated by such lines. No person shall park and leave unattended a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking and on such streets vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the edge of the roadway indicated by such marks or signs. 
(Prior Code, § 35-009) 
Secs. 34-073—34-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 34-103. - Persons riding bicycles to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person riding a bicycle shall be subject to the provision of this chapter application to the driver of any vehicle except those provisions of such chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Prior Code, § 35-010) 
Sec. 34-104. - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
Any person riding upon a bicycle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Prior Code, § 35-011) 
Sec. 34-105. - Carrying extra passengers on bicycles. 
The operator of a bicycle shall not carry any other person upon the handlebars, frame or tank, nor shall any other person ride upon such vehicle unless riding in an extra seat provided for each extra person. 
(Prior Code, § 35-012) 
Sec. 34-106. - Speed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle at an unusual speed, or in a disorderly manner, or as to endanger the life or limb of another. 
(Prior Code, § 35-013) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-001—36-018. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICES 

Sec. 36-019. - Water and sewer connection required inside the city limits. 
A.  All persons having homes, stores, shops, offices or places of business either as owner, tenant or occupant inside the city limits shall be connected to the city water and sewer system where available as determined by the city. 
B.  Private wells for residential or commercial use are prohibited inside the city limits. 
(Prior Code, § 37-001) 
Sec. 36-020. - Water and sewer connection optional outside city limits; where available, connections to the city's water and sewer system are optional to residents outside the city limits. 
A.  When a property owner requests utility services to property not within the corporate city limits, at the discretion of the city, the owner will be required to: 
1.  Petition for annexation, if the property is contiguous to the existing city limits, prior to commencement of construction of utility lines; or 
2.  Execute a restrictive covenant consenting to annexation of such property into the city when the property becomes contiguous. 
B.  When such property is not contiguous and execution of the covenant is required, the owner will also be required to submit a certificate of title to the city attorney to verify ownership of the property. The covenant will be recorded in the property records at the county courthouse and will stipulate that, if the property becomes contiguous in the future and the property owner refuses to petition for annexation, the city will have the authority to terminate utility services. 
C.  Construction of utility lines will not begin until the requirements of this policy are met, which shall be indicated by authorization of the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 37-002) 
Sec. 36-021. - Connection fees for water and sewer. 
A.  All water and sewer connections shall be executed by city personnel. Water and sewer connection fees shall be as determined from time to time. 
B.  Any other dimensions for water and sewer connections not addressed in this section shall be determined on an as needed basis by the public works director. 
C.  The city reserves the right to negotiate connection fees based on special circumstances as determined by the city for commercial and industrial consumers and for residential connections when applications are for a two inch water meter or larger. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary in this article, a commercial development or an apartment complex may utilize a master water meter and be billed by the city for the entire development or complex, provided said development or complex has more than four units. A holder of a master water meter may meter and require its tenants to meter individual usage and reimburse the holder of the master meter for water and sewer usage; provided, however, said reimbursement shall not exceed the cost of the water or sewer paid to the city by the master meter holder. 
(Prior Code, § 37-003) 
Sec. 36-022. - Application for service. 
Once availability of service is determined and connection fees are paid, the consumer shall make application for service at city hall. A picture ID is required of the person making application. If it is determined the applicant has an outstanding balance, payment in full of that balance must be paid before service shall commence. 
(Prior Code, § 37-004) 
Sec. 36-023. - Security deposit for service. 
All individuals (residential and commercial) applying for service shall at the time of application pay a security deposit. 
(Prior Code, § 37-005) 
Sec. 36-024. - Rate schedule. 
The water, sewer, and sprinkler/irrigation rates and criteria are as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 37-006; Ord. of 6-9-2009; Ord. of 8-11-2009; Ord. of 10-14-2008; Ord. of 7-14-2010, § 37-006) 
Sec. 36-025. - Billing cycle and late fees. 
A.  Bills shall be mailed the last business day of each month with a billing date of the first day of the following month. 
B.  A ten percent penalty charge based on unpaid balances will be assessed the next business day after the tenth of each month. In the event the tenth day of the month falls on a nonbusiness day, the next business day will be considered the tenth day and penalties will accrue the day after. 
C.  A delinquent charge as determined from time to time by ordinance will be assessed to each account that remains unpaid after the 20th of each month, at which point service is subject to disconnection. In the event the 20th day of the month falls on a nonbusiness day, the next business day will be considered the 20th day and the delinquent charge will accrue the day after. 
D.  Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of the bill or any subsequent late charges. 
(Prior Code, § 37-007) 
Sec. 36-026. - Change of occupancy and transfer fees. 
A.  Not less than three days' notice shall be given, in person or in writing, at city hall to discontinue service or to transfer service to another location. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make such person liable for paying for the service furnished since the last meter reading. 
B.  A transfer fee shall be collected at such time when a customer chooses to relocate service from one location to another within the city's water and sewer system. 
C.  In the event that the customer does not have a sufficient deposit amount on an active account as described in section 36-023, payment of such shall be made at this time. In addition, any information required as described in section 36-022 that is not on file shall be provided as well. 
(Prior Code, § 37-008) 
Sec. 36-027. - Sprinkler meters. 
A.  Sprinkler meters are for the specific purpose of outdoor watering only. Fees for sprinkler meter connections inside and outside the city limits are as determined from time to time. 
B.  Any other dimensions for sprinkler meters not addressed in this section shall be determined on an as needed basis by the public works director. 
C.  The city reserves the right to negotiate connection fees based on special circumstances as determined by the city for commercial and industrial consumers and for residential connections when applications are for a two inch meter or larger. 
D.  Sprinkler meters shall be installed per work order when payment is made in full for the meter. Once the meter is installed monthly charges shall commence. Billing for sprinkler meters shall be for 12 months of every year for existing sprinkler meters as well as for new connections. Billing charges shall be the minimum charge plus any additional charges that may be applicable based on consumption. 
E.  In order for monthly charges not to be incurred, one of the two following options must occur: 
1.  Notification in writing by the consumer to the city that the meter is no longer needed and removal of the meter is requested. If for any reason in the future the consumer wishes to have the meter reinstalled, a fee as determined from time to time by ordinance will be charged. The meter will then be reinstalled upon payment of the fee and monthly billing on the meter will resume. 
2.  Notification in writing by the consumer to the city that the consumer wishes to have the meter to remain installed but locked by city personnel there will be a cut off fee when the meter is locked and a cut on fee when the consumer wishes to have the meter unlocked. Once the meter is unlocked billing on the meter will resume. 
(Prior Code, § 37-009) 
Sec. 36-028. - City's responsibility and liability. 
A.  The city shall run a water service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in sections 36-021 and 36-027 will be made for a three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
B.  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
C.  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
D.  The city reserves the right to refuse water and sewer service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
E.  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 37-010) 
Sec. 36-029. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
A.  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of the consumer's household and employees only. Except as provided in section 36-021, the consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
B.  Where the meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
C.  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter as well as a backflow preventor. 
D.  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state board of health. 
E.  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person to tap, connect with, disturb, damage, turn on or off any main, service connection or meter of any public utility in the city, whether such device is within the public ways or on private premises, unless such person is acting by the consent of or under direction of the utility owning such property. 
1.  Proof that any appliances, tools, devices or instruments of any kind have been used to improperly pass water around the meter so as to prevent the meter from duly registering shall constitute prima facie evidence of the commission or the intent to commit the acts described in subsection F. of this section. 
2.  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the following shall be presumed to be responsible for the illegal act set forth in subsection F. of this section: 
a.  The person performing any of the illegal acts; 
b.  The person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action; and 
c.  The person in whose name the utilities are in at the time of the illegal act. 
The consequences of such illegal acts shall be criminal charges imposed by the Butler Police Department and fines to be collected from such charges to be determined by the city's municipal court judge. 
(Prior Code, § 37-011) 
Sec. 36-030. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
A.  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property; inspecting piping, reading and testing meters; or for any other purpose in connection with the utility service and its facilities. 
B.  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the city a permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and or sewer lines. 
(Prior Code, § 37-012) 
Sec. 36-031. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the utility rate schedules, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Utility service furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only, and, except for water or fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish utility service free of charge to anyone. 
(Prior Code, § 37-013) 
Sec. 36-032. - Discontinuance of service. 
A.  When utility service is discontinued either at the request of the consumer or due to nonpayment, the security deposit on file will be applied to the balance (if any) on the account and the remainder of the deposit (if any) shall be refunded by check and payable to the individual whose name appears on the utility account. 
B.  In the event the security deposit is insufficient to cover the balance on the account and the customer does not remit payment to cover said amount, the individual whose name is on the account is subject to referral to a collection agency. Said individual shall be responsible for the amount due on the account as well as any addition charges that may be imposed by the collection agency. Additional charges may include but are not limited to, postage, second notices, collection fees, court processing fees and attorney fees. 
C.  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
1.  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
2.  The consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
3.  Emergency repairs; 
4.  Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
5.  Legal processes; 
6.  Direction of public authorities; 
7.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Prior Code, § 37-014) 
Sec. 36-033. - Tampering with meter. 
Charges will be filed if meter is tampered with in any way. Charge will be a minimum of $1,000.00. Services will not be connected/reconnected until the $1,000.00 and balance of bill is paid in full. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 36-034. - Cut-off agreements. 
Only two allowed per year; delinquent fee is applied. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 36-035 - Connection/disconnection times. 
No services will be connected or disconnected after 4:00 p.m. If services must be cut off/on, the on-call employee will receive two hours overtime. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2016) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the prior Code which are included herein. Sections of the prior Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia. 

 