THE CODE OF THE CITY OF DUNWOODY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 
Adopted May 24, 2010 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DUNWOODY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ken Wright 
Mayor 
____________ 
Denis Shortal, Post 1 
Adrian Bonser, Post 2 
Tom Taylor, Post 3 
Robert Wittenstein, Post 4 
Danny Ross, Post 5 
John Heneghan, Post 6 
City Council 
____________ 
Warren Hutmacher 
City Manager 
____________ 
Brian Anderson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sharon Lowery 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the compilation of ordinances of 2008, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2008 compilation of ordinances, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Michael E. Raabe, Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Sharon Lowery, City Clerk, Leonid M. Felgin, City Attorney, and Warren A. Hutmacher, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 2010. 
STATE OF GEORGIA  CITY OF DUNWOODY 
ORDINANCE 2010-05-15 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF DUNWOODY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
WHEREAS, the City of Dunwoody was incorporated on December 1, 2008, pursuant to SB 82 of the 2008 Legislative Session; and 
WHEREAS, the City is authorized and required to create a Code of its ordinances of general and permanent nature in order to provide for an orderly and easy access to the laws of the City for the general public. 
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DUNWOODY AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "THE CODE OF THE CITY OF DUNWOODY, GEORGIA," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 32, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 22, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided for in chapter 1. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 22, 2010, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption by the City Council. 
SO ORDAINED AND EFFECTIVE, this 24 th day of May, 2010. 
Approved: 
       Ken Wright, Mayor 
ATTEST 
       Sharon Lowery, City Clerk 
(Seal) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia, as adopted by 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 385), page 3536. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the Charter of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. The City of Dunwoody, Georgia, in the County of DeKalb, and the inhabitants thereof, are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the "City of Dunwoody" and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Dunwoody shall be those set forth and described in Appendix A of this Charter, and said Appendix A is incorporated into and made a part of this Charter. The city clerk shall maintain a current map and written legal description of the corporate boundaries of the city, and such map and description shall incorporate any changes which may hereafter be made in such corporate boundaries. 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Act. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Act or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades to the extent permitted by general law; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. 
(A)  To condemn property inside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use and for any public purpose deemed necessary by the city council utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(B)  The municipality shall have the right to condemn and cause to be remediated or removed any building, structure, or existing condition within its corporate limits that is dangerous to life, limb, or property, by reasons of decay, dilapidation, or unsanitary condition. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to relieve the municipality of any duty to give owners or interested persons reasonable notice and opportunity to remedy the situation. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as relieving the municipality of liability to any interested person for damages to person or property taken or destroyed in furtherance of this subparagraph. This subparagraph shall not be construed as authorizing the doing of any act or thing contrary to the Constitution of this state and the policy of the general laws of this state. The municipality shall have authority to adopt reasonable ordinances and resolutions for the purpose of carrying out this subparagraph; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the enactment of ordinances that preserve and improve air quality, restore and maintain water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, manage storm water and establish a storm-water utility, manage solid and hazardous waste, and provide other necessary or beneficial actions for the protection of the environment. These ordinances shall include, without limitation, ordinances that protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection. Such ordinances may: require that users vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and protect the storm-water management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas; 
(9)  Ethics. To adopt ethics ordinances and regulations governing such things as, but not limited to, the conduct of municipal elected officials, appointed officials, contractors, vendors and employees, establishing procedures for ethics complaints, and setting forth penalties for violations of such rules and procedures; 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges, taxes, or fees; 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Homestead exemption. To establish and maintain procedures for offering homestead exemptions to residents of the city and maintaining current homestead exemptions of residents of the city as authorized by Act of the General Assembly; 
(16)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(17)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(18)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices not specified in this Charter, commissions, authorities, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(19)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(20)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(21)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(22)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, storm-water management, gasworks, electricity generating plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(23)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(24)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(25)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for city land use, signage and outside advertising, and development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(26)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(27)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure that is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(28)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, maintenance, or abolition of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, public housing, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside the corporate limits of the city and to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(29)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(30)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(31)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(32)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(33)  Employee benefits. To provide and maintain a retirement plan, insurance, and such other employee benefits for appointed officers and employees of the city, as are determined by the city council; 
(34)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements, subject to referendum; 
(37)  Taxes; ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; provided, however, that: 
(A)  The millage rate imposed for ad valorem taxes on real property shall not exceed 3.04 unless a higher limit is recommended by resolution of the city council and approved by a majority of the qualified voters of the City of Dunwoody voting on the issue; 
(B)  For all years, the fair market value of all property subject to taxation shall be determined according to the tax digest of DeKalb County, as provided in Code Section 48-5-352 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes and fees as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; to inspect said vehicles and mandate standards of safety and cleanliness; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Tourism, conventions, and trade shows. To provide for the structure, operation, or management of the Dunwoody Convention and Visitors Bureau created pursuant to Section 1.05 of this Charter and to authorize the City of Dunwoody to contract with private sector nonprofit organizations or other governmental agencies to promote tourism, conventions, and trade shows; 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and any listing of particular powers in this Charter shall not be held to be exclusive of others or restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia; and 
(43)  Special districts. To exercise all authority provided by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of Georgia to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts and to collect fees, assessments, and taxes within such districts to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. It is the intent of the General Assembly that any fee imposed pursuant to this paragraph for the provision of fire and rescue services not exceed the average of ad valorem taxes levied by DeKalb County for the provision of the same services for the previous five years prior to the date the city begins providing such services. 
(Act. No. 440, § 1, eff. 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 1.04. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Act. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.05. - Tourism, conventions, and trade shows. 
The Dunwoody Convention and Visitors Bureau is hereby created. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.01. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of the City of Dunwoody, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, shall be vested in a city council of which the mayor shall be a voting member. 
(b)  (1)  The city council of Dunwoody, Georgia shall consist of six members, plus the mayor. 
(2)  There shall be three council districts, designated Council Districts 1 through 3, as described in Appendix B of this Act, which is attached to and made a part of this Charter of the City of Dunwoody. 
(3)  One councilmember shall be elected from each of the three council districts and shall hold Council Posts 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Each person desiring to offer as a candidate for councilmember for such posts shall designate the council post for which he or she is offering. Councilmembers for such posts shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the respective council districts voting at the elections of the city. In the event that no candidate for a council post obtains a majority vote of the qualified electors of the council district voting in the election, then a run-off election shall be held. The candidates receiving the two highest numbers of votes in the election for such council post will be included in the run-off election. The person receiving the highest number of votes of the qualified electors of the council district voting at such run-off election shall be elected. Each candidate for election to the city council must reside in the district he or she seeks to represent. 
(4)  Three councilmembers shall be elected from the city at large and shall represent Council Posts 4, 5, and 6. Candidates offering for election to Council Post 4 shall reside in Council District 1, candidates offering for election to Council Post 5 shall reside in Council District 2, and candidates offering for election to Council Post 6 shall reside in Council District 3. Each person desiring to offer as a candidate for councilmember for such posts shall designate the council post for which he or she is offering. Councilmembers for such posts shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the entire city voting at the elections of the city. In the event that no candidate for a council post obtains a majority vote of the qualified electors of the entire city voting in the election, then a run-off election shall be held. The candidates receiving the two highest numbers of votes in the election for such council post will be included in the run-off election. The person receiving the highest number of votes of the qualified electors of the city voting at such run-off election shall be elected. 
(c)  With the exception of the initial terms set forth in subsection (d) of this section, councilmembers shall be elected to terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified on a staggered basis in alternate election cycles such that every two years three councilmembers are up for election. 
(d)  In order to assure staggered elections of the councilmembers, in the first election of the city council the terms for the candidates elected for Council Posts 1, 2, and 3 shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to their successors elected in the regular elections held in November 2009 as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2.02. The terms for the candidates elected for Council Posts 4, 5, and 6 shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to their successors elected in the regular elections held in November 2011 as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2.02. Thereafter, a successor to each councilmember shall be elected at the November election immediately preceding the end of such councilmember's term of office and the term of each councilmember shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to his or her successor. 
(e)  With the exception of the initial term of office, a mayor of the City of Dunwoody, with the powers and duties specified herein, shall be elected to a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city. In the event that no candidate for mayor obtains a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city, then a run-off election shall be held. The candidates receiving the two highest numbers of votes in the election shall be included in the run-off election and the candidate receiving the highest number of votes in the runoff of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at such runoff shall be elected. The term of the first elected mayor shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to his or her successor elected in the regular election held in November 2011, as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2.02. Thereafter, a successor to each mayor shall be elected at the November election immediately preceding the end of such mayor's term of office and the term of each mayor shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to his or her successor. 
Sec. 2.02. - Mayor and councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  For all elections subsequent to the first election, the mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their terms shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to their successors. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the City of Dunwoody for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election for mayor or councilmember, shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service, and shall continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Dunwoody. In addition to the above requirements, no person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember representing a council district unless that person has been a resident of the district such person seeks to represent for a continuous period of at least six months immediately prior to the date of the election for councilmember and continues to reside in such district during that person's period of service. 
(b)  An election shall be held on the third Tuesday in September 2008, to elect the first mayor and city council. At such election, the first mayor and council shall be elected to serve for the initial terms of office specified in Sections 2.01(d) and 2.01(e). Thereafter, the time for holding regular municipal elections shall be on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year beginning in 2009. 
(c)  The number of successive terms an individual may hold a position as a councilmember shall be unlimited. 
(d)  The number of successive terms an individual may hold the position of Mayor shall be limited to two terms. An individual who serves as mayor for either one term or two consecutive terms, may stand for subsequent elections provided the individual is not the mayor at time of such elections. 
Sec. 2.03. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Elected officials of the city cannot hold other elected or public offices. The elected offices of the city's government will become vacant upon the member's death, resignation, removal, or forfeiture of office. The following shall result in an elected city official forfeiting his or her office: 
(1)  Violating the provisions of this Charter; 
(2)  Being convicted of, or pleading guilty or "no contest" to, a felony or a crime of moral turpitude; or 
(3)  Failing to attend one-third of the regular meetings of the council in a three-month period without being excused by the council. 
(b)  The office of mayor shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Act or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor. 
(c)  The office of a councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Act or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of a councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the mayor shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term subject to the approval of the city council or those members remaining. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of a councilmember. 
Sec. 2.04. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 2.05. - Election votes. 
The candidates for mayor and city council who receive a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city shall be elected to a term of office. 
Sec. 2.06. - Applicability of general laws; qualifying; other provisions. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended or otherwise provided by law. Except as otherwise provided by this Act, the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, including but not limited to the establishment of qualifying fees, to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended or otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 2.07. - Compensation and expenses. 
The annual salary of the mayor shall be $16,000.00 and the annual salary for each councilmember shall be $12,000.00. Such salaries shall be paid from municipal funds in monthly installments. The mayor shall be provided an annual expense allowance of $5,000.00 and each councilmember shall be provided an annual expense allowance of $3,000.00 for the reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor and councilmembers in carrying out their duties as elected officials of the city. 
Sec. 2.08. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.09. - Meetings, oath of office, and mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The city council shall meet on the first working day in January immediately following each regular municipal election. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected mayor and councilmembers collectively by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths. The oath shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [councilmember or mayor as the case may be] of the City of Dunwoody, and will to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia, and the Charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Dunwoody. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of my district and the City of Dunwoody for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interests of the City of Dunwoody to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
(b)  Following the induction of the mayor and councilmembers, the city council, by a majority vote of the councilmembers, shall elect a councilmember to be mayor pro tempore, who shall serve for a term of two years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The number of successive terms an individual may hold a position as mayor pro tempore shall be unlimited. 
(c)  The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's temporary disability, suspension, or absence. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the councilmembers present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor as described herein and shall perform the mayor's duties in the same manner as the mayor pro tempore. 
(d)  The city council shall, at least once a month, hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The city council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any day or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(e)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on the call of either the mayor and one councilmember or three councilmembers. Notice of such special meetings shall be delivered to all councilmembers, the mayor, and the city manager personally, by registered mail, or by electronic means at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor, all councilmembers, and city manager are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by the mayor, a councilmember, or the city manager in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice. The notice of such special meeting shall state what business is to be transacted at the special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
Sec. 2.10. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business for the city council. The mayor shall be counted toward the making of a quorum. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but on the request of any member there shall be a roll-call vote. In order for any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other action of the city council to be adopted, the measure must receive at least three affirmative votes and must receive the affirmative votes of a majority of those voting. No councilmember, nor the mayor, shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the city council for official action except when such councilmember has a reason which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. If any councilmember or the mayor is present and eligible to vote on a matter and refuses to do so for a reason he or she will not disclose he or she shall be deemed to have voted with the majority of the votes of the other councilmembers on the issue involved; provided further that if there is a tie in the vote of the voting councilmembers, then the mayor and each councilmember shall be required to vote unless he or she discloses a reason for not voting. The mayor shall have one vote on all matters brought before the council. 
(b)  The following types of actions require an ordinance in order to have the force of law: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter or abolish a department, office not specified in this Charter, or agency; 
(2)  Provide for fine or other penalty; 
(3)  Levy taxes; 
(4)  Grant, renew, or extend a franchise; 
(5)  Regulate a rate for a public utility; 
(6)  Authorize the borrowing of money; 
(7)  Convey, lease or encumber city land; 
(8)  Regulate land use and development; and 
(9)  Amend or repeal an ordinance already adopted. 
(c)  The city council shall establish by ordinance procedures for convening emergency meetings. In an emergency, an ordinance can be passed without notice or hearings if the city council passes the ordinance by three-fourths vote; provided, however, that the city council cannot in an emergency meeting: 
(1)  Levy taxes; 
(2)  Grant, renew, or extend a franchise; 
(3)  Regulate a rate for a public utility; or 
(4)  Borrow money. 
Sec. 2.11. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Dunwoody as provided by Article I of this Charter. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Dunwoody and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Sec. 2.12. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except for the office of city manager and the elected positions provided for in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices not specified in this Charter, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The city council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the city council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2.13. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others, except as required by law; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; "Valuable" shall be an amount determined by the city council; provided, however, that the amount shall not exceed $100.00; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she, or members of his or her immediate family, has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. "Private financial interest" shall include interests of immediate family. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose in writing such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the city council shall hold any other elective city office or be employed by any city or county government during the term for which elected. 
Sec. 2.14. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by applicable state law. 
(b)  No member of any board, commission, or authority of the city shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(c)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or any applicable law of the State of Georgia. 
(d)  No member of any board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she shall have executed and filed with the designated officer of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the city council and administered by the mayor or a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(e)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of a majority of the councilmembers in accordance with state laws. 
(f)  Members of boards, commissions, and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the designated officer of the city. 
(Act. No. 440, § 2, eff. 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 2.15. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in writing, and the city council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or amend the same. A resolution may be passed at the time it is offered, but an ordinance shall not be adopted until the title of said ordinance has been read at two city council meetings, provided that the beginning of said meetings shall not be less than 24 hours nor more than 60 days apart. This requirement of two readings shall not apply to emergency ordinances. The catchlines of sections of this Charter or any ordinance printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and: 
(1)  Shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or as any part of the section; and 
(2)  Shall not be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted unless expressly provided to the contrary. 
Furthermore, the article and section headings contained in this Act shall not be deemed to govern, limit, or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any article or section hereof. 
(b)  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business, including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent councilmembers. Such rules may include punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the city council. 
(Act. No. 440, § 3, eff. 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 2.16. - Submission of ordinances to the city clerk. 
(a)  Every ordinance, resolution, and other action adopted by the city council shall be presented to the city clerk within 15 days of its adoption or approval. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery from the city council. 
(b)  An ordinance or resolution that has been passed by the city council shall become effective on the date the ordinance is passed by the city council or on such other date as may be specified in the ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 3.01. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside over all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Set the agenda for meetings of the city council after receiving input from members of the city council, the city manager, and the public; provided, however that an additional item shall be added to the agenda upon the written request of any member of the city council; 
(3)  Serve as the ceremonial head of the city and as its official representative to federal, state, and local governmental bodies and officials; 
(4)  Sign all orders, checks, and warrants for payment of money within a level of authorization as established by the city council; 
(5)  Execute all contracts, deeds, and other obligations of the city within a level of authorization as established by the city council; 
(6)  Vote in all matters before the city council as provided in Section 2.10(a) of this Charter; 
(7)  Make all appointments of city officers as provided by this Charter, subject to confirmation by the city council; 
(8)  Serve in a part-time capacity and be compensated accordingly; and 
(9)  Perform any other duties and exercise any other powers required by state or federal law or authorized by a duly adopted ordinance that is not in conflict with this Charter. 
(b)  The mayor shall have the authority to transfer appropriations between departments, funds, services, and strategy or organizational units but only with the approval of the city council. 
(c)  The mayor shall have the authority to certify that a supplemental appropriation is possible due to unexpected revenue increases but only with approval of the city council. 
(d)  The mayor shall have all of the powers specifically granted to the mayor elsewhere in this Charter regardless of whether such powers are enumerated in this Section 3.01. 
(Act. No. 440, § 4, eff. 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 3.02. - City manager; appointment and qualification. 
The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the city council, an officer whose title shall be the "city manager." The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs and solely on the basis of his or her education and experience in the accepted competencies and practices of local government management. 
Sec. 3.03. - City manager; chief administrative officer. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the government of the city. The city manager must devote all of his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the city over which said officer has jurisdiction. 
Sec. 3.04. - City manager; powers and duties enumerated. 
The city manager shall have the power, and it shall be his or her duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  Appoint and employ all necessary employees of the city, provided that the power of this appointment shall not include officers and employees who by this Charter are appointed or elected by the mayor and the city council or departments not under the jurisdiction of the city manager; 
(3)  Remove employees appointed and employed under Section 3.04(2), without the consent of the city council and without assigning any reason therefor; 
(4)  Exercise supervision and control of all departments and all divisions created in this Charter or that may hereafter be created by the city council except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the city council, without a right to vote, but with a right to take part in the discussions as seen fit by the chair; provided, however, that regardless of the decision of the meeting chair the city manager may take part in any discussion and report on any matter requested and approved by the city council at such meeting. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(6)  Recommend to the city council, after prior review and comment by the mayor, for adoption such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be forthwith to take such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce the same; 
(8)  Make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city as to matters within the city manager's level of authorization as established by the city council to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget, except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no contract purchase or obligation requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council; 
(9)  Sign all orders, checks, and warrants for payment of money within the city manager's level of authorization as established by the city council to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget, except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no such order, check, or warrant requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council; 
(10)  Act as budget officer to prepare and submit to the city council, after review and comment by the mayor, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(11)  Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(12)  Make a full written report to the city council on the fifteenth of each month showing the operations and expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding month, and a synopsis of such reports shall be published by the city clerk; 
(13)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees in accordance with the city budget and the city pay and classification plan; 
(14)  To transfer appropriations within a department; and 
(15)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Act. No. 440, § 5, eff. 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 3.05. - City council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.08 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 3.06. - City manager; removal. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution removing the city manager and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a city council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  The city council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of four of its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the city manager, if he or she has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he or she has requested one. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of his or her removal. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
(c)  If the city manager is suspended in accordance with subsection (a) of this section or becomes disabled and is unable to carry out the duties of the office or if the city manager dies, the acting city manager shall perform the duties of the city manager until the city manager's disability is removed or until the city manager is replaced. Removal of the city manager because of disability shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 3.07. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  The mayor with the approval of the city council may appoint any person to exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager during the city manager's suspension under Section 3.06(a), temporary absence from the city, or during the city manager's disability. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the mayor may designate with the approval of the city council a person as acting city manager, who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until a city manager is appointed. 
Sec. 3.08. - City attorney. 
The mayor shall appoint the city attorney(s) together with such assistant city attorneys as may be deemed appropriate subject to confirmation by the city council and shall provide for the payment of such attorney(s) for services rendered to the city. The rates or salary paid to any city attorney or assistant city attorney shall be approved in advance by the city council. The city attorney(s) shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, other officers, and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. The city attorney(s) shall review all contracts of the city but shall not have the power to bind the city. 
Sec. 3.09. - City clerk. 
The mayor shall appoint a city clerk subject to confirmation by the city council to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council; to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city; and to perform such duties as may be required by law or ordinance or as the mayor or city manager may direct. 
(Act. No. 440, § 6, eff. 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 3.10. - Tax collector. 
The mayor may appoint a tax collector subject to confirmation by the city council to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city; and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.11. - City accountant. 
The mayor may appoint a city accountant subject to confirmation by the city council to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.12. - City internal auditor. 
The city council shall appoint an internal auditor to audit the financial records and expenditures of city funds and to report the results of such audits in writing to the city council at times and intervals set by the city council but no less than quarterly. Such audit reports shall, at a minimum, identify all city expenditures and other financial matters that the internal auditor either determines are not in compliance with or cannot conclusively be determined to be in compliance with (a) the provisions of this Charter, (b) the applicable city budget, and (c) applicable ordinances, resolutions, or other actions duly adopted or approved under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 3.13. - Consolidation of functions. 
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city manager may also, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of the appointment of other persons to perform the same. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans; employment at will. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and a pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Said plan may apply to all employees of the City of Dunwoody and any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted by the city council, neither the city council nor the city manager shall increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except in conformity with such pay plan or pursuant to an amendment of said pay plan duly adopted by the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all employees of the city shall be subject to removal or discharge, with or without cause, at any time. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.01. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Dunwoody which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law, including ordinances of the city; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of, and in accordance with, the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tempore shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
Sec. 4.02. - Judge(s). 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he or she has attained the age of 28 years and has been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for a minimum of three years. The judge shall be nominated by the mayor subject to approval by the city council. The compensation and number of the judges shall be fixed by the city council. 
(b)  Before entering on duties of his or her office, the judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state declaring that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(c)  The judge shall serve for a term of four years but may be removed from the position by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council or shall be removed upon action taken by the State Judicial Qualifications Commission for: 
(1)  Willful misconduct in office; 
(2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; 
(3)  Habitual intemperance; 
(4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or 
(5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
(Act. No. 440, § 7, eff. 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 4.03. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary by the judge to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.04. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Dunwoody and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction to the fullest extent allowed by state law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to recommend to the city council for approval a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for appearances of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited to the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Dunwoody, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears, by probable cause, that a state law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by state law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the judicial jurisdiction and judicial powers throughout the entire area of the City of Dunwoody granted by state laws generally to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
Sec. 4.05. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of DeKalb County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge(s) shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Sec. 5.01. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 5.02. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide, by ordinance, the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 5.03. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
(a)  On or before a date fixed by the city council, but no later than the first day of the ninth month of the fiscal year currently ending, the city manager shall, after input, review and comment by the mayor, submit to the city council a proposed operating budget and capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor and city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as they may deem pertinent. The operating budget, capital budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. 
(b)  Beginning in the third year of the city's operation, the city manager and mayor are required to present to the city council a budget which is balanced in projected spending and revenues. 
(c)  Prior to passage of the budget, the city council shall hold a special public hearing at which the budget will be presented and public comment on the budget will be solicited. The date, time and place of the special public hearing shall be announced no less than 30 days prior to the scheduled date for such hearing. 
(d)  All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of the fund or funds from which such appropriations were made. When a supplemental appropriation is certified by the city manager to exist, these appropriations can be spent during the current fiscal year following passage of a supplemental appropriation ordinance. 
Sec. 5.04. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget or capital budget proposed by the city manager in accordance with Section 5.03(a), except that the budget, as finally amended and adopted, must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt a budget on or before the first day of the eleventh month of the fiscal year currently ending. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by the prescribed deadline, the operating budget and capital budget proposed by the mayor and city manager shall be adopted without further action by the city council. 
Sec. 5.05. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is in writing. The city council may adopt procedures for the authorization of certain contracts without city attorney review or city council approval. Absent the foregoing, no contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
Sec. 5.06. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 5.07. - Audits. 
(a)  There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
(b)  As a minimum, all audits and budgets of the city shall satisfy the requirements of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. relating to local government audits and budgets. 
Sec. 5.08. - Homestead exemption; freeze. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Dunwoody, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this section is first granted to the most recent owner of such homestead. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, with the additional qualification that it shall include not more than five contiguous acres of homestead property. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Dunwoody is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Dunwoody ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the current year assessed value of that homestead exceeds the base year assessed value of that homestead. This exemption shall not apply to taxes assessed on improvements to the homestead or additional land that is added to the homestead after January 1 of the base year. If any real property is added to or removed from the homestead, the base year assessed value shall be adjusted to reflect such addition or removal, and the exemption shall be recalculated accordingly. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(Act. No. 562, § 1, eff. 6-2-2010) 
Sec. 5.09. - Homestead exemption; senior citizens; disabled. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Dunwoody, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(3)  "Income" means Georgia taxable net income determined pursuant to Chapter 7 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, for state income tax purposes, except income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and such individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. Income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as income for the purposes of this Act. 
(4)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under subsection (b) of this section is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Dunwoody who is disabled or is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Dunwoody ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $14,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The exemption granted by this subsection shall only be granted if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead does not exceed $15,000.00 for the immediately preceding year. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  (1)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (b) of this section as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. Such certificate or certificates shall constitute part of and be submitted with the application provided for in paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
(2)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, giving the person's age, income, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2009. 
Sec. 5.10. - Homestead exemption; general. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Dunwoody, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Dunwoody is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Dunwoody ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $10,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2009. 
Sec. 5.11. - Homestead exemption; surviving spouses. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Dunwoody, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(3)  "Unremarried surviving spouse" of a member of the armed forces includes the unmarried widow or widower of a member of the armed forces who is receiving spousal benefits from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 
(b)  Any person who is a resident of the City of Dunwoody and who is an unremarried surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces of the United States, which member has been killed in or has died as a result of any war or armed conflict in which the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, shall be granted a homestead exemption from all City of Dunwoody ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes in the amount of the greater of $32,500.00 or the maximum amount which may be granted to a disabled veteran under Section 2102 of Title 38 of the United States Code, as amended. As of January 1, 2006, the maximum amount which may be granted to a disabled veteran under Section 2102 of Title 38 of the United States Code, as amended, is $50,000.00. The exemption shall be on the homestead which the unremarried surviving spouse owns and actually occupies as a residence and homestead. In the event such surviving spouse remarries, such person shall cease to be qualified to continue the exemption under this Act effective December 31 of the taxable year in which such person remarries. The value of all property in excess of such exemption granted to such unremarried surviving spouse shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in this Act, the unremarried surviving spouse shall furnish to the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, documents from the Secretary of Defense evidencing that such unremarried surviving spouse receives spousal benefits as a result of the death of such person's spouse who as a member of the armed forces of the United States was killed or died as a result of a war or armed conflict while on active duty or while performing authorized travel to or from active duty during such war or armed conflict in which the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, pursuant to the Survivor Benefit Plan under Subchapter II of Chapter 73 of Title 10 of the United States Code or pursuant to any preceding or subsequent federal law which provides survivor benefits for spouses of members of the armed forces who were killed or who died as a result of any war or armed conflict. 
(d)  An unremarried surviving spouse filing for the exemption under this section shall be required to file with the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, information relative to marital status and other such information which the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, deems necessary to determine eligibility for the exemption. Each unremarried surviving spouse shall file for the exemption only once with the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof. Once filed, the exemption shall automatically be renewed from year to year, except that the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, may require annually that the holder of an exemption substantiate his or her continuing eligibility for the exemption. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for such exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by this section shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other exemption from ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes which is equal to or lower in amount than such exemption granted by this section. If the amount of any other exemption from ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes applicable to any resident qualifying under this section is greater than or is increased to an amount greater than the amount of the applicable exemption granted by this section, such other exemption shall apply and shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the exemption granted by this section. 
(f)  The exemptions granted by this section shall apply to all tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2009. 
Sec. 5.12. - Homestead exemption; one mill equivalent. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Dunwoody, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Dunwoody is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Dunwoody ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in an amount that provides the dollar equivalent of a one mill reduction of the millage rate applicable to the homestead property with respect to ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes for the taxable year. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2009. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.01. - DeKalb County Special Services Tax District. 
For the taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, the adjusted ad valorem tax millage rate and amount for service charges or fees for district services for the Dunwoody special services tax district shall be zero percent. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the General Assembly under Section 1 of that local constitutional amendment providing that certain municipalities in DeKalb County shall constitute special services tax districts, Resolution Act No. 168; House Resolution No. 715-1916; Ga. L. 1978, p. 2468, to control the subject matter of such local constitutional amendment. Municipal services provided by DeKalb County for the City of Dunwoody will be established through intergovernmental agreements or established as otherwise authorized by statute. 
Sec. 6.02. - Referendum and initial election. 
(a)  Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of DeKalb County shall call a special election for the purpose of submitting this Act to the qualified voters of the proposed City of Dunwoody for approval or rejection. The superintendent shall set the date of such election for the date of the general primary in 2008. The superintendent shall issue the call for such election at least 30 days prior to the date thereof. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of DeKalb County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 

 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect as provided in this Charter, otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. The initial expense of such election shall be borne by DeKalb County. Within two years after the elections if the incorporation is approved, the City of Dunwoody shall reimburse DeKalb County for the actual cost of printing and personnel services for such election and for the initial election of the mayor and councilmembers pursuant to Section 2.02 of this Charter. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to hold and conduct such election. It shall be his or her further duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
(b)  For the purposes of the referendum election provided for in subsection (a) of this section and for the purposes of the special election of the City of Dunwoody to be held on the third Tuesday in September, 2008, the qualified electors of the City of Dunwoody shall be those qualified electors of DeKalb County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Dunwoody as described by Appendix A of this Charter. At subsequent municipal elections, the qualified electors of the City of Dunwoody shall be determined pursuant to the authority of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. known as the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  Only for the purposes of holding and conducting the referendum election provided for by subsection (a) of this section and holding and conducting the special election of the City of Dunwoody to be held on the third Tuesday in September, 2008, the election superintendent of DeKalb County is vested with the powers and duties of the election superintendent of the City of Dunwoody and the powers and duties of the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody. 
Sec. 6.03. - Effective dates and transition. 
(a)  The initial mayor and councilmembers shall take the oath of office the next business day after certification of the election of such officers, and by action of any four members of the governing authority may, prior to December 1, 2008, meet and take actions binding on the city. 
(b)  A period of time will be needed for an orderly transition of various government functions from DeKalb County to the City of Dunwoody. Accordingly there shall be a two-year transition period as allowed by law beginning at 12:01 a.m. on December 1, 2008. 
(c)  During such transition period, DeKalb County shall continue to provide within the territorial limits of the city all government services and functions which DeKalb County provided in 2008 and at the same actual direct cost and level of service, except to the extent otherwise provided in this section; provided, however, that upon at least 30 days' prior written notice to the governing authority of DeKalb County by the governing authority of City of Dunwoody, responsibility for any such service or function shall be transferred to the City of Dunwoody. The governing authority of the City of Dunwoody shall determine the date of commencement of collection of taxes, fees, assessments, fines and forfeitures, and other moneys within the territorial limits of the city and the date upon which the City of Dunwoody is considered removed from the special tax district. 
(d)  During the transition period, the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody may generally exercise any power granted by this Charter or general law, except to the extent that a power is specifically and integrally related to the provision of a governmental service, function, or responsibility not yet provided or carried out by the city. 
(e)  During the transition period, all ordinances of DeKalb County shall remain applicable within the territorial limits of the city unless otherwise amended, repealed, or replaced by the City of Dunwoody. Any transfer of jurisdiction to the City of Dunwoody during or at the end of the transition period shall not in and of itself abate any judicial proceeding pending in DeKalb County or the pending prosecution of any violation of any ordinance of DeKalb County. 
(f)  During the transition period, the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody may at any time, without the necessity of any agreement by DeKalb County, commence to exercise its planning and zoning powers; provided, however, that the city shall give the county notice of the date on which the city will assume the exercise of such powers. Upon the governing authority of the City of Dunwoody commencing to exercise its planning and zoning powers, the Municipal Court of the City of Dunwoody shall immediately have jurisdiction to enforce the planning and zoning ordinances of the city. The provisions of this subsection shall control over any conflicting provisions of any other subsection of this section. 
(g)  Effective upon the termination of the transition period, subsections (b) through (f) of this section shall cease to apply except for the last sentence of subsection (e) which shall remain effective. Effective upon the termination of the transition period, the City of Dunwoody shall be a full functioning municipal corporation and subject to all general laws of this state. 
Sec. 6.04. - Directory nature of dates. 
It is the intention of the General Assembly that this Act be construed as directory rather than mandatory with respect to any date prescribed in this Act. If it is necessary to delay any action called for in this Act for providential cause, delay in securing approval under the federal Voting Rights Act, or any other reason, it is the intention of the General Assembly that the action be delayed rather than abandoned. Any delay in performing any action under this Act, whether for cause or otherwise, shall not operate to frustrate the overall intent of this Act. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing it is specifically provided that if it is not possible to hold the referendum election provided for in Section 6.02 of this Act on the date specified in that section, then such referendum shall be held as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable but not later than 45 days after securing approval under the federal Voting Rights Act. If the referendum election provided for in Section 6.02 of this Act is conducted on or before August 7, 2008, the special election for the initial members of the governing authority shall be conducted on the date specified in Section 2.02 of this Act. If the referendum election provided for under Section 6.02 of this Act is conducted after August 7, 2008, then the special election for the initial members of the governing authority shall be held as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, and the commencement of the initial terms of office shall be delayed accordingly. If the first election provided for in Section 2.02 of this Act occurs after the Tuesday following the first Monday in November, 2008, the city council shall be authorized to delay the dates otherwise specified in Section 6.03 of this Act. 
Sec. 6.05. - Charter commission. 
No later than July 1, 2020, the mayor and the city council shall call for a charter commission to review the city's experience and recommend to the General Assembly any changes to the charter. Members of the charter commission shall be appointed as follows: one by the mayor, one by the city council, and one by each member of the Georgia House of Representatives or Senate whose district lies wholly or partially within the corporate boundaries of the city. All members of the charter commission shall reside in the City of Dunwoody. The commission shall complete the recommendations within the time frame required by the city council. 
(Act. No. 440, § 8, eff. 4-10-2014) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws in the Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code established. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Applicability. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contains any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 1-3. - Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(a)  The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(b)  In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(c)  All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed to carry out the full intention of the city council. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(d)  Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions on the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific provisions shall control over the general. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 1-4. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise. As consistent with the Charter, definitions shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the enabling legislation creating a municipal charter for the City of Dunwoody, enacted as SB 82 during the General Session of the 2008 General Assembly. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Council. The term "council" means the six councilmembers and the mayor. 
Councilmember. The term "councilmember" means the individual members of the city council, including the mayor. 
County. The term "county" means DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Fire department. The term "fire department" means the DeKalb County Fire Department or the City of Dunwoody Fire Department, whichever provides services to the City of Dunwoody. 
Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and, in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Officials. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of the City of Dunwoody" was added thereto. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and," and the term "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner" applies to a building or land and shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, and bodies political and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Police. The term "police" means the police department or police chief of DeKalb County or of the City of Dunwoody, whichever is serving as the police force for the city. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto and area owned or dedicated as public right-of-way within the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Title of officer or official. Whenever the title of an officer or official is given, it shall be construed as though the term "of the City of Dunwoody" was added. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days, unless otherwise specified. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 1-5. - Nonexclusivity. 
Terms not defined by this article may be defined elsewhere in this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Punishment. 
(a)  Unless specified elsewhere in this Code, any violation of this Code shall be punishable up to a maximum penalty allowed by state law or the city Charter. 
(b)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(c)  Community service may be substituted for the fine with the rate of hourly work set to that of the federal minimum wage. 
(d)  If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this section conflicts with the laws of the state, then state law applies to that particular punishment. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7. - Exercise of powers. 
The powers of the city may be exercised, as provided by the Charter, by the city, and by the parties with whom the city contracts for municipal services. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 1-9. - Catchlines of sections; effect of notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references and other references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(d)  References in city forms, documents, citations, and regulations to city ordinances codified in this Code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 4) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section (or article or chapter) _____ of The Code of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not therefore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 5) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of this Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ through ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into this Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into this Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 6) 
Sec. 1-13. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 7) 
Sec. 1-14. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the municipal government of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 8) 
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, providing policies and programs for, or providing retirement, disability or death benefits for officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes for local improvements; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance, use permit or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(13)  Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code. 
(b)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 1, art. 4, § 9) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Meetings. 
(a)  Meeting times. As described in section 2.09 of the Charter, the council shall meet at least once a month. Regular meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 6:00 p.m. The council may designate alternative meeting times so long as the time is published either electronically on the city website or through other means, including posting at the building designated as city hall at least 24 hours before the meeting. 
(b)  Meetings scheduled on a federal or state holiday. If the regular meeting falls on a federal or state holiday, the council may reschedule the meeting to the following Tuesday, and publish the time change as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Special meetings. Special meetings may be called in accordance with the Charter section 2.09. 
(d)  Adjournment. Any meeting of the council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 1, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-06-12, § 1, 6-8-2015) 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq.; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-2. - Open meetings and records. 
(a)  All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Georgia Open and Public Meetings Act codified at O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
(b)  All city records subject to the Georgia Open Records Act, codified at O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., shall be available to the public. The city clerk shall comply with any valid requests under the Georgia Open Records Act and prepare any materials requested. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 1, § 2) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-3. - Document retention. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the city adopts the records management plan and record retention schedules recommended by the secretary of state as amended from time to time by future resolutions of the mayor and city council. The city clerk shall coordinate all records management for the city including storage, archiving, and destruction of records. Records shall be maintained according to approved retention schedules. All requests made under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., excepting standardized routine requests of the city police department, the city fire department, and the city municipal court shall be made to the city clerk. No record shall be destroyed except as provided in the approved retention schedule; provided, however, a written record may be destroyed if it is otherwise preserved by means of microfiche, scanning, or other reliable photographic or digital means as permitted by law. Changes to the retention schedules shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 2-4. - Fees. 
The city clerk shall charge the full amount permitted by state law to copy the records subject to the Georgia Open Records Act. If compilation and replication of such documents takes more than 15 minutes, the city clerk may charge an additional reasonable administrative charge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 2-5. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  The council, when sitting as a judicial or quasi-judicial body pursuant to public law, its charter, or its ordinances, shall compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena under the same rules as prevail in the superior courts, and any witness who shall fail to respond to the subpoena, or who shall refuse to testify under oath, shall be guilty of contempt. 
(b)  The subpoenas as authorized in subsection (a) of this section shall bear witness in the name of the mayor; shall be issued by the city clerk; and shall be served by the chief of police, any police officer, or by such other person as the mayor may designate. 
(c)  Should any person fail to respond to a subpoena of the council, after having been lawfully served, without good cause, or should the person refuse to testify under oath, then the council shall hold the person in contempt, and, in its discretion, punish the person by the imposition of a fine according to the maximum allowed by state law. Each of the failures or refusals herein described shall constitute a separate contempt. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 2-6. - Reimbursement and travel. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers shall be reimbursed for their own reasonable travel expenses incurred in connection with city business related to travel outside the city, and those cities that share borders with the city. 
(b)  Overnight travel. The city shall reimburse the mayor or councilmembers for actual expenses of meals incurred in connection with overnight travel, lodging, ground transportation and incidental expenses incurred in connection with city business. 
(c)  Expense reports. Within 60 days after incurring the aforementioned expenditures, the mayor or councilmembers shall file with the city manager a signed travel expense form setting forth the reasonable expenses incurred for which city payment is sought. Original receipts documenting each expense over $10.00 must accompany the form, except for reasonable and customary out-of-pocket expenses such as tolls, valet services, gratuities, and mileage. If a travel expense form has not been filed within 60 days after incurring an expenditure, the city shall not reimburse such expenses. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no expenses shall be reimbursed that exceeds the maximum expense amount allowed by the Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 1, § 6) 
Secs. 2-7—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL 

Sec. 2-31. - Personnel manual. 
The city manager shall establish a personnel manual for all municipal employees. In addition to sections deemed necessary by the city manager, the manual shall include policies regarding equal employment opportunity, nondiscrimination, and sexual harassment. The manual will be updated from time to time as required by federal and state laws. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 2-32. - Employees. 
(a)  Categories. In general, municipal employees shall be categorized as fulltime or parttime, or by terms decided by contract with the city. 
(b)  Municipal employees. Fulltime employees will be paid an hourly salary, weekly salary or some other pay rate; parttime employees will work at irregular intervals on a short-term basis, and temporary workers will be hired to fill a temporary need for a specified period of time. 
(c)  Contract employees. The city manager shall have the authority to propose contractual employment relationships between the city and third parties. The terms of these third party contracts will be established by the contract at the time of hiring. The council must approve a contract worth more than $25,000.00. Issues of liability and scope of agency are to be defined by the contract. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 2, § 2) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; salary of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2-33. - Job descriptions. 
The city shall maintain a job specification for each position held by a municipal employee. The city may provide a job specification for contracted positions. Such specification shall describe the duties of the position, the qualifications necessary, licenses required, to whom such employee reports, expected salary range, and such other information as is necessary to recruit for such position effectively. Such specifications may be amended from time to time by the city manager. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 2-34. - Benefits. 
It shall be the policy of the city to attract and retain a qualified workforce through the provision of a comprehensive package of benefits. To that end, the city shall be authorized to contract with benefits providers for the purpose of providing insurance, retirement, pension plans and other benefits deemed necessary by the council upon approval of the benefit program by the city council. Eligibility for benefits and the cost to employees shall be specified in the personnel manual. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 2-35. - Records. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 2, § 5) 
Secs. 2-36—2-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-59. - Authorization. 
(a)  The following departments may be established by the council: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Finance. 
(3)  Community development. 
(4)  Transportation. 
(5)  Public works. 
(6)  Police. 
(7)  Fire and EMS. 
(8)  Parks and recreation. 
(9)  Building. 
(b)  One or more departments may be combined to form one or more multifunctional departments. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 2-60. - Right of contract. 
The city may contract with third parties to provide all or portions of the functions of any municipal department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 3, § 2) 
Sec. 2-61. - Oversight. 
There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the director's department or agency. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 3, § 3) 
Sec. 2-62. - State and national criminal background checks. 
(a)  Wherever in this Code a requirement for obtaining any license or a permit from the city requires a fingerprint-based background check, the process of acquiring and utilizing same shall be in accordance with this section and all applicable Georgia Bureau of Investigation ("GBI") requirements in addition thereto. 
(b)  An applicant for any license or permit that is required under a provision of this Code to undergo a "fingerprint-based background check," shall submit two sets of his or her fingerprints taken by any law enforcement agency in the United States to the city manager or designee, along with appropriate fees for the fingerprint-based background check. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the city manager or designee will transmit both sets of fingerprints and the appropriate fees to the Dunwoody Police Department, who will then submit them to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, who will conduct a state-wide background check. The GBI will then transfer the same to the Federal Bureau of Investigation ("FBI") for a comparison with nationwide records. The results of the FBI check will be returned to the GBI, which will return the full search results to the City of Dunwoody Police Department. The Dunwoody Police Department shall then transmit to the city manager or designee any potentially disqualifying results received from the GBI by writing same on the background check consent form. The Dunwoody Police Department shall retain until the conclusion of the licensing year for the license or permit applied for a copy of the fingerprint cards, results received from the GBI and the background check consent form. 
(d)  In rendering a fitness determination for approval or denial of a license or permit, the city manager or designee will determine, based on the results received from the GBI, whether the record subject has been convicted, plead guilty or nolo contendere, to the disqualifiers as stated in the applicable section of this Code governing the specific licensing or permitting process. The city shall keep a copy of the application and background check consent form as required by the city's document retention schedule. 
(e)  A record subject may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the Dunwoody Police Department. Should the record subject seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact the GBI for a State of Georgia record or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 1, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 2-63—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-81. - Creation. 
There may be created a board of zoning appeals, a design review board, a historic preservation board, a planning commission, a construction board of appeals, and an alcohol licensing review board, which shall have the powers and duties and be subject to and governed by the regulations set forth in this article and this Code. The duties of each board are defined in the corresponding Code section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-08-10, § 1, 8-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-12, § 2, 6-8-2015) 
Sec. 2-82. - Composition. 
All board members must be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 2-83. - Membership. 
(a)  The council shall determine by resolution the number of members of each board or commission. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the council shall establish qualifications for members of each board. Each board member shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. The council shall determine if and at what amount board members will be compensated. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, each board or commission member must be a resident of the city. Should the board member move out of the city; he may remain active until the mayor and council appoint his replacement. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of the meetings in a calendar year. Failure to do so warrants removal from the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 2-84. - Terms. 
(a)  Each member shall serve a specified term of not more than three years. Consecutive terms are permissible, and terms may be staggered. 
(b)  A former councilmember or former mayor may serve on a board. 
(c)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. A consecutive appointment is permissible. 
(d)  Members whose terms expire shall continue to serve until a replacement is appointed or a consecutive appointment is made. 
(e)  Any member may be removed for cause by the mayor and a majority of the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 4; Ord. No. 2014-08-10, § 1, 8-11-2014) 
Sec. 2-85. - Quorum. 
A majority of actual board members establishes a quorum. Any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 5) 
Sec. 2-86. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each of the boards shall adopt its rules of procedure, which shall be substantially similar to the rules of procedure of the city council, and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting as well as agenda items to be considered shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Each of the boards shall elect, annually, at its first meeting of the calendar year, one of its members to serve as chair, and one to serve as vice chair. Each board or commission shall also appoint a secretary to serve as the official record keeper for the board or commission. The secretary of the planning commission may be the director of community development or his designee. 
(c)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the committee shall be public records unless expressly excepted by a provision of the Georgia Open Records Act. The boards shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting closed sessions when permitted by the Georgia Open Meetings and Open Records Acts. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 6) 
Sec. 2-87. - Training. 
The council may establish a mandatory training program for board members. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 7) 
Sec. 2-88. - Additional guidelines of the planning commission. 
(a)  Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(b)  The planning commission may receive reimbursement for customary expenses incurred in conjunction with any authorized activity of the planning commission. 
(c)  The planning commission shall meet monthly in accordance with an established schedule of meetings as prepared by the city department of community development. 
(d)  It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to review and make recommendations for action by the mayor and city council on the following: 
(1)  All applications for annexation, rezoning, master plans, concurrent ordinances and/or variances; 
(2)  Applications for use permits and modifications to same; 
(3)  Amendments to the text of the city zoning ordinance, city subdivision regulations, the city comprehensive plan, the future land use map, and the zoning map; 
(4)  Perform other functions of the planning commission as may be required by federal and state law. 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the mayor and city council from hereafter assigning other duties to the planning commission. 
(e)  Any application that is to be considered by the planning commission must be submitted to the department of community development in accordance with the established filing schedule as prepared by said department or as stated in the city zoning ordinance. 
(f)  At the close of each public hearing, the chair of the planning commission shall call the members to order for consideration and a vote on the issue currently before them. The vote of the planning commission shall be nonbinding and shall be made in the form of a recommendation to the mayor and city council from the following list: 
(1)  Approval as recommended by staff with recommended conditions; 
(2)  Approval as recommended by staff with revised conditions as presented by the planning commission; 
(3)  Denial. 
(g)  The planning commission may move to table an item once to the next regularly scheduled meeting in order to receive additional information necessary to make a recommendation to the mayor and city council. Should the planning commission fail to make a recommendation at the second meeting the item shall be forwarded to the council without a recommendation. Should a request to table an item be made by the applicant and/or the property owner, the planning commission shall consider the request and, if granted, shall not table said request longer than for a period of 90 days. The 90-day period shall begin on the same day the action is made by the planning commission. If the table item is not returned within the prescribed period, the item shall then be automatically withdrawn and shall be required to follow the prescribed and established procedure to re-file applications before the planning commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 8; Ord. No. 2018-08-14, § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-89. - Additional guidelines of the design review board. 
If created by resolution of city council, the city design review board shall consist of residents, land owners, business owners and professional architects and/or land planners, who either maintain primary residences and/or businesses or own land in the city. The design review board shall review all plans for development in the city for compliance with standards delineated by the community guidelines as established in the city zoning ordinance or other ordinances of the city council, and shall make recommendations to the department of community development prior to the approval of a concept plan, land disturbance permit, building permit, or sign permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 4, § 9) 
Secs. 2-90—2-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY ADVISORY COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-107. - Authorization. 
The mayor may establish advisory committees. Each committee may have one or more councilmembers. The mayor is an ex officio member of every committee. The city manager or a designee shall oversee the meetings of each committee and is an ex officio, nonvoting member of each. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 1) 
Sec. 2-108. - Duties. 
(a)  Each committee may, from time to time, propose policies and ordinances to the council on the subjects germane to the committee. 
(b)  This section shall not be interpreted to require committee approval for a measure to be heard before the council. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of the meetings in a calendar year. Failure to do so warrants removal from the committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 2) 
Sec. 2-109. - Membership. 
The mayor shall establish qualifications for members of each committee. Each committee person shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 3; Ord. No. 2011-05-13, § 1, 5-23-2011) 
Sec. 2-110. - Terms. 
(a)  Each committee member shall serve a specified term of not more than three years. Consecutive terms are permissible. 
(b)  A former councilmember or former mayor may serve on a committee. 
(c)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. A consecutive appointment is permissible. 
(d)  Members whose terms expire shall continue to serve until a replacement is appointed or a consecutive appointment is made. 
(e)  Any member may be removed with or without cause by the mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 4; Ord. No. 2014-08-10, § 2, 8-11-2014) 
Sec. 2-111. - Compensation. 
Committee members may serve without compensation. Reasonable expenses for travel may be reimbursed, and committee members may be compensated pursuant to a policy to be established by the city manager and approved by the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 5) 
Sec. 2-112. - Quorum. 
A majority of actual committee members establishes a quorum. Any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 6) 
Sec. 2-113. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each of the committees shall adopt its rules of procedure, which shall be substantially similar to the rules of procedure of the city council, and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting as well as agenda items to be considered shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the mayor and council. 
(b)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the committee shall be public records unless expressly excepted by a provision of the Georgia Open Records Act. The committee shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question; and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the city council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting closed sessions when permitted by the Georgia Open Meetings and Open Records Acts. 
(c)  Expenditures of the committees, if any, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose intended by the mayor and council during the annual budgeting process. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 7) 
Sec. 2-114. - Training. 
The mayor may establish a mandatory training program for committee members. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 5, § 8) 
Secs. 2-115—2-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY FINANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget ordinances and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1. 

Sec. 2-142. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall be set by ordinance of the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 6, § 1) 
Sec. 2-143. - Finance director. 
(a)  The functions of the city accountant and city treasurer shall be performed by the finance director or his designee within the finance department under the direction of the finance director. 
(b)  The finance director shall perform at least the following duties: 
(1)  Managing, planning, directing, and maintaining the city's financial operations, including serving as chair of the city finance department, if such a department is established; 
(2)  Directing and supervising the work of personnel involved in performing the accounting, utility billing, property tax, payroll, and purchasing functions for the city; 
(3)  Providing technical leadership in budgeting, overseeing, and directing investment opportunities and debt administration, as well as ensuring that proper record retention policies are strictly followed; 
(4)  The council may require the finance director to perform other duties. 
(c)  The city may contract with a third party to serve as finance director. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 2-144. - City tax collector. 
(a)  The mayor shall nominate a city tax collector, subject to ratification by the council. The city tax collector also may serve as the city treasurer, city accountant, and city finance director. 
(b)  The city may contract with a third party, including the county tax commissioner, to serve as city tax collector. 
(c)  The city tax collector shall perform at least the following duties. The mayor and council may require the city tax collector to perform other duties: 
(1)  Managing, planning, and directing the collection of all city taxes; 
(2)  Notifying delinquent taxpayers of their status in accordance with state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 2-145. - Audits. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint an internal auditor to audit the financial records and expenditures of city funds and to report the results of such audits in writing to the city council at times and intervals set by the city council, but no less than quarterly. Such audit reports shall, at a minimum, identify all city expenditures and other financial matters that the internal auditor either determines are not in compliance with or cannot conclusively be determined to be in compliance with: 
(1)  The provisions of the Charter; 
(2)  The applicable city budget; and 
(3)  Applicable ordinances, resolutions, or other actions duly adopted or approved by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall appoint an auditor to perform an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this chapter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. As a minimum, all audits and budgets of the city shall satisfy the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 36, chapter 81 relating to local government audits and budgets. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 6, § 3) 
Secs. 2-146—2-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-174. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City finance director means the city accountant, his agent, or the chair of the city finance department, if such a department is created, or is in existence. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. The term "construction" does not include the routine operation, repair and/or maintenance of existing structures, building, or real property. 
Contract means any city agreement, regardless of form or title, for the procurement or disposition of goods, commodities, and services. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wage from the city whether on a fulltime or parttime basis. The term shall encompass all members of the governing authority without regard to whether or not such individual is compensated. 
Gifts or favors means any thing or any service of value. 
Goods or commodities means supplies, apparatus, materials, equipment, and other forms of tangible personal property. 
Governing authority means the city entity responsible for the contract. 
Ordinance means this article. 
Purchase order means the document used by the city to obtain supplies, goods, commodities and services from vendors. 
Purchasing agent means the principal purchasing official of the city pursuant to section 2-175. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 7, § 1) 
Sec. 2-175. - Purchasing agent. 
(a)  The mayor may appoint the city manager or his agent to serve as the purchasing agent for the city, or the mayor may contract with an independent third party to serve as the purchasing agent. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies, and contractual services for the city or any using agency; arrange and negotiate for the sale or otherwise dispose of all surplus equipment and supplies or real estate of the city or any using agency; 
(2)  Maintain a perpetual or periodic inventory record of all materials, supplies, or equipment stored in city storerooms, warehouses, and elsewhere, including monthly reports that provide: 
a.  The titles of all requests for proposals and the method of source selections to be used; 
b.  All contracts authorized by the council, the method of source selection used, and the total dollar amount; 
c.  All emergency contracts awarded pursuant to this article; 
d.  All change orders or contract modifications authorized by the council, the dollar amount, and the reason; 
e.  All change orders or contract modifications authorized by the purchasing agent, the dollar amount, and the reason; and 
f.  An explanation of any changes, and the costs involved, in the scope of services made between the time a contract is awarded and the time that a resolution authorizing the contract is sent to the council for adoption; 
(3)  Control and supervise all city storerooms and warehouses, unless otherwise provided in this Code; 
(4)  Develop and maintain a purchasing policy and procedure manual which will be updated by the purchasing agent periodically and approved by the city council; 
(5)  Direct efforts to procure services through advertisements of bids as required by this article and by state law; 
(6)  Require bonds, insurance, and other forms of protection for the city on the process of procuring goods and services for the city; 
(7)  Terminate solicitations for bids for any goods or services when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest to do so, including termination for breach of contract or anticipated breach of contract; 
(8)  Reject any and all bids when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest; 
(9)  Consult with the city attorney if a contracting party breaches or is reasonably anticipated to breach its contract with the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 7, § 2) 
Sec. 2-176. - Legal representation. 
The city attorney represents the city in all legal matters and has the authority to provide standard terms and conditions of contracts and purchase orders, and approves all contracts. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 7, § 3) 
Sec. 2-177. - Purchasing policy. 
The purchasing policy, as amended from time to time and approved by resolution of the city council, is adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 2, art. 7, § 4) 
Secs. 2-178—2-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-208. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointing authority means the mayor, city council, city manager or any other person who appoints a person to a public position. 
Associated, when used with reference to a business or an organization, includes any business or organization in which a public servant or a public servant's partner in interest is a director, officer or trustee, or owns or controls, directly or indirectly, and severally or in the aggregate, at least five percent of the outstanding equity, or any business or organization in which a public servant or a partner in interest has a personal interest. 
Benefit means anything having a monetary value in excess of $100.00. The term "benefit" includes, but is not limited to, a valuable act, advance, award, contract, compensation, contribution, deposit, emolument, employment, favor, fee, forbearance, fringe benefit, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, offer, payment, perquisite, privilege, promise, reward, remuneration, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things will be conferred in the future. 
Board means the board of ethics established by the city to operate under the provisions of this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; used generically, the term "board" may mean any voting body: 
(1)  Which is established to participate as a body in some manner in the conduct of the city government, including participation which is merely advisory, whether established by state law, the city Charter, this Code, or contract, executive action or any other lawful means; and 
(2)  Any part of which its membership is appointed by the mayor acting on behalf of the city; but the term "board" does not include a board, commission or committee which is the governing body of a separate political subdivision of the state, or whose membership, after appointment, is not subject to any regulation by the city council; nor does it include any city administrative agency, bureau, department, division or office which is administered by individuals rather than by a body. 
Business means an activity, association, commercial entity, corporation, enterprise, firm, franchise, holding company, joint stock company, organization, partnership, receivership, self-employed individual, sole proprietorship, trust or other legal entity established to earn or otherwise obtain money for profit excluding a municipal corporation or governmental entity. 
Business with which a public servant is associated means a business in which any of the following applies: 
(1)  The public servant is an owner, partner, director, officer, employee or independent contractor in relation to the business; 
(2)  A public servant's partner in interest is an owner, partner, director or officer; 
(3)  The public servant or a partner in interest is a stockholder of close corporation stock which is worth at least $1,000.00 at fair market value or which represents more than a five percent equity interest; 
(4)  The public servant or a partner in interest is a stockholder of publicly traded stock which is worth at least $5,000.00 at fair market value or which represents more than five percent equity interest, other than publicly traded stock under a trading account if the public servant reports the name and address of the stockholder; or 
(5)  Any business, regardless of ownership or value, by whom or for whose benefit a decision maker is influenced to act in the hope or expectation of obtaining a personal benefit for the public servant or for a partner in interest of the public servant. 
Candidate means an individual who is a candidate for an elective office in the city, as defined in the city Charter, or an applicant for city employment or for an appointive city position. 
Child means a son or daughter, whether or not the son or daughter is the biological offspring of the legal parent or parents and whether or not the son or daughter is financially dependent on the parent or parents. 
Compensation means any benefit conferred upon or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be rendered. 
Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of holding public office, employment, an independent contract or otherwise acting as a public servant, and which information is not available to members of the public under the Georgia Open Records Act or other law or regulation and which the public servant is not authorized to disclose, including: 
(1)  Any written information that could lawfully be excepted from disclosure pursuant to state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; 
(2)  Any nonwritten information which, if it were written, could be excepted from disclosure under state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by the state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; and 
(3)  Information which was obtained in the course of or by means of a record or oral report of a lawful executive or closed session, whether or not the disclosure of the information would violate state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized by state law to do so, or unless the public servant disclosing it has been properly authorized to disclose it pursuant to an applicable law, policy or procedure; however, when such information is also available through channels which are open to the public, this provision does not prohibit public servants from disclosing the availability of those channels. 
Conflict of interest means a personal pecuniary interest. 
Controlled or illegal substance means any drug or other substance, the use of which is regulated by federal or state law, except that, within the meaning of this article, the term does not include any drug or substance which has been lawfully prescribed by an authorized person for the use of a public servant, and which is used by the public servant in accordance with the prescription. 
Decision maker means any public servant or group of public servants empowered to act in a discretionary manner on behalf of the city in any capacity whatsoever, including the making of recommendations. The term "decision maker" includes, but is not limited to, any city agency, bureau, department, division, office, administrator or person who is charged with implementing and administering particular legislation or executive or administrative decisions, and, to the extent this article is applicable to them, any volunteer or independent contractor who is empowered to exercise any discretionary power which could influence a public servant in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. In this article, the term "decision maker" is used to represent any and every public servant who could take any discretionary action regarding a matter in which a public servant or a partner in interest has or may have a conflict of interest, or as a result of which a public servant might receive a personal benefit. 
Decision making means the exercise of any discretionary public power in any capacity whatsoever, including the making of recommendations, by any public servant whose action pertains to a matter in which a public servant or a public servant's partner in interest has or may have a conflict of interest, or as a result of which a public servant receives a personal benefit. 
Disclose means, unless the context of this article indicates otherwise, to provide the city clerk with written notice of a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest, and any other pertinent information, including the nature and extent of the public servant's conflict of interest, the decision maker who may act on the matter, and the name and address of any person alleged to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest. Unless this article or a law which supersedes it requires or permits another procedure, information shall be deemed disclosed if any public servant, within a reasonable time before any official action is to be taken by the decision maker, provides the city clerk with written notice disclosing the conflict or potential conflict. For purposes of this provision, the phrase "within a reasonable time" means within adequate time to allow the city clerk to forward the disclosure to the decision maker before whom the matter is pending or may be brought, and within adequate time to allow the decision maker to review the disclosure before taking any official action. 
Discovery rule means the statute of limitations does not start to run until the date of the discovery of the violation or wrongful act, or the date which, by the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, the complaining party should have discovered the violation or wrongful act. 
Employee means a person, other than an elected public officer, employed and paid a salary to work for the city, whether under civil service or not, whether fulltime, parttime, or on a contract basis, and including those officially selected but not yet serving; and, for purposes of establishing ethical obligations under this article and for no other purpose, the term "employee" includes volunteers, notwithstanding the fact that they are unpaid. 
Frivolous means a claim or complaint which is clearly insufficient on its face, does not controvert the material points of the opposing party and is presumably interposed for mere purposes of delay or to embarrass the opponent. A claim or defense is frivolous if a proponent can present no reasonable argument based upon the evidence or law in support of this claim. 
Gift means any benefit or thing or act of monetary value of over $100.00 which is conveyed to or performed for the benefit of a public servant or a partner in interest, including any advance, award, contract, contribution, deposit, employment, favor, forbearance, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, payment, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things or acts of value will be conferred in the future, if such thing or act of value is conferred or performed without the lawful exchange of consideration which is at least equal in value to the thing or act conferred or performed. 
Governing body means the elected officials who comprise the legislative body of the city, as defined by the city Charter. 
Immediate family means: 
(1)  A public servant's spouse, children, grandchildren, parents, parents-in-law, grandparents, grandparents-in-law, sisters, sisters-in-law, brothers, brothers-in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, nieces, nephews, aunts, or uncles (whether by marriage, lineal descent or adoption); 
(2)  A public servant's relative by marriage, lineal descent or adoption who receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his support from the public servant or from whom the public servant receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his support; and 
(3)  An individual claimed by the public servant or the public servant's spouse as a dependent under the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
Interest means any personal pecuniary benefit accruing to a public servant or the public servant's partner in interest, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any person or business from which the public servant is entitled to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a matter which is or which is expected to become the subject of an official action by or with the city. 
Loan means a transfer of money, property or anything else of ascertainable monetary value in exchange for an obligation, conditional or not, to repay in whole or in part. 
Materially adverse means an opposing or contrary position of substantial or important a matter as to influence the party in question. 
Matter means, unless the context of this article indicates otherwise, any act, action, agenda item, allegation, application, amendment, auction, bill, business, case, charge, claim, consideration, contract, controversy, decree, deed, deliberation, discussion, hearing, issue, lease, license, measure, offer, order, division, permit, personnel action, petition, policy, presentation, procedure, privilege, proceeding, project, proposal, proposition, purchase, recommendation, regulation, rental, request, resolution, sale, subject, transaction, use, variance or other discretionary choice pending before a city decision maker when a public servant or a partner in interest has a personal interest in the outcome of the decision, or the decision may result in a personal benefit to a public servant or a partner in interest. 
Ministerial action means a simple and definite action or function imposed by law where no exercise of discretion or judgment is required. 
Negotiating concerning prospective employment means one or more discussions between a public servant and a potential employer other than the city concerning the possibility of the public servant or a partner in interest considering or accepting employment with the employer, in which discussion the public servant responds in a positive way. 
Office means any of the following: 
(1)  An elective position within the government of the city; 
(2)  A city attorney; 
(3)  An appointive city position in which a public servant serves for a specified term, except a position limited to the exercise of ministerial functions or a position filled by an independent contractor; or 
(4)  An appointive city position which is filled by the city council or the executive or administrative head of the city, and in which the incumbent serves at the pleasure of the appointing authority, except a clerical position, a position limited to the exercise of ministerial functions or a position filled by an independent contractor. 
Officer means any person elected or appointed to hold an office, as defined in the city Charter. 
Official action means any act, action, approval, decision, denial, directive, disapproval, inaction, order, performance, nonperformance, recommendation, vote, or other direct result of a public servant's exercise of discretionary authority in connection with the public servant's public position. 
Official duty means any official action or ministerial action which a public servant is obligated or authorized to perform by virtue of being a public servant. 
Official records means any minutes, papers, documents, completed forms, or other records maintained by a public agent for the purpose of fulfilling the disclosure requirements of this article. 
Organization means, unless the context indicates otherwise, any nonprofit business other than an individual or governmental agency. 
Partner in interest means, when used in this article in connection with a public servant, as in the phrase "a public servant or a partner in interest," any and all of the following: 
(1)  A member of the public servant's immediate family; 
(2)  A business with which the public servant or a member of the public servant's immediate family is associated; 
(3)  Any other person with whom the public servant or a member of his immediate family is in business, or is negotiating or has an agreement concerning future employment or the future conferring of any personal benefit, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any business or person from whom the public servant is entitled, or expects to become entitled, to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a contract or transaction which is, or which is expected to become, the subject of an official action by or with the city. The term "partner in interest" does not imply or require any form of legal partnership or formal agreement; or 
(4)  When used in the phrase "a public servant or a partner in interest," the term "partner in interest" refers only to a partner in interest of the public servant to whom reference is being made, and not to any other person's partner in interest. 
Personal benefit means any benefit which is offered or received, or reasonably perceived to be offered or received, primarily for the purpose of influencing the manner in which a public servant performs or refrains from performing an official action, so that an attempt is made to induce the public servant, or the public servant is induced, to act in favor of some interest other than the public interest on the basis of an expectation or hope that the public servant or a partner in interest of the public servant will obtain some personal pecuniary gain by acting against the public interest; provided, however, that the term "personal benefit" within the meaning of this article does not include any of the following, which, although they may benefit individual public servants, are deemed to be primarily public benefits rather than personal benefits: 
(1)  Payment by the city of salaries, compensation or employee benefits; or payment by an employer or business other than the city of salaries, compensation, employee benefits or pursuant to a contract, when the payment is unrelated to a public servant's status as a public servant and is not made for the purpose of influencing, directly or indirectly, the vote, official action or decision of a public servant; 
(2)  Fees, expenses, or income, including those resulting from outside employment, which are permitted and reported in accordance with the policies of the city; 
(3)  Authorized reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses; 
(4)  Admission, regardless of value, to events to which public servants are invited in their official, representative capacity as public servants; 
(5)  Campaign or political contributions which are made and reported in accordance with state law; 
(6)  Reasonable hosting, including travel and expenses, entertainment, meals or refreshments furnished in connection with public events, appearances or ceremonies related to official city business, if furnished by the sponsor of such public event; or in connection with speaking engagements, teaching or rendering other public assistance to an organization or another governmental entity; this provision applies only if the city does not also pay the person for the same activity; 
(7)  Awards publicly presented in recognition of public service, acts of heroism or for solving crimes; 
(8)  Anything of value, regardless of the value, when the thing of value is offered to the city, is accepted on behalf of the city, and is to remain the property of the city; 
(9)  Commercially reasonable loans made in the ordinary course of the lender's business in accordance with prevailing rates and terms, and which do not discriminate against or in favor of an individual who is a public servant because of such individual's status as a public servant; 
(10)  Complimentary copies of trade publications; 
(11)  Any unsolicited benefit conferred by any one person or business if the economic value totals less than $250.00 per calendar year, and if there is no express or implied understanding or agreement that a vote, official action or decision of a public servant will be influenced; 
(12)  Reasonable compensation for a published work which did not involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources, if the payment is arranged or paid by the publisher of the work; 
(13)  Reasonable compensation for a published work which did involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources, if the payment of the compensation to the public servant is lawfully authorized by a representative of the city who is empowered to authorize such compensation; 
(14)  Anything of value, if the payment, gift, or other transfer of value is unrelated to and does not arise from the recipient's holding or having held a public position, and if the activity or occasion for which it is given does not involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources which is not available to the general public; 
(15)  Anything of value received as a devise, bequest or inheritance; 
(16)  A gift received from a relative within the third degree of consanguinity, under the civil law computation method, to the public servant, or the spouse of such a relative; or 
(17)  A gift received from a spouse of a public servant, or a spouse's relative within the third degree of consanguinity to the spouse, under the civil law computation method. 
Personal interest means a direct or indirect interest having pecuniary value peculiar to a particular individual or group, which value may accrue to such individual or group or result in such individual or group deriving or potentially deriving a personal benefit as a result of the approval or denial of any division, resolution, order or other official action, or the performance or nonperformance thereof, by a public servant, and which interest is not shared by the general public. 
Public servant means any member of the city council or of any city agency, board, commission, committee, or other voting body, and any agent, department head, employee, official, supervisor, volunteer, or other person, whether elected or appointed, or legally authorized by contract or in any other manner to act in any capacity under the authority of the city. 
Reasonable means fair, proper, equitable and just under the circumstances. 
Relative means a person who is related to an official or employee (whether by marriage, lineal descent or adoption) as spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, grandparent, grandchild, parents-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-law. 
Volunteer means an individual who is permitted by the city, or by a person authorized to act on behalf of the city, to assist public servants in performing any kind of official duty or action without any expectation of receiving compensation. 
Voting body means the city council and any other city authority, board, commission, committee, council or group, regardless of whether its function is legislative, administrative, quasi-administrative or quasi-judicial or any combination thereof, which must act as a body on the basis of a vote of some or all of its members. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 2-209. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The city government is a representative democracy. Those who are elected, appointed, hired, volunteer or campaign to serve the public as representatives accept a public trust, which they share with those whom they elect, appoint, hire or otherwise enlist to help them serve the public. Public trust requires that acts which are contrary to the public interest be defined and prohibited; that there be an orderly procedure for raising and addressing ethical questions; that ethical behavior be encouraged and suitably rewarded; and that unethical behavior be discouraged and suitably disciplined through a process which is fundamentally fair. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of each public servant to act in a manner which contributes to cultivating public trust in the integrity of government. 
(c)  In adopting this article, the city recognizes that: 
(1)  Public servants are also members of society and, therefore, share the same general personal and economic interests in the decisions and policies of government as all members of the community; 
(2)  Public servants retain their rights to publicly express their views on matters of general public interest, and to express their opinions on the effect of public actions on their personal or economic interests or rights; 
(3)  It is sound public policy for standards of ethical conduct for public servants to distinguish between those minor and inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free society, and those conflicts which are personal, material and avoidable; 
(4)  Public servants are entitled to engage in employment, professional or business activities, other than official duties, in order to support themselves and their families and to maintain a continuity of professional or business activity, and are entitled to maintain investments. 
(d)  This article provides the minimum standards which a public servant's conduct cannot fall without the risk of penalty. The principal policy which forms the foundation of this article is to encourage internal commitment by establishing and maintaining a work environment which supports integrity with pride and enthusiasm. A work environment which supports integrity includes public servants who: 
(1)  Recognize with gratitude that the primary reason they hold a public position is to serve the public; 
(2)  Are motivated and committed to pursue ethical ideals which always exceed minimum standards and often achieve the highest standards; 
(3)  Encourage ethical practices which protect, advance and promote the public interest; 
(4)  Recognize that the most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act ethically themselves, and to consistently react appropriately with respect to the ethical decisions of others; 
(5)  When they observe serious unethical practices, promptly disclose them to appropriate authorities, and encourage others to do the same; 
(6)  Ensure that those for whom they are responsible are aware of minimum standards of ethics below which their conduct cannot fall without the risk of disciplinary consequences; and 
(7)  When circumstances warrant, appropriately discipline those who are proven to have engaged in unethical behavior. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 2-210. - Purposes of article. 
This article, including the definitions set forth in section 2-208, is adopted to: 
(1)  Identify the minimum standards of ethical conduct which public servants must meet; 
(2)  Adequately educate public servants, and any subordinates, in the principles of ethics; 
(3)  Encourage public servants to pursue the highest ethical ideals which they can achieve; 
(4)  Provide a process by which public servants may identify and resolve ethical issues; 
(5)  Provide a process to ensure the prompt disclosure by public servants of serious unethical practices, and encourage others to do the same; 
(6)  Provide a fair and impartial process by which alleged violations of this article may be heard; 
(7)  Provide for a just and reasonable balance among the rights of all individuals who are directly affected by the operation of this article; and 
(8)  Establish penalties, as appropriate, for public servants who violate the public trust. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 2-211. - Applicability of article. 
This article applies to all public servants, as the term is defined in this article, except that it shall not apply to a municipal judge when the judge is acting in a judicial capacity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 4) 
Sec. 2-212. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article does not prevent any public servant from accepting other employment or following any pursuit which in no way interferes with the full and faithful discharge of his public duties, provided that the public servant complies with all applicable city requirements, including any requirements imposed by this article. 
(b)  No public servant shall be deemed to have a conflict of interest by virtue of carrying out any contract pursuant to which the public servant directly or indirectly received income or benefits in the form of compensation for the performance of official duties. 
(c)  A former public servant is not prohibited from entering into a contract to represent the city in any matter. 
(d)  No public servant shall be deemed to have a conflict of interest by virtue of sharing, directly or indirectly, in the benefit of a lawful city action when the benefit to the public servant is substantially the same as the benefit to the public at large or to a segment of the public to whom the benefit is provided in a nondiscriminatory manner. 
(e)  This article does not prohibit any public servant from taking any action to approve the lawful payment of salaries, employee benefits, reimbursements of actual and necessary expenses, or other lawful payments which are authorized in accordance with city policies. 
(f)  This article does not prohibit public servants from taking any official action properly within the scope of their duties with respect to any proposal to enact or modify law or public policy. 
(g)  This article does not prohibit an elected official or other public servants from raising campaign contributions in any manner which is otherwise permitted by law. 
(h)  This article does not prohibit communication between an individual or organization and a candidate regarding the candidate's views, record or plans for future action regarding an issue or measure in an attempt to determine a candidate's viewpoints or how the candidate plans to act in the future, if such communication results in an endorsement of the candidate, a decision not to endorse the candidate, or a contribution or expenditure required to be recorded or reported under a state statute. 
(i)  Actions which might otherwise be alleged to constitute a conflict of interest shall be deemed to comply with this article and not to be a conflict of interest if: 
(1)  Before acting, the public servant requested and received a written opinion from the city attorney or a formal ethics opinion or a confidential advisory opinion from the board of ethics in accordance with the procedures established in this article; 
(2)  The material facts, as stated in the request for an opinion, are true and complete; and 
(3)  The actions taken were consistent with the opinion. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 5) 
Sec. 2-213. - Penalties—Generally. 
Any violations of this article shall be punishable up to the maximum extent permitted by law. Any disciplinary action shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of this article, as well as any other applicable laws, policies and procedures applicable to the position of the offender and the gravity of the offense. The board of ethics is permitted to take any action which it is otherwise lawfully permitted to take, including, but not limited to, any one or combination of the following which the board deems appropriate under the circumstances: public admonition by the board; public reprimand by the board; and recommendation for suspension, demotion, forfeiture of office or removal from office, and/or termination from employment, as allowed by applicable law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 6) 
Sec. 2-214. - Same—Cumulative, nonexclu- sive. 
The penalties prescribed in this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive of each other or of any other penalties which may be imposed pursuant to any other laws or policies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 7) 
Sec. 2-215. - Liberal construction of article. 
The provisions of this article are to be construed liberally, to the end that the public interest shall be fully protected, and shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws and applicable provisions of the city Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 8) 
Sec. 2-216. - Duties of public servant. 
(a)  No public servant or former public servant shall divulge any confidential information to any person who is not authorized to have it nor divulge to any unauthorized person confidential information acquired in the course of holding his position in advance of the time prescribed by the city council, administrators, or other applicable law for its release to the public. 
(b)  All public servants shall respond fully and truthfully to any inquires by the city attorney or the board of ethics in connection with the investigation of an alleged or potential violation of this article. All public servants shall cooperate fully in any investigation by the city attorney or the board, and shall locate, compile and produce for them such information as they may request, unless the information requested is exempt from disclosure under this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  In addition to being a violation of other laws, it is also a violation of this article for any public servant to: 
(1)  Be convicted of any felony involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Be found liable of violating any federal, state or city law prohibiting discrimination or sexual harassment; 
(3)  Be found liable of violating any federal, state or city laws prohibiting retaliation against public servants who assert a lawful claim of any nature or otherwise engage in lawfully protected activity; or 
(4)  Be found liable of knowingly and willfully violating any state laws governing lobbying activities or regulating political activity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 9) 
Sec. 2-217. - Conflict of interest and personal benefits prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted under applicable federal, state and city laws and policies, including the city's procurement policies, no public servant shall have a personal interest in any official action. 
(b)  No public servant shall accept or receive, directly or indirectly, from any person, including one whose identity is unknown to the public servant, any personal benefit under circumstances in which it can reasonably be inferred that the benefit is intended to unduly influence the public servant or as a reward for any official action of the public servant. 
(c)  No person, including any vendor, contractor, business, or board of the city, shall offer or give any personal benefit to any public servant or any partner in interest of the public servant under circumstances in which it can reasonably be inferred that the benefit is intended to unduly influence the public servant or as a reward for any official action of the public servant. 
(d)  No public servant nor partner in interest of that public servant shall solicit from any person, directly or indirectly, any personal benefit or the promise of receiving a personal benefit in the future, for the public servant under circumstances in which it can reasonably be inferred that the benefit is intended to unduly influence the public servant or as a reward for any official action of the public servant. 
(e)  No current or former public servant shall intentionally use or disclose information gained in the course of, or by reason of, his official position or activities in any way that could likely result in the receipt of any personal benefit for the public servant, for a partner in interest of that public servant, or for any other person. This provision shall not: 
(1)  Prohibit the disclosure of public information; 
(2)  Prohibit the disclosure of information the public servant has been authorized to disclose; 
(3)  Prohibit the disclosure of any such information to incumbent public servants to whom the information may be pertinent; 
(4)  Prevent the disclosure of violations of this article or other illegal acts to the proper authorities; or 
(5)  Prohibit the disclosure of any such information the disclosure of which is required by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 10) 
Sec. 2-218. - Duty to leave meeting. 
(a)  To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any public servant or a partner in interest is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, and once all questions relating to the conflict of interest have been answered to the satisfaction of the decision maker, the public servant shall immediately leave the meeting room, except that if the matter is being considered at a public meeting, the public servant may remain in the area of the room occupied by the general public. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall require members of voting bodies to leave their seats while action is taken regarding any item contained on a consent agenda on which there is no deliberation, the public servant's conflict has been disclosed, and the public servant abstains from voting on the item. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 11) 
Sec. 2-219. - Public contracts. 
Any public servant who has or may have a personal interest in any contract shall disclose such interest prior to the first of any of the following events: 
(1)  The solicitation of a contract; 
(2)  The bidding of a contract; 
(3)  The negotiation of a contract; or 
(4)  The approval of a contract by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. I, § 12) 
Sec. 2-220. - Disclosure of conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest. 
(a)  A member of the city council who has or may have a conflict of interest in a matter which requires an official action by any decision maker shall, before the matter is decided, disclose the conflict of interest or the potential or alleged conflict of interest; if the member of the city council believes that no conflict of interest exists, or that despite any alleged or potential special interest, such city councilmember is nevertheless able to vote and otherwise participate fairly, objectively and in a manner consistent with the public interest, then the member shall so state in a written disclosure. 
(b)  If any member of the board of ethics has or may have a conflict of interest in any matter before the board, such member shall not appear before the board, discuss, debate, deliberate about, act upon, vote upon or otherwise participate in or influence the decision-making process pertaining to the matter in which the member has a conflict of interest. 
(c)  If the city attorney or any assistant city attorney has or may have a conflict of interest in any matter before the board of ethics, or if any attorney who is responsible for performing any functions on behalf of the board is precluded from doing so because of a legal conflict of interest which cannot be resolved by the city attorney's office internally by screening or some other method, the city attorney shall disclose the personal interest, or the nature of the conflict, to the board. If the board determines that the city attorney has a personal interest in the matter, or if the city attorney determines that the city attorney's office cannot resolve the conflict in a manner which will allow the city attorney's office to perform its duties properly, then the board may engage outside counsel upon terms and conditions approved by the city council. 
(d)  Any public servant who has or may have a conflict of interest shall disclose it. After receiving a disclosure, the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Maintain a record of such disclosure; and 
(2)  Promptly forward copies of the disclosure to any person named in the disclosure, the board of ethics and the city attorney. 
(e)  Any public servant who believes that any other public servant has a conflict of interest in any agenda item before a governmental body shall disclose such interest to the city clerk, and the city clerk shall forward copies of such disclosure to the person alleged to have a conflict of interest, the board of ethics and the city attorney. 
(f)  A public servant, in addition to disqualifying himself from participation in any decision regarding the pecuniary or employment interest of a partner in interest, shall make known the existence of the relationship and the interest by filing, with the city clerk a written disclosure of the relationship and the nature and extent of the conflict of interest involved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. 1, § 13) 
Sec. 2-221. - Unauthorized outside employment. 
(a)  Purpose of policy. The purposes of the policies governing unauthorized outside employment are to prevent conflicts of interest and conflicts of loyalty; to prevent abuses regarding dual compensation, payment for work not done, or unlawful gifts of public funds; and to prevent excessive loss of efficiency in the performance of public service. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. A public servant shall not accept any employment, nor enter into any contract, nor perform any service for compensation that results in a financial conflict of interest or a conflict of loyalties which would affect the performance of the public servant's official duties. 
(c)  Employees. 
(1)  An employee of the city may be self-employed or may take occasional or part-time jobs if, in the opinion of his department head, there is no conflict with working hours, the employee's efficiency in his city work, or other interests of the city. 
(2)  Before engaging in outside employment, employees shall have the written approval of their department heads or designee in emergency situations. 
(3)  Public servants who hold management level positions shall notify the city manager prior to creating, contracting with, or being employed by any business other than the city. The city manager shall provide written approval or disapproval of the notification within a reasonable time. Any action undertaken by the city manager shall require prior approval by the city council. 
(4)  All requests for approval of outside employment shall state the type and place of employment, the hours of work and the employer's name and address. 
(5)  City employment shall remain the employee's first priority, and if at any time the outside employment interferes with an employee's job requirements or performance for the city, the employee shall be required to modify the conditions of the outside employment or terminate either the outside employment or the city employment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. 1, § 14) 
Sec. 2-222. - Prohibited conduct and other abuses or misuses of position. 
(a)  Public servants of the city shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each such public servant shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Intentionally granting or making available to any person any special consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large; 
(2)  Intentionally requesting, using or permitting the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor, or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of oneself or any other person, except as otherwise allowed by law or as authorized by the city; 
(3)  Knowingly participating in the deliberation of or voting on any matter involving personal financial or personal interest, or where the public servant has a personal interest which is materially adverse to the applicant or person affected by the outcome of the matter; 
(4)  Engaging in private employment with, or rendering services for, any private person who has business transactions with the city, unless the employee has made full public disclosure of such employment or services and received approval of their supervisor or the city manager; 
(5)  Appearing on behalf of any private person, other than oneself, before any public body in the city; 
(6)  Accepting any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan, or promise, that would not be offered or given to the employee if the individual were not an official or employee that would thereby cause the official or employee to place themselves in a position in which the giver of the gift could expect special consideration or in which the public could reasonably assume that special consideration is being given; 
(7)  Intentionally disclosing any confidential information concerning any official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city, without prior formal authorization of the city council; 
(8)  Intentionally using or permitting the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of the individual or any other person; 
(9)  Ordering any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure; 
(10)  Intentionally using his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods and services for personal, business, or political purposes; or 
d.  Work for him personally without offering just compensation; 
(11)  A public servant shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city; 
(12)  Intentionally violating any provision of the city Charter which prescribes the conduct of a public servant. 
(b)  No public servant shall hold any other office, elected or appointed, in any other governmental entity, when the duties of such office are incompatible with the proper discharge of the public servant's duties with the city as defined by any one of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where one office is subordinate to the other; 
(2)  Where one office carries the power of removal of the other; or 
(3)  Where the occupancy of both offices is prohibited by the city Charter or other law. 
(c)  No public servant shall falsely represent his personal opinion to be the official position of the city, and no public servant shall falsely represent his personal opinion to be the official position of any board or city administrators. This subsection shall not apply to statements of elected officials made in the course of fulfilling the responsibilities of their offices or in running for election to office, nor shall it apply to the professional opinions of city officers or employees rendered in the course of performing their duties, provided that such opinions are clearly identified as professional opinions. 
(d)  All public servants have a fiduciary duty to use city fiscal and human resources in a manner which advances the public interest, and to refrain from using city resources for their personal benefit; therefore, public servants are prohibited from using city resources in any manner which violates any applicable law or policy, and are expressly prohibited from using any city resource to obtain any personal benefit. 
(e)  No public servant shall use his official authority or position to influence or interfere with or affect the results of any election, nor to solicit or receive contributions from city employees in connection with any city election. 
(f)  No public servant shall suppress any public document, record, report or any other public information available to the general public because it might tend to unfavorably affect their private financial, personal, or political interest. 
(g)  When a public servant, in the course of carrying out his duties, has been offered or is discussing future employment with a business that is presently dealing with the city concerning matters within the public servant's current official duties, that person shall disclose such possible future employment to the city manager. The city manager shall disclose such possible future employment to the city council. 
(h)  No member of the city council having a personal interest in a matter shall represent himself or any other person before the city council in connection with that matter, nor in connection with any matter in which a partner in interest has a personal interest, except in cases where a legal right to self-representation exists. 
(i)  No member of a board having a conflict of interest shall represent himself or any other person before that board in connection with that matter, nor in connection with any matter in which a member of his immediate family or a business with which he, or a member of his immediate family, is associated has a prohibited personal interest, except in cases where a legal right to self-representation exists. 
(j)  No member of a board who is prohibited by this provision from representing himself before that board shall represent himself in the appeal of any decision of that board to any decision maker. 
(k)  No public servant shall, while in the course and scope of their duties, engage in any kind of behavior towards another public servant or member of the public that is threatening or abusive in nature. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 9, art. 1, § 15) 
Secs. 2-223—2-252. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMPLAINTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, adopted April 1, 2013, repealed former Div. 2, §§ 2-253—2-265, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. Former Div. 2, §§ 2-253—2-265, pertained to board of ethics, and derived from Comp. Ords. 2008, Ch. 9, art. II, §§ 1—13. 

Sec. 2-253. - Creation of board of ethics; membership; term; compensation. 
(a)  Created; membership. There is created a board of ethics consisting of five members, and two alternate members. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. 
(b)  Member restrictions. Members of the board shall not be elected city officials, fulltime appointed officials (whether exempt or nonexempt), or city employees, and shall hold no elected public office nor any other city office or employment. 
(c)  Appointment. Members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Each city councilmember may submit to the mayor up to two names to consider for appointment to the board and the mayor may, but is not required to, choose to appoint members of the board from the names submitted by councilmembers. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the board shall be made by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(d)  Chairperson. The board shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson and one as vice-chairperson of the board. 
(e)  Term of office. Board members shall serve staggered terms of no more than three years, starting with the next appointments to the Board following the effective date of this ordinance. A member shall hold office until a member's successor is appointed. 
(f)  Limit of term. No person may serve more than two consecutive full terms as a board member. 
(g)  Deliberations, actions open to the public. The board's deliberations shall be open to the public. 
(h)  Compensation. Members of the board are volunteers and shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(i)  Staff support. The city council shall provide such staff support for the board as the city council determines to be necessary for the board to fulfill its duties and responsibilities. The city clerk, or assistant city clerk if the city clerk is the subject of the ethics complaint, shall serve as recording secretary to the board. 
(j)  In conjunction with any special meetings for purposes of reviewing and holding hearings on complaints pursuant to this article, the board shall have standing monthly meetings on a day as determined by the board. Said monthly meeting may be cancelled by request of at least two members of the board if no complaints are pending for review or hearing at said meeting. At the first monthly meeting of the year, the board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman. 
(k)  The board shall be authorized to develop and adopt written by-laws and procedural rules for meetings outside of the evidentiary hearing process established by this article. 
(l)  The board shall receive biennial training on procedural rules, open meetings and open records laws and such other matters as pertains to the board's jurisdiction and operation. New board members shall receive the same training within two months after appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-254. - Appointment of hearing officer. 
Whenever the procedures herein require a review by or hearing in front of a hearing officer, such hearing officer shall: 
(1)  Be a competent attorney at law of good standing in his or her profession; 
(2)  Have at least five years' experience in the practice of law; and 
(3)  Shall not maintain an office nor shall he reside within the city. 
The city clerk shall maintain a listing of no less than three qualified attorneys to serve as a hearing officer pursuant to this article. Upon receipt of a properly verified complaint as described in this article, the city clerk shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified hearing officers and appoint the first one who is available to serve in the matter. Once a hearing officer is appointed, no public servant shall communicate with or otherwise contact the hearing officer, except as authorized herein, unless such public servant is the complainant or public servant charged in the complaint or the city attorney or city clerk, unless either is charged in the complaint; however; no party to a complaint shall engage in ex parte communications with the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-255. - Custodian of records. 
The city clerk shall serve as legal custodian of the board's records, and accept, file, maintain and administer, in accordance with all applicable laws, any information related to the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-256. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints filed under this article, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be filed with the city clerk, provided, however, to discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a member of the city council or the mayor, whether currently serving or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints shall not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(b)  No action may be taken on any complaint which arises out of substantially the same facts or circumstances which have previously served as the basis for a complaint pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Any complaint shall be in writing, and shall be signed by the person filing the complaint and sworn in the presence of a notary. Each complaint shall state: 
(1)  A separate count for each alleged violation; 
(2)  The specific section of this article alleged to have been violated; 
(3)  With specificity, the facts which are alleged to constitute the violation; and 
(4)  The documentary evidence which the complainant possesses. Copies of said documentary evidence shall be attached to the complaint as exhibits. 
(d)  All complaints shall contain an oath that the facts set forth therein are true and correct to the best of the complainant's knowledge in substantially the following form: 
"STATE OF GEORGIA  COUNTY OF DEKALB  AFFIDAVIT 
Personally appeared before the undersigned officer duly authorized to administer oaths, (Name of person filing Complaint), who on oath deposes that the statements in the foregoing Complaint are true and correct to the best of his/her knowledge and belief. The affiant further acknowledges that false statements made in this Complaint may result in a prosecution against them for false swearing, a felony under O.C.G.A. 16-10-71. 
                   (Signature of person filing Complaint) 
Sworn to and subscribed 
Before me this _____ day of ________, 20_____. 
___________  Notary Public" 
(e)  Complaints against the city clerk, city manager, or city attorney shall be filed directly with the mayor, who shall forward said complaint to all councilmembers. The mayor and council shall discuss the complaint at a regular or special meeting and either: 
(1)  Dismiss said complaint; 
(2)  Choose to treat said complaint as a personnel matter and determine any consequences against the city clerk, city attorney or city manager for violations complained of; or 
(3)  Determine that a full ethics investigation is warranted and forward said complaint to the city clerk (or assistant city clerk if the complaint alleges violations by the city clerk) to move forward with the complaint process outlined in this article, with the exception that if the complaint is against the city attorney, the city clerk shall forward same directly to the hearing officer, who shall, in addition to substantive determination of the complaint, shall determine if the complaint has been filed in accordance with the procedures outlined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-257. - Service of complaints/city attorney review. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a filed complaint, the city clerk shall cause the complaint to be served on the public servant charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. The city clerk shall also forward the complaint to the city attorney for review. 
(b)  The public servant charged in the complaint shall have 15 days from receipt of complaint to file an answer to the complaint provided, however, the public servant charged shall have no obligation to file an answer to any complaint. On due cause shown, the hearing officer or the city attorney may extend said deadline up to an additional 15 days. 
(c)  Within seven days of receiving a filed complaint, the city attorney shall review said complaint for conformity with the requirements of section 2-256 of this article. If the city attorney finds that the complaint is not in conformance with the requirements of section 2-256, the city attorney shall dismiss the complaint and serve said dismissal in writing to the complainant and the public servant charged. Said dismissal shall be without prejudice once and, if refiled and still not in conformity with section 2-256 upon second filing, which shall be within 30 days of the letter of dismissal, shall be with prejudice. The complainant shall have the right to appeal the city attorney's determination to the appointed hearing officer by filing a written appeal with the city attorney no later than five days following receipt of the letter of dismissal. The hearing officer's review of the city attorney's decision in such appeal shall be de novo. If the hearing officer concurs with the city attorney's dismissal, the hearing officer shall dismiss said complaint, and said dismissal shall be with prejudice and shall not have the right to be re-filed. If the hearing officer disagrees with the city attorney's dismissal, he shall proceed with substantive review of the complaint pursuant to the procedures in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-258. - Procedures for review and hearing of complaints. 
(a)  Upon being forwarded a complaint pursuant to section 2-257, the hearing officer shall review same to determine if the complaint is unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded. A frivolous, unjustified or patently unfounded complaint shall mean a complaint clearly unsupported by evidence or law which is brought for no other reason than to waste time and be a nuisance to the accused and/or convoluted in reasoning to a point where a reasonable person is unable to clearly establish how the actions alleged by the complainant serve as a violation of this article. The hearing officer may take into consideration relationship between the complainant and the accused, previous allegations by complainant against the accused, the timing of the complaint and any political or other improper motive for filing said complaint. If the hearing officer determines that the complaint is frivolous, unjustified or patently unfounded, the hearing officer shall dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and accused of said dismissal in writing within 15 days of receiving the complaint. 
(b)  Upon a determination that a complaint should not be dismissed pursuant to subsection (a), the hearing officer shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of his investigation to the file containing said complaint. In furtherance of this investigation, the hearing officer may: 
(1)  First, seek such further information from the complainant or the public servant charged through inquiry or written questions, provided, however, the public servant charged shall have no obligations to answer any inquiries. Upon collection of such additional evidence, if the hearing officer determines that the complaint demonstrates facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary jurisdiction, the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing. 
(2)  During said hearing which is conducted to determine whether a violation of this article has occurred: 
a.  The person under investigation, or the accused, shall receive written notice of the hearing at least 14 days in advance of the first hearing from the city clerk (or assistant city clerk if the city clerk is the subject of the complaint) and may be represented by counsel of his or her own choosing; and 
b.  The accused or his representative, if any, shall have an opportunity to: 
i.  Challenge the sufficiency of any complaint which has been filed against him; 
ii.  Examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the hearing officer in connection with the matter heard; 
iii.  Bring witnesses; 
iv.  Establish all pertinent facts and circumstances; 
v.  Question or refute testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross examine adverse witnesses; and 
vi.  Exercise, to the extent the hearing officer, in his discretion, determines to be just and reasonable, any pretrial discovery procedure usually available in civil actions. 
vii.  During said hearing, the statutory rules of evidence shall not strictly apply. 
(3)  During said hearing, the hearing officer shall serve as the magistrate of the proceedings and the ethics board shall serve as the "jury," and shall have the right, at the conclusion of the hearing, to ask the hearing officer questions concerning the law to be applied and clarification on any evidence presented at the hearing. 
(4)  The burden shall be on the complainant to show, by preponderance of the evidence, that the accused public servant has violated the provisions of this article. 
(c)  All investigations by the hearing officer, including the hearings, shall be completed within 45 days of the hearing officer receiving the complaint. Should the investigation not be completed in the said period of time, the complaint shall be deemed dismissed as a failure to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. 
(d)  Within seven days following the completion of any hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a report of findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommendations to the ethics board. The report shall consist of: 
(1)  A written findings of fact and conclusions of law; and 
(2)  Recommendations to the ethics board on what actions to take. 
(e)  Within ten days of receiving the hearing officer's findings of fact and law, the ethics board shall meet to determine whether the complainant has proven, by preponderance of the evidence and based on the findings of fact of the hearing officer that the accused public servant has violated the provisions of this article. The hearing officer shall be present at said hearing to present his report and to answer any questions of the board regarding any aspect of the hearing or the report. If the board determines by majority vote that the burden has not been met, the board shall dismiss the complaint with prejudice. 
(f)  If the board determines, by majority vote, that the accused public servant violated the provisions of this article, the board shall recommend punishment for said violation to the mayor and city council by stating so on the record, which shall be transmitted, along with the hearing officer's report, to mayor and city council within five days of the conclusion of the board's determination. 
(g)  The report of the hearing officer and the board, as well as all documentation gathered by the hearing officer as part of each complaint and as presented in any evidentiary hearing, shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act, and any of its exceptions; and all meetings of the board, including the evidentiary hearing where the board serves as "jury," shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Open Meetings Act, and any of its exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-259. - City council action. 
(a)  Within 30 days following the receipt of the findings of the hearing officer and recommendations of the board, the mayor and council shall, at their next regularly scheduled meeting, either: 
(1)  By simple majority accept the recommendations of the board; 
(2)  By simple majority, accept the findings of the hearing officer and reject the recommended discipline, instead substituting its own discipline; or 
(3)  By simple majority, dismiss the complaint. 
(b)  If the subject of the complaint is the mayor or any councilmember, he or she will not be allowed to vote pursuant to this section or participate in any discussion related thereto, nor shall such position be counted for the purpose of establishing a quorum for this particular purpose. 
(c)  Upon final determination by the city council pursuant to this section, the city clerk (or assistant city clerk if the city clerk is the subject of the complaint) shall serve the accused with certified copies of the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer and the board, as well as certified minutes of the final action of city council, by personal service, certified mail, Federal Express or other overnight delivery service. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-260. - Right to appeal. 
A complainant aggrieved by a dismissal of the complaint by the hearing officer or board of ethics, or public servant adversely affected by the final decision of the city council, may appeal said decision by Petition for Writ of Certiorari in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-261. - Statute of limitation. 
No action may be taken on any complaint which is filed later than one year after a violation of this article is alleged to have occurred, and any complaint alleging a violation must be filed within six months from the date the complainant knew or should have known of the action alleged to be a violation; such limitation periods shall be measured from the date of the last act occurring in furtherance of such violation. No proceeding under this article shall be instituted or prosecuted after the earlier of: 
(1)  The expiration of the term of office of the person complained against; or 
(2)  The resignation, death, vacancy, disqualification withdrawal or termination from office of the public servant against whom a complaint is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-262. - Wrongful use of ethics complaint process. 
The purpose of the ethics code process delineated in this article is to endeavor to maintain a high standard of ethical behavior by city officials, employees and other public servants. This will be most effective when city officials, employees and other public servants and citizens work together to set and maintain high ethical standards. Complaints directed to the hearing officer and board must be based on fact and have the intent to improve the ethical climate of the city. Individuals directing unfounded, frivolous, false or politically motivated complaints may be subject to penalties including, but not limited to, dismissal of the complaint, public reprimand, criminal prosecution for perjury, and/or payment of costs associated with the handling and processing of the complaint. Other penalties may be imposed by the board of ethics for the wrongful use of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-07, § 1, 4-1-2013) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. III, § IX, ¶ VI(e); Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391; local regulation of alcoholic beverage manufacture, distribution, and sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; signs advertising alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; 
(4)  Promotion of appropriate land use and zoning and the effectuation of the city's land use and zoning policies; 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent possible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcohol Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-1 through 3-12-3. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage ordinance of the City of Dunwoody who provides alcohol at authorized events or functions, special events, or special events facilities. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Bottle club means any restaurant, music hall, theater or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. In calculating the total annual gross food and beverage sales for any such establishment for the purpose of determining whether the establishment constitutes an eating establishment as defined herein, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, as authorized pursuant to subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A § 3-5-36, or to the public for consumption off the premises in accordance with subparagraph (A) and (D) of paragraph (2), paragraph (3) and paragraph (4) of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, shall not be used. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Dunwoody, or his designate. 
Church means any permanent place of public religious worship. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell or otherwise dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Full-service kitchen means a kitchen consisting of a commercial sink and refrigerator and either a commercial stove, grill or microwave oven approved by the city manager or his designee. 
Growler means a bottle capable of being sealed with a tamper-proof cap, top or other seal for the purpose of complying with open container laws, and further provided that the container may hold less than 12 ounces, but not to exceed 68 ounces, and is filled with malt beverage drawn from a barrel, cask, tank, or keg by a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, holding a package malt beverage license issued by the City of Dunwoody. 
Immediate family of a person means all persons related to such person by consanguinity or affinity within the first degree, as computed according to state law. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership, corporation, or company, all partners, officers, members, managers, and directors of the partnership, corporation, or company. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Registered agent means that individual who is a resident of the county and at least 21 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon a licensee or owner. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 1, § 2; Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § I, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 4-3—4-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Declaration of business of manufacturing, selling and other dealings in alcoholic beverages as privilege subject to regulatory requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1; powers of local authorities as to granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereof on premises prohibited, exception for sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 

Sec. 4-23. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled and is subject to the laws of Georgia and the existing and any further ordinances of the City of Dunwoody." 
(c)  The applicant for a license or permit, for which provision is made in this chapter, shall be subject to all state laws and regulations and to all city ordinances and regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 4-24. - Retail package licenses. 
(a)  Applicants may apply for one or more of the following type retail licenses: 
(1)  Package malt beverage license: Retail sale of malt beverages in the original package and retail sale of growlers as authorized herein. 
(2)  Package wine license: Retail sale of wine in the original package. 
(3)  Package distilled spirits license: Retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package. 
(4)  Ancillary wine or malt beverage tasting license. 
(b)  Upon filing an application and payment of a filing fee and a license fee and after a fingerprint-based background check in accordance with section 2-62 of this Code and review by the finance department, a license may be issued to a licensed retail package wine or malt beverage dealer or licensed wine or malt beverage wholesaler to hold a wine or malt beverage tasting, respectively. The license shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine and/or malt beverage to the public for consumption at a location which meets legal requirements for on-premises consumption, with the exception of a full-service kitchen requirement, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant for a wine and/or malt beverage tasting license must hold any and all applicable licenses and permits required by the state and the city, including, but not limited to, those named above. 
(2)  All federal, state, and local laws and restrictions that apply to wine tastings shall also apply to malt beverage tastings. 
(3)  The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolutions adopted by the city council. The fee shall be the same for both wine and malt beverage tasting licenses. 
(4)  Should a single applicant apply for both a wine and malt beverage tasting license in the same calendar year, the applicant shall be subject to and have to pay for only one fingerprint-based background check. However, the applicant would be responsible for paying the filing fee for each application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 2; Ord. No. 2010-06-20, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 2, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 2, 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § II, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-25. - Retail consumption on the premises licenses. 
(a)  Five classes of retail consumption on the premises licenses are available. Unless otherwise specifically provided below or in this chapter, retail consumption on the premises licenses are available only to establishments having a full-service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour they are open. 
(1)  Full pouring license: Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink. 
(2)  Limited pouring license: Retail sale of wine or malt beverages by the drink. 
(3)  Limited pouring license: Retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink. 
(4)  Brewpub: See definition in section 4-2. 
(5)  Limited pouring license: Bring your own beverage at certain retail establishments. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. Sunday sales may be made, upon payment of an additional fee, as set by resolution of the city council, provided the licensee otherwise meets the qualifying requirements for Sunday sales. Service from more than one bar at a licensed location may be made upon payment of an additional fee per bar, as set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Any establishment that has over 75 percent of its total gross sales from the sale of malt beverages or wine is exempt from the requirement in this section of having a full service kitchen in order to obtain a limited pouring license. This exemption does not apply if a licensee sells distilled spirits or has a full pouring license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 3; Ord. No. 2012-03-03, § 2, 4-9-2012; Ord. No. 2017-05-09, § 1, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 4-26. - Wholesale licenses. 
(a)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the State of Georgia and who does not have a place of business in the city shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the city upon application for such license to the city manager, submittal of an annual renewal affidavit, and a statement that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of the city and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. Distributors whose principal place of business is a location other than the city shall pay a registration fee of $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(b)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. The application for a resident wholesale dealer's license shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Any broker in alcoholic beverages as defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees, however, such broker shall be exempt from the location requirements of section 4-99(c). The application for a broker's license shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(d)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirit license. 
(e)  No retailer shall knowingly and intentionally purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall knowingly and intentionally sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed. 
(f)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 4; Ord. No. 2018-04-06, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-27. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)  License requirements for resident caterers. 
(1)  Any resident caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales at authorized catered events or functions. 
(2)  Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid only for the event for which the license is issued. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
(b)  Permit requirements for nonresident caterers. 
(1)  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city manager. The fee for each such permit shall be $50.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3, or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto. 
(2)  An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. 
(3)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(c)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)  Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(e)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article 8 of this chapter. 
(f)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article 8 of this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 5) 
Sec. 4-28. - Nonprofit civic organization temporary permit. 
(a)  To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide non-profit organization must be the applicant; a nonprofit authorization letter (Federal Form 501-C) must be produced; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(b)  Pursuant to state law, a temporary permit shall authorize the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed one day, subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than ten such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. 
(c)  Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 6; Ord. No. 2014-06-04, § 2, 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 4-29. - Special event temporary permit. 
(a)  A retail consumption dealer may apply for an on-premises special event temporary permit. 
(b)  No more than ten such permits may be issued to any location in any one calendar year. 
(c)  Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 7; Ord. No. 2014-06-04, § 2, 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 4-30. - Duration of licenses. 
All licenses, except as otherwise indicated, issued under this chapter shall be issued on a calendar year basis, and all licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. License fees shall be prorated as follows: New applications received after January 1 shall be assessed a license fee based upon the number of months remaining in the calendar year and partial months shall count as a full month. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 8) 
Sec. 4-31. - Application. 
(a)  All persons or entities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the finance department. 
(b)  The application shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The proposed business to be carried on; 
(3)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; 
(4)  If a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers; 
(5)  The name and address of the agent for service of process; 
(6)  The name and address of the manager; 
(7)  The names and addresses of all stockholders holding more than ten or more percent or of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be required by the finance department and/or the police department. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the finance department and the police department with the name and address of the new manager and other information as is requested within ten days of such change. 
(c)  All applications for a package liquor license must be accompanied by a full and complete statement relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include names and addresses of all persons possessing a legal ownership in the subject establishment, together with any interest that each person or that any family member of each person has in any other retail liquor store located in the city or any other place; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for the land and building, the manner in which such rental is determined, and to whom and at what intervals the rental is paid; the names and addresses of lessor or sublessor of the land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other legal interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the finance department to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Any change in relationship herein declared must be filed when made with the finance department and failure to so file within a period of ten days after this change is made shall be grounds for the city to cancel the license. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the finance department or the police department and failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. By filing an application, applicants agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the finance department or the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the license. The failure to produce the person within 30 days after being requested shall result in the automatic dismissal, with prejudice, of the application. An application shall not be considered complete until the applicant has furnished all data, information and records requested of them by the finance department or the police department. 
(e)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(f)  Each applicant and licensee shall submit to a fingerprint-based background check in accordance with section 2-62 of this Code. 
(g)  The application form shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease to the premises, or proof of ownership of the premises, or proof of other authorization for use of the premises. 
(h)  In addition to the fingerprint-based background check, each applicant and licensee authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any legal source and by any legal means his/her civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information, and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents for obtaining and using such information. 
(i)  Separate applications must be made for each location, and separate licenses must be issued for each location. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 9; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 3, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 3, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 4-32. - Joint responsibility. 
If a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a corporation, the corporation, its officers and directors shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a nonprofit organization, its officers, directors, or governing authority shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 10) 
Sec. 4-33. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  Every applicant shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and the application shall constitute a certification that applicant has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages concerning the relevant provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  An applicant shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, a licensee shall not be considered active unless he is an owner, stockholder, or fulltime employee of the licensed business and is present on the licensed premises a minimum of ten hours per week. 
(c)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person or entity, where the majority of stock or partnership interests are controlled by individuals who are not citizens of the United States or aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence. If, an entity is owned by other entities, then this requirement shall apply to the majority stockholders of the other entities to ensure that a license is not granted to an ineligible person or entity. 
(d)  No person, including members of a retail dealer licensee's immediate family, shall be issued, nor shall have a beneficial interest in, more than two package distilled spirits licenses issued in this state. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person, or the spouse of any person, who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within the last ten years, has been on felony probation or parole within the last five years, or released from prison on felony charges within the last five years prior to filing an application. The term conviction includes any adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person, or the spouse of any person, who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten years prior to filing an application. The term "conviction" includes any adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. The term "moral turpitude" shall include any violation that involves gambling, drugs, or a driving while intoxicated conviction in less than five years from a prior driving while intoxicated conviction, and sale of alcohol. 
(g)  A licensee shall not have had revoked, within the two years preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(h)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person that has not attained the age of 18. 
(i)  A licensee shall have been, and continuously maintain, as a registered agent, a resident of the county upon whom may be served any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 11) 
Sec. 4-34. - Application fee. 
Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 12) 
Sec. 4-35. - Procedure for consideration of application; temporary licenses. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall have the responsibility and authority to request additional information as may be determined to be necessary in order for the city manager or designee to accept the application as complete prior to its approval or denial pursuant to section 4-36. 
(b)  A temporary license for a full pouring license, a limited pouring license, package malt beverage license, package wine license, and package distilled spirits license may be issued by the finance director or designee for a period of up to 60 days, provided the finance director or designee is satisfied that the applicant substantially complies with the provisions of the applicable ordinances and meets required qualifications, and the denial of a temporary license would create undue hardship upon the applicant, such as the closing of an existing business or delaying of the opening of a new business. No right or property shall vest in any applicant by virtue of the issuance of such permit. The applicant shall sign an acknowledgment that the temporary license is a mere accommodation and may be revoked, with or without cause, by the finance director at any time. 
(c)  The fee for issuance of a temporary license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 13; Ord. No. 2009-09-43, § 1, 9-28-2009; Ord. No. 2016-07-07, § 1, 7-25-2016; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 4, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 4, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 4-36. - Denial of application. 
(a)  A license may be denied by the city for any violation of this chapter; for any violation of state laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages; for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(b)  A license may be denied by the city manager pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The city manager shall notify the licensee of the denial in writing by certified letter detailing the effective date of the denial and the reason for said denial. The denial letter shall also give the licensee ten days in which to appeal the administrative decision to the alcohol license review board. If the licensee desires to appeal the city manager's decision, the licensee shall notify the city manager of same in writing within ten days of receipt of the denial letter. The city manager shall set a date for hearing of the licensee's denial within 30 days of the licensee's written notice of appeal to the city manager, and the city manager shall notify the licensee in writing no later than ten days prior to such hearing of the date of such hearing pursuant to section 4-70. Service of such notice shall be by personal service on the registered agent. If personal service fails, the notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the registered agent at the address provided and to the named licensee at the licensed premises. Delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following deposit in the United States mail. Pending the outcome of the complete appeal process pursuant to this subsection, the licensee may continue to operate his place of business that the license in question pertains to, assuming the licensee has a current valid occupation tax certificate and any other pertinent license. 
(c)  Any decision by the alcohol license review board denying an application shall be final unless the applicant applies to the county superior court by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the alcohol license review board. 
(d)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of the denial. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 14; Ord No. 2009-09-43, § 2, 9-28-2009) 
Sec. 4-37. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. All applications seeking a transfer of a license in any respect shall be made upon application forms provided by the city manager and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensed premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In case of the death of the licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 30 days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new license, whichever occurs first; provided, however, that the finance department must be notified of the licensee's death within ten days of the death or the license shall automatically terminate on the 11th day following the death of the licensee. 
(d)  If a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs the association with the licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 30 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined to be the date of severance; provided, however, that the finance department must be notified of the change within ten days of the severance or the license shall automatically terminate on the 11th day following the date of the severance. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more of the partners in the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license; nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing stock holdings to a total of ten or more percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in the entity. 
(f)  Except as provided herein, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued under this division automatically, without the necessity of a hearing. 
(g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine of $1,000.00 each on the new ownership and the old ownership. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 15) 
Sec. 4-38. - Sale or disposition of licensed business; temporary license. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells, or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the city manager. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, the city manager may issue a temporary license as provided in section 4-35 to the successor in interest, if the successor in interest has properly completed an application and paid the appropriate fee. The temporary license shall be valid for up to 60 days or until the application for a permanent license is granted or denied by the city council, whichever first occurs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 16) 
Sec. 4-39. - Notice. 
Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this chapter, any required notice may be delivered by hand or posted by certified mail, in which event delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 17) 
Sec. 4-40. - Collection of sums due. 
As to any failure to pay any sum due for fees or taxes under this chapter, the city may issue an execution against the licensee and his property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax in addition to any other remedies the city may have. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 2, § 18) 
Sec. 4-41. - License required to manufacture. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a license issued under this article and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-42. - Manufacturer defined. 
As used herein, a "manufacturer" means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage and: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirts, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; and 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer, excepting, however, brewpub brewers, licensed under section 4-XX[45] of article II of this chapter; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vitner. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-43. - Compliance with state law required. 
The applicant for a manufacturer license shall be subject to and comply with all state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-44. - Application for manufacturer license. 
Application for a manufacturer license shall be made in the same manner and subject to the same rules and procedures as an application for any other license authorized under this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by the resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-45. - Manufacturer licenses. 
Manufacturer licenses which may be issued under the article shall be specific to the alcoholic beverages to be manufactured: 
(1)  Manufacturer license for distilled spirits; 
(2)  Manufacturer license for malt beverages; 
(3)  Manufacturer license for wine. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-46. - Manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
(a)  Barrel , as used in this section, means 53 gallons. 
(b)  As provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.2, a limited exception to the three-tier system for the distribution and sale of distilled spirits shall include the right to sell up to 500 barrels of distilled spirits per year produced at the distiller's licensed premises to individuals who are on the premises for: (1) consumption on the premises, and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 2,250 milliliters of distilled spirits per consumer per day. 
(c)  A distiller may sell distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on all days and at all times that sales of distilled spirits by retailers and retail consumption dealers are lawful, including, but not limited to Sundays. 
(d)  A distiller shall not sell any distilled spirits for consumption off the premises pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at a price less than the price at which a person licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package is permitted to sell distilled spirits pursuant to O.C.G.A § 3-4-26(b). 
(e)  Any distiller engaging in sales of distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall remit all sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-47. - Manufacturer of malt beverages. 
(a)  Barrel , as used in this section, means 31 gallons. 
(b)  As provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.1, a limited exception to the three-tier system for the distribution and sale of malt beverages shall include the right to sell up to 3,000 barrels of malt beverages per year produced at the brewer's licensed premises to individuals who are on the premises for: (1) consumption on the premises, and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 288 ounces of distilled spirits per consumer per day. 
(c)  A brewer may sell malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on all days and at all times that sales of malt beverages by retailers are lawful, including, but not limited to Sundays. 
(d)  A brewer engaging in sales of malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall remit all sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-48. - Sale allowed only to wholesalers. 
Distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine manufactured pursuant to a manufacturer license issued hereunder shall be sold only to wholesalers and not directly to retailers or end consumers except as may otherwise be allowed by state law and city code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § V, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 4-49—4-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING 

Sec. 4-69. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city for any violation of this chapter; for any violation of state laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages; for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(b)  Whenever the state revokes any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The police department, upon notice of such revocation from the finance department, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  When suspension of a license is permitted under this chapter, but no specific period of suspension is mandated, the following guidelines shall apply: 
(1)  First suspension in a 24-month period of time shall not exceed 30 days. 
(2)  Second suspension in a 24-month period of time shall not exceed 60 days. 
(3)  Third suspension in a 24-month period of time shall cause revocation of the license. 
(d)  Prior to the suspension or revocation of a license by the city, the city manager shall give written notice to the licensee of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing before the city alcohol license review board shall be held in accordance with section 4-70. Service of such notice shall be by personal service on the registered agent. If personal service fails, the notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the registered agent at the address provided and to the named licensee at the licensed premises. Delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following deposit in the United States mail. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 4-70. - License review board; hearings. 
(a)  There is hereby established a license review board consisting of five members appointed by the mayor and subject to approval by the council. Each member shall serve a term of three years, except that upon appointment of the initial members of the board, the initial terms may be staggered. 
(b)  The board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To hear deferred applications or appeals from administrative decisions by the city manager with regard to issuance, suspensions, or revocation of licenses, transfers, renewals, change of ownership, or other matters affecting such licenses or decisions by the city manager pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  To hear appeals with regard to issuance or renewal of employee work permits; 
(3)  To hear any matter involving revocation or suspension of a license or other disciplinary action against a licensee or employee under a work permit; 
(4)  To consider and act upon any other matter specifically delegated to the board by city ordinance, resolution, or action of the council. 
(c)  Applicants or licensees shall be given written notice of the date, time and place when the board will consider the respective matter. The applicant and interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard by the board and present evidence to the board prior to making its decision. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided, no alcoholic beverage license having been issued shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause, as defined in this section, until after a hearing and upon written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. Ten days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board may deem the circumstances to justify. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the business; the violation of any state or federal law; any reason which would authorize the city to refuse the issuance of a license; or any violation of this chapter. Further, the police department shall notify the city manager if the licensee or anyone in the employ of a licensee is: 
(1)  Being charged with or arrested for selling alcoholic beverages: 
a.  To an underage person; 
b.  On Sunday without necessary Sunday sales license; or 
(2)  Being convicted of selling alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated person pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22 during the current license year. 
Once the city manager becomes aware of such charge, charges, arrest, or conviction, he shall place the matter before the board for hearing. The board, at said hearing and after receiving evidence, may order the license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages be suspended or revoked if the evidence so warrants. All decisions of the board shall be in writing, and a copy shall be furnished to the applicant or licensee. 
(d)  The board shall have the authority to hear or determine any matter set forth in this chapter unless specifically prohibited therefrom. 
(e)  Upon close of the public hearing, the board shall reach a decision on the matter before it, and the decision of the board shall be final unless the applicant, licensee, or permit holder appeals the decision to the city council within ten days of the date of its written decision. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. Within 30 days of the filing of the appeal and at a regularly scheduled meeting, the council shall conduct a de novo hearing to hear evidence and, at the conclusion of such hearing, shall render a decision to uphold the decision made by the board, reverse the decision made by the board, or in its discretion, modify the decision made by the board. 
(f)  The decision of the council as rendered on an appeal under this article shall be final unless the applicant, licensee or permit holder applies to the county superior court by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the council. 
(g)  The board shall meet at such times as necessary as determined by the board and shall render its decisions within 30 days after the close of a hearing on any matter. Such meeting shall not be scheduled later than 30 days from the time a matter is filed for hearing or appealed to the board. 
(h)  The board shall select one of its members to serve as chair and one member to serve as secretary, both to serve at the pleasure of the board. Minutes and records of all proceedings shall be kept and maintained in the office of the city manager. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 3, § 2; Ord. No. 2014-08-10, § 3, 8-11-2014) 
Secs. 4-71—4-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOCATION OF SALES 

Sec. 4-99. - Distance from churches, schools, etc. 
(a)  No package malt beverage license, package wine license, or consumption on the premises license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus, or adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  No package distilled spirits license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any church building or alcohol treatment center or which is located within 200 yards of a school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus, or adult entertainment establishment, or which is located within 500 yards of another licensed package distilled spirits business. 
(c)  No package license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 200 yards of a private single-family or two-family dwelling in a zoning district that permits single- and/or two-family dwellings; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a private dwelling located in a zoning district in which alcoholic beverage outlets are authorized and which dwelling is on the same street as the premises for which a package license is applied, or as exempted in section 4-102 herein. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure, as determined by the director of community development, from which alcoholic beverages are sold or proposed to be sold; and 
(2)  In a straight path to the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds, as determined by the director of community development, whichever is applicable under this chapter. 
No license shall be revoked and no application for a license or renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection, if such license or license application or renewal application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to the enactment of this chapter in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(e)  Unless otherwise on file with the city, no application for a license shall be approved which does not include, or have attached thereto, a certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this section, or a certificate from a registered surveyor which states that the subject alcoholic beverage outlet meets all of the location and distance requirements of this section, and shows such location's compliance or noncompliance with linear foot measurements where appropriate or required. 
(f)  When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's certificate, as required under subsection (e) of this section, clearly showing that the premises will, when completed, meet the requirements of this section. 
(g)  If the distance requirements of this section are met at the time a license is issued, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the prohibited distance shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the issuance of a new license to a subsequent owner of the property; provided, however, that as to any new license, the prior license must have been lawful and validly issued at the location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding the application for the new license. 
(h)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at any other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools and private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "church building" as used in this section means the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 4, § 1; Ord. No. 2009-08-39, § 1, 8-24-2009; Ord. No. 2014-06-04, § 1, 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 4-100. - Sales and consumption on public property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverage in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. 
(b)  Private parties and organizations may secure a permit from the city manager to serve, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages on property owned or leased by the city. 
(c)  An outdoor festival host holding a special event permit may allow or prohibit alcohol consumption at the outdoor festival and shall have the right to require that alcohol consumed at the outdoor festival be purchased or obtained from an official outdoor festival vendor. Such authorization and/or limitations shall be set forth on the application for the special event permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 4, § 2; Ord. No. 2009-09-43, § 3, 9-28-2009) 
Sec. 4-101. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
(b)  No consumption and/or sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed in open areas and patios unless first permitted and approved by the city. The city shall prepare such appropriate regulations as to ensure the safe and orderly operation of these establishments, including but not limited to regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 4-102. - Exemptions. 
The distance restrictions contained in subsection 4-99(c) of this article shall not apply to a retail sales or food and beverage retail sales establishment, as defined in section 27-114, when requesting a package malt beverage license or package wine license for off-site consumption, subject to meeting each of the following criteria: 
(1)  The area dedicated to the display, storage and sale of the above products does not exceed six percent of the gross floor area of the business/facility; and 
(2)  The business is located within an independent building site or shopping center which is not directly abutting property zoned for single-family or two-family residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06-04, § 1, 6-9-2014) 
Secs. 4-103—4-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-131. - Display of license. 
(a)  Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept in a public area plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(b)  All retail consumption dealers and retail dealers who sell at retail any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall post, in a conspicuous place, a sign which clearly reads: 
"Warning: Drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy can cause birth defects." 
(c)  Each retail business establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall post in a conspicuous place a notice which shall contain the provisions of the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of such items to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 1) 
Sec. 4-132. - Purchase and sales records. 
(a)  Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by the licensee. All consumption on the premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by them. Such records, more specifically described in subsection (c) of this section, shall at all times be open for inspection by the city manager or his designee. These records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years unless the city manager determines that no such records exist, and it is not financially practical, based on the net income of the licensee, to require the keeping of such records. 
(b)  If the city manager deems it advisable to conduct an audit of the records of a licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time, and place of the audit. The city manager may designate the city's internal auditor or other person to perform the audit, and the licensee shall cooperate with the audit or be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(c)  At the request of the city manager or his designee, the licensee shall make available the following records required to be kept for at least three years: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine, and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees); 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets; 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and 
(5)  Federal income tax returns. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 2) 
Sec. 4-133. - Sale to, purchase or possession by underage person. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply when the parent or guardian of the underage person gives the alcoholic beverage to the underage person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be violated when a person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, the person's photograph, and the person's date of birth. Proper identification includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in a licensed premises if such employment is lawful under this chapter. 
(f)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could doubt whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is 21 years of age or older, the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage shall request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (d) of this section. The failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(g)  In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcoholic beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonably prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcoholic beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(h)  For purposes of the prohibitions set forth in this section, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond shall constitute a conviction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 3) 
State Law reference— Persons under 18 years of age not allowed to serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 4-134. - Days when sales unlawful. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
(b)  No retail package licensee shall be permitted to sell package malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits on Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. No retail consumption on premises licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday unless such licensee is a bona fide eating establishment, caterer, private club, or special events facility as defined in this chapter. Any licensee wishing to sell alcohol on Sunday pursuant to this chapter shall pay the requisite fee for Sunday sales, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Any retail consumption on premises licensee otherwise eligible for a Sunday sales permit pursuant to subsection (b) of this section may apply for a one-day Sunday sales permit for a specific date. The fee for a one-time Sunday sales permit shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 4; Ord. No. 2010-01-04, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-06-21, § 1, 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 4-135. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Package licensees shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. Package licensees shall not permit their places of business to be open except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, or between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays, except that where the primary business of a malt beverage package licensee or wine package licensee is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, such restrictive hours shall apply only with respect to the sale of malt beverages or wine. 
(b)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall sell alcoholic beverages only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on the following day, Monday through Saturday. Sunday sales may be made by eating establishments, as defined herein, or by a private club between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day, provided license for Sunday sales has been granted and the fee paid. Consumption on the premises licensees shall not allow alcoholic beverages sold under this subsection to be consumed after 2:30 a.m. 
(c)  The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales on Sunday. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 5; Ord. No. 2011-06-21, § 2, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 2018-07-12, § 1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 4-136. - Prohibited acts, sexual display on licensed premises. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any: disorderly conduct; breach of the peace; lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices; or noise which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  No licensee shall use any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, and genitals. 
(d)  No licensee shall allow live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (c) of this section, or where such person performs acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act prohibited by law; 
(2)  The caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; 
(3)  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals. 
(e)  No licensee shall allow the use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate, or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  No licensee shall allow the holding, promotion, or sponsoring of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection (c) or (d) of this section. 
(g)  No licensee shall allow to be shown, displayed, or exhibited any film, still picture, electronic reproduction, or image of any act or conduct described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(h)  Nothing contained in subsections (c) through (g) of this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theatre which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. A mainstream performance house means a building where conventional performances are presented. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 6) 
Sec. 4-137. - Delivery and storage. 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise specifically provided herein as to brewpubs, alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises in the original container and in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler) with a permit from the city to make deliveries in the city. Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided herein as to brewpubs, any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 7; Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § III, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-138. - On-premises consumption unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. This section shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sale of growlers, as defined in section 4-2, is authorized for and by those licensees holding a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but not authorized under any circumstances for licensees holding a package distilled spirits license, and who do not sell, or offer for sell [sale], vehicular fuel. The filling of growlers with malt beverage drawn from a tap on a barrel, cask, tank, or keg on the premises shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this chapter, provided that no filled growlers may be consumed on the premises. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. In order to be securely sealed, the growler must be sealed with a tamper-proof cap or seal. With the exception of brewpubs pursuant to subsection (c), growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, in the case of a brewpub holding a license to sell malt beverages by the package, growlers may be filled from barrels, casks, tanks, or kegs of malt beverages manufactured on the licensed premises, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 8; Ord. No. 2018-04-07, § IV, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 4-139. - Condition of premises requirements. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by the chief of police, the fire chief, and other authorized agents of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 5, § 9) 
Secs. 4-140—4-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS AND HANDLING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-162. - Age requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the term "grocery stores" or "supermarkets" shall not include convenience stores. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 6, § 1) 
Sec. 4-163. - Handling not to include bagging and carrying out. 
For the purposes of this article, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 4-164. - Pouring permit required. 
(a)  An employee pouring permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any employee who serves in any managerial position. At least one such employee with a valid pouring permit shall be present at the establishment at all times alcohol is being present; and 
(2)  Any employee of an alcoholic beverage caterer who is engaged in handling, selling, or serving alcoholic beverages; provided, however, employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboys or cooks or dishwashers shall be excluded. 
(b)  Any person required to obtain a pouring permit shall apply to the city for such permit. Only one pouring permit per individual will be issued for employment at any and all establishments within the city. The permit shall contain a picture of the permit holder, the name of the establishment the permit is issued for, will be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit shall submit themselves to a fingerprint-based background check in accordance with section 2-62 of this Code. The fee for a pouring permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)  The city manager or designee may revoke an employee's pouring permit and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  The city manager or designee may revoke an employee's pouring permit and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Any conviction for violation of the provisions of this article or of the state's Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-1—3-13-4, shall result in the automatic suspension of the pouring permit. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose pouring permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made to refuse to return the card or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(g)  A new fingerprint-based background check may be conducted upon each renewal application for a pouring permit. 
(h)  When any employee's pouring permit is denied or revoked, the city manager shall provide written notice of the denial or revocation to the applicant or employee, which shall set forth the reasons for the denial. The applicant shall have a right of review of the denial by filing an appeal with the alcohol license review board within 30 days of the denial, pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 6, § 3; Ord. No. 2010-01-04, § 2, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 5, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 4, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 4-165. - Licensee to report disciplinary action. 
Any licensee who has any disciplinary action taken against him or any of his employees who sell, take orders for, deliver, or handle alcoholic beverages by any governmental authority (municipal, county, state, or federal) shall notify the chief of police and the city manager of such action within five days of such action. The following shall be considered to be disciplinary action: any arrest; the issuance of any citation; any indictment, presentment, or accusation; any conviction, including the acceptance of a plea of nolo contendere; any penalty imposed by any regulatory agency; and any other written charge or reprimand against the licensee or any of his employees. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to citations for traffic offenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 6, § 4) 
Secs. 4-166—4-183. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSUMPTION ON-THE-PREMISES LICENSES 

Sec. 4-184. - Eligibility for license. 
Except as provided in section 4-25, a consumption on the premises license may be granted only to the establishments described in this article and subject to the specified conditions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 1) 
Sec. 4-185. - Hotel and hotel room service. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a hotel must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where food is served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered to guests for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain 50 or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of guests; and 
(3)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities. 
(b)  A hotel may consist of a single building or may consist of two or more buildings located on the same premises and used in connection with the hotel operation. 
(c)  A facility which is styled as a motel, motor lodge, inn, or other similar appellation may be licensed as a hotel if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any hotel (as the term "hotel" is commonly used and without regard to the requirements of this section), inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire, may provide "in-room service" of alcoholic beverages if such establishment: 
(1)  Holds a valid city package license or a valid city consumption on the premises license or both; and 
(2)  Has been authorized to provide in-room service by the state. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the term "in-room service" consists of: 
(1)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of the hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and 
(2)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in-room service of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations in this chapter relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages. In-room service sales shall be authorized only on such days and only during such hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages is otherwise authorized. 
(g)  Distilled spirits sold pursuant to this section shall not be sold in packages containing less than 50 milliliters each. 
(h)  All alcoholic beverages sold pursuant to this section shall be purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and shall be subject to all taxes imposed under this chapter, including the excise tax on the retail sale by the drink of alcoholic beverages containing distilled spirits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 2) 
Sec. 4-186. - Restaurant. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a restaurant must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served to the public for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(4)  Be prepared to serve food every hour they are open. 
(b)  Brewpubs, as defined in section 4-2 and O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(3), shall be allowed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 3) 
Sec. 4-187. - Lounge. 
(a)  A lounge is a separate room which is: 
(1)  Connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant; or 
(2)  Located in a hotel. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a lounge must be arranged and maintained such that all booths, stools, and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other customers in the lounge. 
(c)  A lounge which is operated on a different floor, or in a separate building from, or which is not connected or adjacent to, another licensed facility shall be considered a separate establishment from such other licensed facility and shall pay a separate annual license fee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 4) 
Sec. 4-188. - Private clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association which is organized under the laws of this state and which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofit purposes; 
(4)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4)c of this section, the term "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food; provided, however, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 5) 
Sec. 4-189. - Special events facility. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a special events facility must: 
(1)  Be available to public or private groups of persons; 
(2)  For monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage, or similar basis, be used primarily for special occasions, including but not limited to, receptions, meetings, banquets, conventions, parties, catered events, or similar gatherings; and 
(3)  Be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; or 
(4)  Be a sport complex situated in conformance with the city's zoning ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 6) 
Sec. 4-190. - Physical requirements of premises. 
All lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Sales to hotel guests in their hotel rooms; 
(3)  Private clubs; or 
(4)  Special events facilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 7) 
Sec. 4-191. - Live music and dancing. 
Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the fire chief has been obtained. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 8) 
Sec. 4-192. - Package sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any distilled spirits to be sold by the package from premises licensed for consumption on the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 9) 
Sec. 4-193. - Carry-out of alcoholic beverage unlawful. 
(a)  All alcohol beverages sold or otherwise dispensed by consumption on the premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises except as provided herein. Except beer or malt beverages in an air tight container of 64 ounces or less sealed by the licensee such that it shall be apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, sold by a licensee who does not sell distilled spirits or as permitted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcohol beverages sold for consumption on the premises. The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcohol beverages from the premises in any type of container, except as permitted herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person purchasing alcohol beverages for consumption on the premises to leave the premises without paying for such alcohol beverages. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 10; Ord. No. 2012-03-03, § 1, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 4-194. - Bottle clubs. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring his own spirituous liquor into any licensed retail establishment. For purposes of this section, the term "retail establishment" shall not include a private hotel room or other similar guest room or a private club. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 11) 
Sec. 4-195. - Happy hour discounts; other unlawful practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit offering a sampler of malt beverages or wine in containers not exceeding four ounces each; 
(3)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(4)  Providing two or more alcoholic beverages to a single customer who has an unconsumed alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Selling distilled spirits in containers or glasses containing more than three ounces of distilled spirits. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm, or organization for a set period of time and for a valuable consideration. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 7, § 12) 
Sec. 4-196. - Bring your own beverage; limited pouring licenses for certain retail establishments to allow bring your own beverage. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring his own alcoholic beverage into any retail establishment without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages except for the following specific exceptions: 
(1)  This section shall not prohibit any person dining at a retail establishment licensed to sell wine and/or beer for consumption on the premises from bringing an unopened bottle of wine or two or less, 16 ounce or smaller, unopened bottles or cans of beer into said establishment for consumption where the establishment has a policy permitting same. 
(2)  This section shall not prohibit any person who is a patron of a retail establishment from bringing an unopened bottle of wine or two or less, 16 ounce or smaller, unopened bottles or cans of beer into the establishment on Monday—Saturday where the owners or their agents have a policy permitting a patron to bring an unopened bottle of wine or bottle(s)/can(s) of beer into the retail establishment for consumption on the premises by the patron and the establishment complies with the following: 
a.  Such retail establishment, shall be required to be licensed by the city and meet all application requirements and be governed by the ordinance provisions as set forth in article II of this chapter for a limited pouring license for wine and/or malt beverage. 
b.  No retail establishment so licensed shall have any employee under the age of 18 working in the establishment, and the retail establishment shall have an established closing time no later than 10:00 p.m. 
c.  The fee for this retail establishment to permit wine and/or beer to be brought into such establishment, shall be in an amount set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
d.  Said establishment, before they allow the bringing in of the wine and beer, must apply for and receive a State of Georgia alcohol license of the kind received by any licensee for consumption on the premises. 
e.  This exception shall not apply to any establishment not meeting the distance requirements of this chapter or state law for receiving a license for consumption on the premises or to any establishment categorically prohibited from serving alcohol by any provision of the City of Dunwoody Code or state or federal law. 
(3)  Any opened bottle of wine, or opened bottle/can of beer, not consumed at a retail establishment, as described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, shall be disposed of at the premises and not carried out in an open container, unless the retail establishment is able and authorized to reseal and repackage the opened bottle of wine as required by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(4)  All applicable state laws and city ordinances which address the use and serving of alcoholic beverages shall apply to this section. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, the term retail establishment shall not include a private hotel room or other similar guestroom or a private club. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05-09, § 2, 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 4-197—4-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 4-214. - Tax imposed on sale of drinks containing distilled spirits. 
There is imposed upon the retail sale of drinks containing distilled spirits in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the drink to the consumer. A record of each sale shall be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 1) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; excise taxes on malt beverages to be paid by wholesale dealer, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81; prohibition on requirement for markings on beverage containers regarding excise taxes, O.C.G.A. § 35-5-82; local excise taxes on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-60. 
Sec. 4-215. - Licensee to collect and remit. 
Every consumption on the premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this article from purchasers of drinks containing distilled spirits. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the city to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 2) 
Sec. 4-216. - Payment and returns by licensee. 
(a)  Each licensee shall pay the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the city by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the city may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of drinks containing distilled spirits and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. Any amounts collected in excess of three percent of the taxable sales shall be reported and paid to the city. 
(c)  Licensees shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 3) 
Sec. 4-217. - Excise tax; wholesalers. 
(a)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. Remittances shall be accompanied by completed forms as prescribed or authorized by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 4) 
Sec. 4-218. - Deficiency assessment. 
(a)  If the city has cause to believe that a return or the amount of tax paid to the city by a licensee is not proper, the city may compute and determine the amount due on the basis of any information available. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any month. 
(b)  The amount of a deficiency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes until paid, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(c)  The city shall give notice of a deficiency determination to the licensee. The notice may be served personally or by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the named licensee at the licensed premises, shall be made by certified mail, and is complete when delivered with a receipt signed by the addressee or by the receipt of mailing from the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever is later. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 5) 
Sec. 4-219. - Failure to file return. 
(a)  If a licensee fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the tax due for the period for which a return was not filed. Such estimate may be based on any information available to the city. Written notice of the estimate shall be given to the licensee in the manner specified by section 4-218. 
(b)  If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the licensee shall be added to the estimate of the amount due in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 6) 
Sec. 4-220. - Interest. 
Any licensee who fails to pay to the city within the time required any amount required to be paid under this article shall pay, in addition to the principal unpaid amount, interest at the rate of one percent month or fraction thereof from the date the tax payment was last due until payment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 7) 
Sec. 4-221. - Actions for collection; overpayment. 
(a)  At any time within three years after the delinquency of any amount due under this article, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state, or the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(c)  If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once and such fact has not yet been determined by the city, the licensee shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim with respect to such overpayment or double payment. Such claim shall be in writing and shall state the specific grounds upon which it is based. The claim shall be audited. If the city approves the claim, the excess amount paid may be credited against any other amounts due from the licensee or refunded. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 8) 
Sec. 4-222. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)  The city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Every licensee engaging in the sale of mixed drinks shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by the city. 
(d)  The city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and facilities of any licensee engaging in the sale of any alcoholic beverage, retail or wholesale, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return is made to ascertain the amount of tax due. 
(e)  In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody any information relating to purchases subject to taxation under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 8, § 9) 
Secs. 4-223—4-252. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 

Sec. 4-253. - General penalty. 
Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, any person who violates an ordinance contained herein may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense and/or up to six months incarceration. Should the violation and conviction be of a state law, the punishment shall be by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and/or up to 12 months' incarceration. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 4, art. 9, § 1) 
Secs. 4-254—4-284. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OFFENSES 

Sec. 4-285. - Alcohol-related offenses. 
(a)  Alcohol consumption near package stores. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to consume all or any part of any type of alcoholic beverage within 100 feet of any retail store where alcoholic beverages are sold in package form or within the boundary lines of the property on which such retail store is located, whichever constitutes the greater distance. 
(b)  Drinking in public. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage while on any streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parking areas or other open areas operated and controlled by the city, or while in or on the grounds of any Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) station. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink any vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage while in any city park except at the Nature Art Center at a function sponsored by a Nature Art Center organization, during permitted festivals or at other licensed locations within such parks. 
(c)  Sidewalk cafe. A licensee may prepare and serve alcoholic beverages to be consumed within an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of a sidewalk cafe. Open containers of alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into or out of outdoor dining areas by the licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. 
(d)  Disorderly while under the influence. 
(1)  Acts constituting violation. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to be disorderly while under the influence on the streets, sidewalks or other public places. The following acts are declared to be in violation of this section: 
a.  Any person who acts in a reckless manner so as to create an unreasonable risk to himself, to others or to property in the vicinity while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
b.  Any person who shall defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
c.  Any person who, without provocation, uses to or of another, in such person's presence, fighting words, or who shall panhandle under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
d.  Any person who shall act in a tumultuous manner toward another so as to endanger the life limb, health or property of another while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
e.  Any person who, while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, shall lie down or otherwise obstruct, block or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any sidewalk, street, or entrance or exit to any public way, house of worship, business, public hall, theater, public conveyance or other public place and who shall refuse to remove themselves when ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority. 
f.  Any person who shall act in a boisterous, turbulent, or agitated manner, or who shall use profane, vulgar, loud or unbecoming language while under the influence of alcohol or drugs while on the city streets sidewalks, or other public places within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Duty of peace officer. Any peace officer, in accordance with standards set out in standard operating procedures promulgated by the police chief, may take or send an individual under the influence of alcohol or drugs to such person's home or to a treatment facility in lieu of incarcerating such person for violations of this section or when such person is unresponsive to the officer's communications. Any peace officer so acting shall be considered as carrying out such peace officer's official duty. The standard operating procedures shall set out the circumstances under which a peace officer may send an individual home or to treatment facility without formally rendering charges against a person. 
(e)  Furnishing to, purchasing of, or possession by person under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages. 
(1)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
a.  No person directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
b.  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, drink or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverages; 
c.  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
d.  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; 
e.  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverages; or 
f.  No person shall keep or maintain a place where persons under 21 years of age are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (e)(1)a, b, and d of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
a.  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
b.  At a religious ceremony. 
(3)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (e)(1)a, b, and d of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(4)  The prohibition contained in subsection (e)(1)a of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(5)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
a.  Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishments; 
b.  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
c.  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(6)  Testimony by any person under 21 years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding, against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used as an admission in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person who is under 21 years of age. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify, amend or supersede O.C.G.A. Title 15, chapter 11 (O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq.). 
(8)  Any person convicted of violating any prohibition contained in subsection (e)1 of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 180 days or both; except that any person convicted of violating subsection (e)(1)b of this section shall be punished by not more than 30 days' imprisonment or a fine of not more than $300.00, or both. Any defendant charged under this section shall be entitled upon request to have the case against such defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. Any person charged with a second or subsequent offense under this section shall be punished as for a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature in the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
(9)  Whenever any person who has not been previously convicted of any offense under this section or under any other law of the United States or this or any other state relating to alcoholic beverages pleads guilty to or is found guilty of a violation of subsection (e)(1)b or (e)(1)c of this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of such person, may defer further proceedings and place such person on probation upon such reasonable terms and conditions as the court may require. The terms of probation shall preferably be such as to require the person to undergo a comprehensive rehabilitation program, including, if necessary, medical treatment, not to exceed three years, designed to acquaint such person with the ill effects of alcohol abuse and to provide such person with knowledge of the gains and benefits which can be achieved by being a good member of society. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed accordingly. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge such person and dismiss the proceedings against such person. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection shall be without court adjudication of guilt and shall not be deemed a conviction for purposes of this subsection or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection may occur only once with respect to any person. 
(10)  Unless the officer has reasonable cause to believe such person is intoxicated, a law enforcement officer may arrest by issuance of a citation a person accused of violating only subsection (e)(1)b of this section. The citation shall enumerate the specific charges against the person and either the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges or a notation that the person will be later notified of the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges. If the person charged shall fail to appear as required, the judge, having jurisdiction of the offense may issue a warrant or other order directing the apprehension of such person and commanding that such person be brought before the court to answer the charges contained within the citation and the charge of such person's failure to appear as required. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to invalidate an otherwise valid arrest by citation of a person who is intoxicated. 
(f)  Consumption and transporting open containers of alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or transport open containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon public areas, except where otherwise authorized in this Code or by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 3) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, adopted January 24, 2011, repealed and reenacted article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article I, § 6-1 pertained to general provisions, and derived from original codification. 

Sec. 6-1. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means that any domesticated animal shall be considered abandoned, for the purposes of this article, which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered as abandoned, for the purposes of this article, which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without proper food and water. 
Abused animal means any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased, or is deprived of water, food or shelter, or is kept under unsanitary conditions, or is abandoned, or is trained for fighting other animals. 
Adequate care means exhibiting attention to the needs of an animal including but not limited to, the provision of food, water, shelter, sanitary, safe and healthy conditions, and adequate and timely veterinary medical attention necessary to maintain good health for the specific age, size, species, and breed of animal. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian; which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for a domestic animal that provides adequate space and protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides, a constructed floor, and a roof with a door opening. It should also be clean, dry and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water sufficient to prevent dehydration and properly sustain health presented in a clean dish, free from contamination. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to, snow, ice and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control center means the facility designated by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners for the detention of animals. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the DeKalb County Animal Control Director to perform the duties prescribed by this article or imposed by local ordinance, and any police or code enforcement officer of the city. 
Animal under restraint means any animal humanely secured by a leash or led or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure or the animal is confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion. 
Companion animal means a domesticated animal, a "pet", kept for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals and other animals associated with man's environment. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to any animal by an act, an omission, or neglect. Cruelty also includes transporting an animal in an unrestrained open-air vehicle or transporting an unrestrained animal in the trunk of any vehicle or leaving an animal unattended in a closed vehicle without proper ventilation or temperature control, where the outside air temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above. Cruelty also means allowing or causing any animal to participate in training for or engaging in an animal fight operated for sport, entertainment or gaming purposes. Routine medical procedures by a licensed veterinarian shall not be regarded as cruelty. 
Dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or bite so as to cause serious bodily harm. An animal trained, owned or harbored for the purpose primarily or in part, of animal fighting. Exceptions: An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if: 
(1)  It bites, attacks or menaces: 
a.  Anyone assaulting the owner; 
b.  A trespasser on the property of the owner; 
c.  Any person or other animal which has tormented or abused it; 
d.  Where the animal is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; 
e.  Where the animal is protecting or defending its young or another animal; or 
f.  Where a dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out official law enforcement duties and injures someone. 
(2)  It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; or 
(3)  It is protecting or defending its young or other animal. 
Director means the DeKalb County Animal Control Director. 
Domesticated animals means animals that are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. This definition only applies to those animals mentioned herein and is only applicable to this article, and in no way affects the meaning or application of a definition of the described animal, as may be found in any other city ordinances. 
Electronic animal confinement system shall mean a commercially produced, functioning and professionally installed electronic fence which utilizes an invisible electrically generated perimeter, in which the animal within the perimeter wears an electronic collar that produces an electric shock when the animal approaches or exceeds the perimeter. 
Euthanasia means the legal act of putting an animal to death using humane methods, recommended by the American Veterinary Medical Association Panel on Euthanasia and approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, as defined by Georgia law in the Georgia Animal Protection Act, as may hereinafter be amended. 
Fence means any structure of wire, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence must be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig, or escape from confinement. 
Garbage means all refuse matter/effluent, either animal or vegetable by-product from a restaurant, kitchen, or meat/poultry processing establishment; spoiled/rancid food and refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that is normally discarded. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or upon and within which he or she is located. 
Hazardous animal means an animal that may be harmful to humans or other animals by virtue of its ability to produce poison or, due to its size and feeding habits, could prey on humans as a food source. Hazardous animal include, but are not limited to, pit vipers (genus Crotalidae), coral snakes (genus Micrurus), poisonous spiders, frogs, large reptiles, Nile monitors, caiman, alligators, crocodiles, and large constricting snakes greater than ten feet in length. 
Identification means any tag, tattoo, microchip, or other type of marking that can be used to locate an animal's owner. 
Kennel means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where animals are maintained for boarding, holding, training, or other similar purposes for a fee or compensation. 
Open-air vehicle means the cargo area of any pick-up truck that is not covered by a permanent attached utility cover or any convertible vehicle with its top down. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping, harboring or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal that, without provocation bites or attacks humans or any other animal on public or private property. 
Proper enclosure means any structure or device used to restrict an animal to a limited amount of space such as a fenced area, electronic animal confinement system, building, house, pen, or other device or structure out of which an animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape. 
Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of this article; 
(2)  Is unlicensed (unregistered) in violation of this article; 
(3)  Is trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of dog fighting; 
(4)  Is dangerous, as defined, and is not restrained or confined, as provided for in this article; 
(5)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(6)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the DeKalb County Board of Health, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
Severe injury means a physical injury that results in broken bones, significant puncture wounds, disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or significant medical procedures or a physical injury that results in death. 
Spay/neuter certificate means documentation that certifies that the animal listed therein has been sterilized as of the date of surgery. 
Sterilized animal means an animal that has been surgically or chemically altered by a licensed veterinarian in order to render the animal incapable of reproduction. 
Tethered means an animal attached to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device commonly used for the size and type of animal involved. An animal is not considered tethered when the animal is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the animal. Any tethering device used to tether an animal must be at least ten feet in length. 
Unsanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalties for violation and repeat offenders. 
Any person violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be punished pursuant to section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-4. - Animal control center. 
There is hereby recognized the DeKalb County animal control center, which is under the supervision of the director and is staffed with such personnel as may, from time to time, be authorized in the county budget and appropriations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-5. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or anyone having an animal in his or her custody, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the incorporated limits of the city; or on the property of another person, without permission of the owner of that property, or of the person in possession of that property, except dogs being hunted in accordance with state game and fish department laws, rules and regulations. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-6. - Duty of all animal owners to be responsible owners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and other animals from injury or damage resulting from such animal's behavior, including, but not limited to, chasing, biting, or otherwise jeopardizing the safety or welfare of the public, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness, or ferocity. 
(b)  If the owner of an animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal on any street or right-of-way. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal used for law enforcement related activities. 
(d)  Domesticated or caged non-farm animals may not make any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if the vocalization is intermittent. These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter and are not required to be noise control officers as defined by this Code. Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the police chief with the address of the owner. If the disturbance is not resolved within two days or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual, who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-7. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while on property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint, and that precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is securely and humanely enclosed within a proper enclosure as a means of primary restraint. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended. When outside the proper enclosure but on the owner's property, it shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is humanely secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a responsible and competent person; or off leash but under the direct control of a responsible and competent person who is physically present with the animal, provided that such animal is obedient to that person's command. 
(c)  Any animal that is housed outside of its owner's house shall be housed in a proper enclosure that complies with the provisions of this Code. The owner shall also ensure that the proper enclosure contains at least 100 square feet of open space as that term is defined in chapter 27. 
(d)  Tethering of an animal is prohibited. 
(e)  As a secondary means of restraint to a proper enclosure, an animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system providing that: 
(1)  A running cable line or trolley system is set inside a proper enclosure; 
(2)  Only one animal may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system; 
(3)  No animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system for more than 12 hours in a 24-hour period; 
(4)  No animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(5)  Tethers and cables attaching the animal to the running cable line or trolley system must be made of a substance which cannot be chewed by the animal and shall not weigh more than five percent of the body weight of the animal tethered; 
(6)  A running cable line or trolley system must have a swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary object that cannot be moved by the animal; 
(7)  The running cable line or trolley system must be at least ten feet in length and mounted at least four feet and no more than seven feet above ground level; 
(8)  The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the animal's collar should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to food, water, and shelter; 
(9)  Be attached to a properly fitted harness or collar not used for the display of a current rabies tag and other identification; and with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering an animal to a running cable line or trolley system; and 
(10)  Be tethered at sufficient distance from any other objects to prohibit the tangling of the cable, from extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury of strangulation of the animal and be of sufficient distance from any fence so as to prohibit the animal access to the fence. 
(f)  If an electronic animal confinement system is used to confine an animal, it shall: 
(1)  Provide a properly fitted and working signal device that will be worn by the animal to be enclosed. 
(2)  Contain permanent and prominently displayed signs at 25 feet intervals around the entire perimeter of the electronic animal confinement system. The signs shall be no smaller than six inches square, and shall read: "Caution—Electronic Animal Confinement System." 
Failure to keep any animal confined or under constraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-8. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while off property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his or her possession to keep the animal under restraint and control at all times while the animal is off the real property of the owners, possessor or custodian. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when: 
(1)  It is securely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; 
(2)  It is properly confined within a secure enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located; or 
(3)  It is securely restrained by a leash or other devise held by a competent person. 
(c)  Failure to keep animal under restraint or control as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-9. - When collar and tag required; dog. 
It shall be the duty of each dog owner, possessor or custodian thereof, to provide a collar for his or her dog to which the rabies inoculation tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the rabies tag, shall be worn by the dog at all times, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 2011-02-08, § 1, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 6-10. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information made known to or complaint logged with any officer of the city police department or code enforcement, that any owner, possessor or custodian of any dog or animal is in violation of this article, he or she or his or her authorized representative shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner, possessor or custodian of his or her dog or animal to appear before a judge of the municipal court of the city on a day and time certain then and there to appear for the violation of this article. If a violation of this article has not been personally witnessed by any officer of the city police department or code enforcement, a subpoena shall be issued by the court to the person making the complaint, to be and appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the city. 
(b)  In the event that the owner, possessor or custodian of any dog or animal is not known and this dog or animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school ground or other public places or premises or the property of another without that property owner's permission as prohibited by this article, upon complaint made to or information made known to the city the animal may be impounded by the DeKalb County animal control. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-11. - Vaccinations for rabies, dogs and cats. 
All dogs and cats in the incorporated limits of the city shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the applicable rabies control ordinance of DeKalb County, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-12. - Warning signs; guard dogs and dangerous dogs. 
All owners, keepers or harborers of any guard dog or dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on their premises, and at each entrance or exit to the area where such dog is confined, a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-13. - Abandonment, neglect or abuse of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon, neglect or abuse any domesticated animal within the city. Each person who knowingly abandons, neglects or abuses, or willingly permits such abandonment, neglect or abuse, or aids in the abandonment, neglect or abuse of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of the law shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-14. - Required permanent identification. 
It shall be the duty of every animal owner who has been convicted of abandonment, cruelty or neglect of an animal by a court of competent jurisdiction or owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal, to have the animal permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-15. - Dangerous and potentially dangerous animals. 
(a)  If the police chief, animal control officer or code enforcement officer learns of the existence of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, the police chief shall then cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner of the animal to appear before a judge of the city municipal court at a date and time certain, to conduct a hearing as to the appropriate classification of the animal. The police chief shall also immediately impound the animal believed to be dangerous or potentially dangerous. 
(b)  The court shall determine after a hearing if the animal is to be classified as a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal. In making its findings in this regard, the court shall enter a written order notifying the animal's owner and the police chief of its decision. 
(c)  The appeal of any order of the court concerning the classification of an animal as potentially dangerous or dangerous shall be by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
(d)  If the court classifies the animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous, and no appeal is filed, the owner shall be required to obtain an annual certificate of registration in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the DeKalb County Animal Control ordinance. No potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be released to its owners until such certificate is issued by the appropriate party. 
(e)  If the owner fails to obtain the certificate of registration as required by this chapter, the animal will not be released and will be euthanized. The animal shall not be euthanized if the owner appeals the court's classification order by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. In the event the owner appeals the court's order, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In such event, the animal will be housed at a licensed veterinarian's office or a licensed kennel and the cost of such detention shall be borne by the owner of the animal. In the event the city appeals the court's order, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In the event of an appeal by the city, the animal will be housed in the DeKalb County animal service center and the cost of such detention shall be borne by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-16. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous animal and potentially dangerous animal must obtain a certificate of registration for the animal from DeKalb County annually and pay an annual registration fee to be determined by the county. The requirements of this section apply to any animal living in the city that has been deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous by any other state, county or municipal court, hearing officer, or other authorized government agency. 
(b)  The certificate of registration shall be issued to the owner upon receipt of all of the following: 
(1)  Written evidence that the animal is permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and the police chief, or other authorized representative, within 15 days of an order classifying the animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous or within such later time as specified by a court of competent jurisdiction or within 15 days of the conclusion of any appeal of a court's order that upholds the classification of an animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous; 
(2)  A copy of a current policy of insurance in the amount of $25,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state, insuring the owner of the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; or a copy of a current surety bond in the amount of $25,000.00, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state, payable to any person injured by the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; 
(3)  Written or photographic proof that the animal will be confined as defined in section 6-7 and 6-17 when allowed outdoors; and 
(4)  Written evidence that the animal has been sterilized by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the police chief, or designated representative, immediately if the animal dies or has been sold or given to another person. If the animal dies, the body must be available for microchip scanning to provide positive identification of the dangerous animal or potential dangerous animal. If the animal is sold or given to another person, the current owner listed on the most current certificate of registration must provide the police chief, or designated representative, with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner within 30 days of the sale or transfer of such animal. New owners are subject to all requirements of this Code upon transfer of such animal. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal must notify the police chief, or designated representative, in writing immediately upon changing his/her address. Such written notice shall provide the owner's new address and telephone number. The owner shall promptly obtain a new certificate of registration reflecting the new address if such address is located within the city. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the police chief, or designated representative, in writing immediately upon moving the dangerous animal or potential dangerous animal into the city. Such written notice shall provide the address and telephone number of the owner and the owner shall immediately obtain a certificate of registration for the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-17. - Confinement of potentially dangerous and dangerous animals. 
(a)  Animals that are classified as potentially dangerous or dangerous shall have adequate shelter and be confined in accordance with the requirements of this section. Confinement shall consist of a fenced area on the owner's property. Within this fenced area, the owner shall provide a structure to house the animal that is completely enclosed with secure sides and a secure top. The sides of the fence must be buried two feet into the ground, sunken onto a concrete pad or securely attached to a wire floor. The door or gate to the fence must be equipped with a working lock. In addition, the minimum open space requirements within the fenced area shall be the same as set forth in section 6-7. All fencings shall be of industrial gauge type. 
(b)  The owner of an animal that has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous or dangerous must post signs on all means of ingress and egress to the real property that read "Dangerous Animal On Property" or "Potentially Dangerous Animal On Property" which shall be no smaller than eight and five-tenths by 11 inches. 
(c)  Whenever outside its fenced area, but on the owner's property, an animal classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be attended by the owner, restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed six feet in length. 
(d)  No dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall be permitted off the property of its owner unless accompanied by the owner, muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent biting of person or animals and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed six feet in length. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal that has been declared by a court to be dangerous or potentially dangerous shall make the animal and the area of confinement available for periodic, unannounced inspections by the police chief to ensure compliance with the confinement requirements of this section, provided the owner consents to such entry and inspection. If consent is not obtained, the police chief, or designated representative, shall obtain an inspection warrant prior to any inspection in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-18. - Transportation of animals in open air vehicles. 
If transporting an animal in an open-air vehicle, the animal must be secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or having the ability to extend over the edge of the vehicle that could result in a injury or strangulation of the animal while the vehicle is in motion. If the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal, requirements of this section are in addition to requirements outlined in section 6-17. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-19. - Hazardous animals. 
No person shall own, keep, harbor, house, or permit to be kept, harbored or housed, a hazardous animal within the city, unless granted prior written approval from the police chief, or designated representative. Written approval may be granted upon presentation of photographic proof that the animal will be kept adequately restrained or confined as is common for the species. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-20. - Right of entry. 
The police chief, or designated representative, including a DeKalb County Animal Control Officer, may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the police chief shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-21. - Ownership. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, sell, trade, swap or give away animal within the real property limits of the police department parking area, or surrounding grounds. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give away or sell any animal on any public roadway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-22. - Sterilization. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner and/or animal facilitator of a dog or cat adopted from DeKalb County or any other adoption agency to have the dog or cat sterilized. Puppies and kittens must be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian within six months of the date of adoption. Adult dogs and cats must be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days of the date of adoption. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or cat declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal to have the animal sterilized. Such sterilization must be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days of a final order of a court of competent jurisdiction declaring the animal to be a potentially dangerous animal, or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-23. - Transient animals. 
A dog, cat, or ferret shipped or transported through the city or entering the city for less than 15 days shall be exempt from licensing fees and collar and tag sections of this chapter. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. In addition, proof of a current rabies vaccination or health certificate for such animal must be available for inspection by the police chief, or designated representative, at any time the animal is within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-24. - Violations and enhanced penalties for dangerous animals. 
(a)  A dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal may be immediately impounded by any DeKalb County or city police officer, code enforcement officer or animal enforcement officer if such animal or its owner has violated any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the police chief, or designated representative, immediately if the animal is on the loose, unconfined, or has attacked a human or another animal and failure to so notify the police chief, or designated representative, shall be a violation of this chapter by the owner of the animal. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to possess within the city a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction of any violation of this chapter by a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal or its owner, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(e)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of this chapter by a dangerous animal or its owner, the court may order the dangerous animal to be euthanized. 
(f)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction for a violation of section 6-11, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(g)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 24-month period of time, as measured from the date of issuance of previous court summonses for which convictions were obtained, for a violation of section 6-8, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(h)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction for a violation of subsection 6-6(3), the court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(i)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 24-month period of time, as measured from the date of issuance of previous court summonses for which convictions were obtained, for a violation of subsection 6-6(4), the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(j)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction of a violation of section 6-12, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(k)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period of time, as measured from the date of issuance of previous court summonses for which convictions were obtained, for a violation of section 6-17, the court shall require the owner to provide additional confinement, as outlined in subsection 6-17(a). The additional confinement requirements shall apply regardless of whether the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-25. - Animal enforcement by the county. 
(a)  Except as otherwise in conflict with provisions of this article, the city hereby adopts the DeKalb County Animal Control Code. 
(b)  The county will retain all fees collected in accordance with the animal control code with the exception of any fines assessed by the city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Secs. 6-26—6-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 2, adopted January 24, 2011, redesignated the former sections 6-21 and 6-22 as sections 6-30 and 6-31. The historical notation of these sections has been preserved for reference purposes. Section 3 of said ordinance repealed the former section 6-23, which pertained to removal of canine fecal matter and derived from Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 4, § 3. 

Sec. 6-30. - Cruel treatment of animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall willfully place within reach of any domestic animals any substance that is poisonous or harmful to the animal. 
(b)  No person shall willfully and unjustifiably kill or injure any domestic animal other than livestock maintained for food purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 4, § 1; Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 2, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-31. - Disposal of deceased animals. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon his premises or upon the premises of any other person or allow any dead animal to remain upon his premises or any dead animal belonging to the person to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of same or causing the animal to be properly removed or disposed of within 24 hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 4, § 2; Ord. No. 2011-01-05, § 2, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-32. - Animal nuisances. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The keeping or harboring of any companion animal, as defined in the City of Dunwoody Zoning Ordinance, whether licensed or not, which by its bodily waste odor, unsanitary condition or habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs the comfort, peace or quiet of nearby property or which would cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. Such nuisance shall be abated in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure for the enforcement of the prohibition of subsection (1) above, as well as provide that every person owning or occupying premises where any companion animal is kept shall keep the place in which such animal is kept in a clean and sanitary condition and free of bodily waste and odor. Any property found to be maintained, used or allowed to be maintained or used in violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(3)  The declaration of a nuisance and the procedures for abatement set forth in this section shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. Further, this chapter shall not preempt or preclude a person from filing a civil lawsuit seeking to abate as a private nuisance an animal that causes annoyance or discomfort to such person by such animal's bodily waste odor, unsanitary condition or habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning or intent: 
Animal that habitually howls, yelps, barks or makes noise does not include an animal that howls, yelps, barks or makes noise by reason of provocation by a person other than the animal's owner. 
Complaint means either: 
(1)  A writing in which it is asserted by three or more persons having separate residences in a neighborhood that an animal is a public nuisance by reason of its bodily waste odor, unsanitary condition or habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise; or 
(2)  A writing in which it is asserted by one or more residents in a neighborhood that an animal is a public nuisance by reason of its bodily waste odor, unsanitary condition or habitual howling, yelping, barking, or other noise, and 
a.  Such resident(s) can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the code compliance official that the resident(s) has made a good faith effort to obtain the signatures of other residents in the neighborhood or can demonstrate that it is not possible to obtain such other signatures, as in the case where there are less than three occupied residences in the neighborhood, and 
b.  Such resident(s) has provided to the satisfaction of the code compliance official adequate and competent evidence in support of the claim that the subject animal is a public nuisance. 
Owner means the owner, keeper, person or persons having custody, control or possession of an animal. 
Public nuisance or nuisance means the keeping or harboring of any companion animal, defined in the City of Dunwoody Zoning Ordinance, whether licensed or not, which: 
(1)  By habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs the peace and quiet of nearby property or which would cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area; or 
(2)  By its bodily waste odor or other unsanitary condition such as, but not limited to, insect infestation, would cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area. 
(c)  Notice to owner to abate nuisance. 
(1)  Whenever a complaint has been filed with the code compliance official, he/she shall determine whether the complaint appears to set forth a valid complaint of a public nuisance according to this section. If the code compliance official determines that the complaint appears to be valid, he/she shall: 
a.  Notify the owner that the complaint has been received; and 
b.  Investigate whether the animal in question constitutes a public nuisance by reason of its bodily waste odor, unsanitary condition or habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise. 
(2)  Following such investigation, if the code compliance official determines that the animal in question constitutes a public nuisance by reason of its bodily waste odor, unsanitary condition or habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise, the code compliance official shall notify the owner that the animal is a public nuisance and that such nuisance must be abated within a reasonable time as determined by the code compliance official. Such a time may not be more than 30 days. 
(3)  If the owner fails to abate the public nuisance within the time specified by the code compliance official, he/she may issue a citation to the owner for violation of this section. 
(e)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Failure to comply. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal that has been deemed to be a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this section to fail to comply with the requirements set forth in this section. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue after notification to cease and desist shall constitute a separate offense and each subsequent violation shall be punishable as provided in the City Code. 
(2)  Ownership of animals. Any person convicted in the Dunwoody Municipal Court of violating or permitting violations of any provision of this section shall, upon a subsequent conviction, be subject to a mandatory six-month probationary sentence, that may not be suspended, where one condition of such probation shall be that said person shall be prohibited from keeping or harboring within the city an animal of the type, species, group or family to which the conviction applies (including the animal initially causing the nuisance) for the duration of such probation. Violation of this probationary condition during the probation term shall be cause for revocation of said probation for the duration of the sentence. 
(3)  Violations. Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(4)  Enforcement. Any provision of this section may be enforced by the police department or the code compliance official. 
(5)  Penalties and remedies cumulative. The penalties and remedies specified herein shall not be exclusive but shall be cumulative with all other remedies at law or in equity. The city may, in its discretion, elect to pursue any one or more of the penalties or remedies provided for herein, in chapter 22 of this Code relating to nuisance abatement, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(f)  Exceptions. The provisions contained in this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any dog while utilized by any police department or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police work; or 
(2)  Any licensed animal service establishment as defined in the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12-17, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; minimum standard codes to have uniform application throughout the state, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-25, 8-2-28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council to enforce and adopt the state minimum standard codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). The adoption includes the latest edition of the following state minimum standard mandatory codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs: 
International Building Code 
International Fuel Gas Code 
International Mechanical Code 
International Plumbing Code 
National Electrical Code 
International Fire Code 
International Energy Conservation Code 
International Residential Code 
(b)  The following appendices of said codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 

 
(c)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council to enforce and adopt the following codes; the latest editions of the state minimum standard permissive codes as adopted by the state department of community affairs, or other applicable agencies: 
International Property Maintenance Code 
(d)  For all permits granted or approved by the county under earlier versions of any or all of these codes, it is hereby declared to be the intention of the council to enforce the code under which the project was approved. 
(e)  Amend the following adopted codes to reflect missing or jurisdictional information referenced through adoption: 
(1)  International Building Code: 
(i)  Revise section 1612.3 to include "The flood insurance study for DeKalb county countywide FIRM and FIS effective 5-07-2001." 
(ii)  Adopt Appendix A (amended as follows): 
1.  Appendix A - Employee Qualifications 
2.  A101.1. Building Official. 
The building official shall have at least ten (10) years' experience or equivalent as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, five (5) years of which shall have been supervisory experience. The building official shall be certified as a Certified Building Official (CBO) through a recognized certification program. The building official shall hold all certifications and credentials of trades overseen or departments supervised (i.e. Certified Housing Code Official for Code Enforcement Supervision). 
a.  Building Officials not certified as certified (housing, building, plumbing, electrical or mechanical) code officials may have chief inspectors for each trade maintaining their corresponding trade certifications. 
3.  A101.2. Chief Inspector. 
The building official can designate supervisors to administer the provisions of the International Building, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, International Fuel Gas Code and ICC Electrical Code. Each supervisor shall have at least 10 years' experience or equivalent as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, five years of which shall have been in a supervisory capacity. They shall be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade. 
4.  A101.3. Inspector and plans examiner. 
The building officials shall appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized by the jurisdiction. A person shall not be appointed or hired as inspector of construction or plans examiner who has not had at least five (5) years' experience as a contractor, engineer, architect, or as a superintendent, foreman or competent mechanic in charge of construction. The inspector or plans examiner shall be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade. 
a.  If Inspectors or plans examiners lack certifications for specific trades then the Building Official must have those certifications and supervise all inspections or plan reviews performed accordingly. The Inspector or plan reviewer is expected to be in active pursuit of obtaining lacking certifications within a time frame specified by the jurisdiction. 
5.  A101.3.5. Code Enforcement/Code Compliance Personnel. 
a.  Code Enforcement Official, or supervisory personnel under the direction of the building official must obtain and maintain Level II certification from GACE as well as ICC certification as a Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector and zoning inspector. Certified Code Enforcement Officer designation from the American Association of Code Enforcement is preferred. 
b.  Code Enforcement officers under the direction of the building official must obtain and maintain a Level I certification from GACE, which should be required for every Code Enforcement Officer as well as ICC certification as a Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector. 
c.  The Building Official and all inspectors and Plan reviewers must maintain their certifications as active in accordance with the certification program issuing the certification. 
6.  A101.4. Termination of employment is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(iii)  Construction Classification and Building Height. Any new building or structure designed or intended to be more than three (3) stories in height in any respect and which individually or in aggregate with other principal buildings or structures on the same site exceeds 200,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area (GFA), within the confined exterior walls of the structures whether occupiable or non-occupiable, shall, irrespective of any conflicting allowances or provisions of any other standard, code or ordinance having force and effect in the corporate limits of the City of Dunwoody Georgia, be of Type I or Type II construction defined in Chapter 6 of the 2012 International Building Code as amended by the State of Georgia. This regulation shall not be used to relax or reduce any requirement in Table 503, Allowable Building Heights and Areas, or any other Section of the current adopted International Building Code. 
(2)  International Plumbing Code: 
(i)  Revise Section 305.6.1; insert "12 inches." 
(ii)  Revise Section 305.9 to include "Components of a plumbing system installed along alleyways, in yards, or lawns, driveways, parking garages or other locations exposed to damage shall be recessed into the ground, wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner." 
(iii)  Waiver for an exemption to the requirements for the installation of high efficiency plumbing fixtures relative to any new construction and to the repair or renovation of an existing building may be given under the following conditions: 
1.  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
2.  When such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or shower heads required by this part were installed; 
3.  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
4.  When units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by person with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles 
(3)  National Electrical Code: 
(i)  When a residential service change is installed, all receptacle outlets that are required under the current state adopted electrical code to be GFI outlets shall be modified to provide such protection, including bathrooms, kitchen counters, and outdoor receptacles. 
(ii)  When a residential service change is installed, all smoke alarms required for new construction must be installed per the requirement in the adopted residential code. 
(iii)  A reinspection permit and reinspection shall be required before power is restored to any residence or building where power has been disconnected for six months or more. 
(4)  International Residential Code: 
(i)  Table 301.2(1) in chapter 3 shall be completed by adding the following information to the blank spaces: 
(1)  Ground snow load (lbs. Per square foot)—8. 
(2)  Wind speed (fastest mile)—90. 
(3)  Seismic design category B. 
(4)  Weathering—moderate. 
(5)  Frost line depth—Yes, 12" minimum. 
(6)  Termite damage—Yes, very heavy. 
(7)  Winter design temp. for heating facilities—22 F. 
(8)  Ice Barrier Underlayment Required—No. 
(9)  Flood Hazards—Yes. 
(10)  Air Freezing Index—225. 
(11)  Mean Annual Temperature—55 F to 60 F. 
(f)  It is the declared intention of the council to adopt and enforce the rules and regulations of the safety fire commissioner chapter 120-3-3 "Rules and Regulations for the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards" as specified in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4. 
(g)  It is the declared intention of the council to adopt and enforce the rules and regulations of the safety fire commissioner chapter 120-3-20 "Access to and use of Public Facilities by Handicapped Persons" as specified in O.C.G.A. § 30-3-7(G). 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 1, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-03-01, § 1, 3-26-2012; Ord. No. 2014-12-19, § 1, 12-8-2014; Ord. No. 2015-01-01, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-08-11, § 1, 8-22-2016) 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT OF ADOPTED CODES 

Sec. 8-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as the construction codes or "this code." 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 8-22. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as "service systems." 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 8-23. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(8)  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in section 8-1(b) shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 8-24. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the state minimum standard codes for new construction shall be as follows, unless otherwise required by this section: 
(1)  When the estimated cost of the new work is less than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the existing system or building, the new work shall be brought in to conformance with the requirements of the state minimum standard codes for new construction. 
(2)  When the estimated cost of the new work is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the existing system or building, the entire system or building shall be made to conform to the requirements of the state minimum standard codes for new construction. 
(3)  For essential service facilities occupancy category IV type buildings as defined by the state minimum standard codes for new construction, when the estimated cost of the new work is equal to or greater than 30 percent of the replacement cost of the existing system, the entire system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the state minimum standard codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official and the specific requirements of the occupancy. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(d)  Existing installations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, buildings, structures, plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and applicable codes at the time of its installation, and no hazard to life, health or property is created by such building, structure or system. 
(e)  Buildings applicable to property maintenance and fire codes. All existing buildings are subject to the requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code or the International Fire Code, as applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 8-25. - Building department. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department, and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. The duties of the department may be contracted out in full to a third party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the construction board of adjustment and appeal, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to he kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 5) 
Sec. 8-26. - Building official. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes which are consistent with their intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall he in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Removal of a stop work order authorized under any city code without the approval of the building official shall be considered a violation of section 24-5 and carries a fine of up to $1,000.00 for each offense. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 6; Ord. No. 2015-01-01, § 2, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 8-27. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The owner, or his authorized agent, shall sign the application. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 calendar days after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 180 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall he specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to he prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. 
a.  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 in A2) or more in area. 
b.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
c.  Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance-rated wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance-rated floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction, and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads, and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and, upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and, pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect, or locate said building; and it shall he the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 calendar days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 calendar days after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 calendar days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall certify, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. Valuations will be based on current ICC building valuations for the size and type of construction unless otherwise stated within the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that, after investigation, he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and any required reinforcing in place and secured prior to placement of concrete. A site plan or staking survey prepared and sealed by a registered engineer or land surveyor shall be submitted at the time of the residential footing or slab inspection and prior to the pouring of same. Survey shall show the setbacks from all property lines. Setbacks shall comply with all minimum zoning ordinance requirements and/or legally acquired variances. 
2.  Slab inspection. To be made before slab concrete is poured in on any slab on grade foundations, if required 
3.  Damproofing inspection. To be made prior to backfill of foundation walls. 
4.  Residential floodplain inspections. For construction permitted in areas prone to flooding as established by table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Building Code, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official shall require submission of a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, prepared by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, as required in Section R324 of the International Residential Building Code. 
5.  Roof felt and sheathing inspection. To be performed on exterior wall sheathing prior to installation of vapor barrier to ensure compliance with fastening scheduling and wall bracing requirements per current adopted building codes. Metal drip edge shall be installed at all roofing edges of roofs coverings of Asphalt shingles. 
NOTE: Dunwoody falls within the moderate to high Hail zone outlined in the Residential Code Figure 903.5, which only permits a single layer of Asphalt roof shingles to be installed. 
6.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, masonry, all framing, fire blocking, fire stopping, draft stopping and bracing are in place, and after the plumbing, mechanical and electrical rough inspections are approved. 
7.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the distribution panel is in place and all electrical conductors and associated device boxes are installed and prior to covering or concealment or the installation of fixtures, wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Temporary power inspection. Temporary approval for connection to the utility can be granted prior to completion. This temporary connection is only valid for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
4.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the distribution pipe and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes or concealment of any plumbing materials. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See Section 312 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. No mechanical equipment or ductwork is allowed to be installed in any building that is not adequately sealed from the weather. Any ductwork or equipment contaminated by storm water must be replaced to prevent a potential mold issue or health hazard, as recommended by the DCA Mold Task Force. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, operational and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances has been connected. 
2.  Temporary gas connection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed and inspected. At least one fixture or gas appliance should be installed and connected to provide adequate means to test and purge the system. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Insulation inspection. To be made after all rough inspections are complete and approved and before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of the exterior insulation envelope and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
2.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. Verification of compliance with all state amendments for the energy code in regards to sealing and compliance certificates where applicable and properly posted. 
(7)  Inspections requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide safe access to and a safe means for inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by this chapter. 
(8)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(9)  Re-inspection fee. Re-inspection fees shall be required in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the governing authority when work performed is required to be re-inspected due to the following reasons: 
a.  The re-inspection is not approved due to a failure to correct a previously noted code violation on a prior inspection; 
b.  The job is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed; 
c.  The building or structure is not accessible and inspection cannot be performed; 
d.  Work to be inspected has been covered or concealed and proper inspection cannot be performed; 
e.  Prior issuance of a stop work order requires re-inspection. 
(10)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(11)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(12)  Fire barrier inspection. Where fire resistance rated construction is required between dwelling units, between various occupancies or due to location on property, the building official shall require an inspection after all wallboard is installed but prior to joints and fasteners being taped and finished. Multiple layers shall be inspected individually. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuance of certificate. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming the authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for non-residential buildings or portions thereof for a specified period of time when it has been determined by the building official or designee that no outstanding Code violations or deficiencies exist and the building may be safely occupied for the use and time requested. A request for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing and show or express demonstrated need. Temporary certificate of occupancy certificates are not required for installation of office furniture or rack shelving; however, this must be approved by the building official or field inspector in written form. 
1.  Issuance. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for stated purposes only when construction has not been fully completed and all final inspections have not been performed. 
2.  Revocation. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be revoked at the option of the building official for any and/or all of the following reasons: 
(i)  Violation of any building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations; 
(ii)  Failure to complete any stage of construction and/or site improvements required by the building official in a timely manner; 
(iii)  Unauthorized occupancy or use of any part or portion of the building or structure other than the area or portion for which a temporary certificate of occupancy has been granted; 
(iv)  Any other conditions that may affect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. 
d.  Existing building occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
e.  Revocation. The building official shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this Code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. The certificate of completion does not grant authority to occupy a building or structure or change the type of occupancy or nature of use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official, and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. This temporary connection is only valid for a period not to exceed 90 calendar days. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by a stamped and signed affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 7; Ord. No. 2012-03-01, § 2, 3-26-2012; Ord. No. 2018-05-09, § I, 5-21-2018) 
Sec. 8-28. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 8) 
Sec. 8-29. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. The council shall establish a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals. Members shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Composition; terms. The board shall be comprised of not fewer than three and not more than five persons. Each member shall serve a term of three years and may serve consecutive terms. 
(2)  Quorum and voting. A majority of actual board members establishes a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(3)  Secretary of the board. The building official shall appoint a secretary for the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(4)  Qualifications. As provided above, the council shall establish qualifications for board members. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustments and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations there under have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. 
a.  The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
1.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
2.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
3.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service system. 
4.  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system. 
5.  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
b.  In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 20 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official and shall state with specificity the grievance(s) of the appellant and detail objections to specific determinations and decisions of the building official. Any objection and grievance not specifically addressed in the notice of appeal shall be considered waived by the appellant. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Establishment. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(2)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(3)  Training/education. The board shall meet at least once a year for a training session that will cover code, procedures or city ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 9; Ord. No. 2012-03-01, § 3, 3-26-2012; Ord. No. 2014-08-10, § 4, 8-11-2014) 
Sec. 8-30. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 2, § 11) 
Secs. 8-31—8-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRENCHING 

Sec. 8-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions as results of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth to width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing, or controlling an excavation or trench. 
Trench means a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of the trench is not greater than 15 feet. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 8-50. - Prohibition. 
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in the compliance with the provisions of this article and in compliance with any applicable laws of the state or of the United States or any rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 2) 
Sec. 8-51. - Adoption of federal regulations. 
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly part 1926, subpart P-Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring, sections 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, 1926.653 of the Code of Federal Regulations (29 CFR 650 et seq.), as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended are adopted as a part of this article the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 3) 
Sec. 8-52. - Certificate required. 
(a)  No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench unless such person holds a valid certificate evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. 
(b)  In the event any person who holds a valid certificate from the city is found to be in violation of the safety standards or requirements on any job site, the certificate may be revoked after notice and hearing as herein provided. In the event of revocation, the certificate may be reissued one time upon repeat by the person of the educational program required for issuance of the initial certificate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 4) 
Sec. 8-53. - Permit required. 
(a)  No excavation or trenching shall be performed until a permit or authorization for same has been obtained from the city. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the job site. 
(b)  No permit or authorization shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 5) 
Sec. 8-54. - Inspection. 
The city shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards herein adopted. The inspectors may operate pursuant to a contract between the city and a third-party entity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 6) 
Sec. 8-55. - Violations. 
Violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 7) 
Sec. 8-56. - Appeals. 
Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal in a manner consistent with this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 3, § 8) 
Secs. 8-57—8-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-86. - Maintenance of proper sanitary conditions on premises required; procedures; enforcement. 
(a)  Every person, whether owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, holding, or occupying property in the city shall, at all times, maintain the property, whether a vacant lot or otherwise, in a clean and sanitary condition, keeping all weeds cut and wastepaper, trash and other rubbish of every sort cleaned off of the property. Said duty to maintain property in a clean and sanitary condition shall include the duty to cut and remove undergrowth, such as kudzu, briars, weeds in excess of ten inches in height, honeysuckle, other vines and seedlings, whenever such undergrowth becomes a nuisance to persons residing in the area or operating businesses in the area. If such undergrowth exists upon an unimproved lot, the community development director may reduce the extent to which the property must be maintained in such condition, provided there are no imminent threats to public health and safety. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the community development director or a designee thereof to give five days' written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and take reasonable steps to deliver in person to any owner of property or other person violating this section to appear before the city council to show cause why these provisions have not been complied with. In addition, the community development director or a designee shall immediately post a notification upon the property in violation of this section in order to provide visual notification to property owners for a period of five consecutive days. 
(1)  In case of inability to contact owners in other manners prescribed above, posted notice shall serve as the official notice for the city council hearing on this matter. 
(2)  After a hearing, if it is deemed by the council that this section has not been complied with, such owner or other person shall be given five days to comply, and, if he fails or refuses to do so, the public works director shall thereupon cause the work to be done. 
(3)  For purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, as provided for herein, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon, unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property; that owner shall be responsible for said violation. 
(4)  The council may, by majority vote, refer any and all cases described in this section to the municipal court, and all hearings heretofore described as being before the council may be before the municipal court if the council decides. 
(c)  When the public works director has caused weeds to be cut from any premises, or wastepaper, trash, or other rubbish removed, a notice shall be prepared assessing the cost of the cutting of those weeds, cleaning and rendering sanitary such vacant lot or other property against the owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, occupying, or controlling the property. The cost of such action shall be a debtor lien upon the property so cleaned and rendered sanitary and a debt against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. The debtor lien shall date from the completion of the work on the property as declared under city council ordinance. 
(d)  A written statement shall be furnished by the city clerk to the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment provided for herein showing the amount of the assessment. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment to pay the city, within 30 days after the receipt of the statement, the entire amount of the assessment against the property and the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. 
(e)  Any owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of property subject to assessment as provided herein who fails or refuses to pay to the city the amount of such assessment at the expiration of 30 days after the service of the notice of statement provided above, the city clerk shall issue an execution bearing date of its issuance in the name of the mayor of the city and specifying the purpose for which it is issued against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property subject to the assessment and also against the property of the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property upon which the work in question is performed. The execution shall assert and be a lien against the property from the day of the completion of the performance of the work hereinbefore described and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date on which it is issued. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(f)  The execution issued under these provisions shall be delivered to the chief of police or a designee thereof who shall execute the same by levying upon and selling the property described therein, or so much thereof as may be necessary for the amount due the city from the doing of such work, together with all costs that may accrue thereon. The law applicable to the sales under other executions issued by this city shall apply to the levy, notice, advertisement and sale made under the execution, and the levying officer shall have authority to execute a deed to the purchaser when the property is sold and shall deliver the possession thereof to the purchaser within the time required by law as under tax executions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 8-87. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city for purposes of the building code shall be the same as is provided in this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 8-88. - Application of the International Fire Code. 
The International Fire Code shall apply to all existing buildings and subjects all existing buildings to a periodic inspection for compliance with the adopted fire code. The Georgia Amendment to the International Fire Code, designated as section 101.3 (Purpose and Intent) of the code, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 7, art. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 8-89. - Multifamily rental housing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified building inspector means a person inspecting for compliance with the various adopted codes who is a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or holds one of the following certifications from the International Code Council (ICC): property maintenance and housing inspector, housing rehabilitation inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
Code compliance certificate means a certificate, substantially similar to the inspection report provided by the city, executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in the inspection report. 
Inspection report means the report attached to the code compliance certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each unit. 
Lease means any written or oral agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
Multifamily rental dwelling means any multifamily structure, multifamily building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to, multiple-family dwellings, multiple-family apartment units, boardinghouses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
Multifamily rental unit means any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
Occupancy means all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises. 
Owner-occupied means any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multifamily rental units. Example: Two-family dwelling, owner occupies one flat; rooming house, owner occupies one unit. 
Premises means any lot or piece of land inclusive of the multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
(b)  Fee and certificate required. 
(1)  Occupation tax. All owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units within the city that receive income for use of four or more such dwellings or units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city (i) shall be subject to an occupation tax as provided in this policy and (ii) shall provide to the city, prior to receiving an initial occupational tax certificate under this policy, a code compliance certificate covering 100 percent of the multifamily rental units within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of the certification. Said code compliance certificate shall be certified by the owner that all units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. For the initial year of construction, this section shall not apply to new construction or rehabilitation of a multifamily rental dwelling provided proper permits are obtained from the city. 
(2)  Inspection. Upon initial inspection of such dwellings or units, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the chief building official outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If such plan is accepted by the chief building official as reasonable and justified, an extension may be granted for up to one year for completion of repairs and compliance with this article. No extension shall be granted if life safety issues are involved and any such units shall not be leased until brought into compliance. 
(3)  Compliance certificate. After submission of the initial code compliance certificate, each owner shall submit a code compliance certificate annually, commencing on January 1, 2011, with their business license renewal. Such subsequent code compliance certificate shall cover at least 20 percent of the units, provided all units shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five years. All units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. Furthermore, exterior inspections shall cover at least 20 percent of the buildings, provided all buildings shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five years. All units inspected shall be listed individually and submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. 
(4)  Written record of inspection. Each owner and certified building inspector shall keep a written record of all inspections for each unit including the date of the inspection, items inspected and all violations, if any, observed. Such records shall be presented to the city within ten business days after such request is made in writing to the inspector. Failure to provide such records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for those units. 
(c)  Failure to provide code compliance certificate. 
(1)  Failure to provide the code compliance certificate as provided herein shall be a violation of this section and is subject to those penalties contained within chapter 1 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Failure to provide the code compliance certificate shall further, upon a judicial determination, be a condition constituting probable cause for, and may subject said multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental units to, inspection by the city building official at a fee as determined by the city council that covers all costs of such inspection by the city. Said inspection by the city, if required, shall be at a sole cost of the owner and failure to pay said cost shall result in a lien being placed on the premises as provided for collection of taxes. 
(3)  Failure to pay the occupational tax as provided herein shall be a violation of the City Code and is subject to those penalties set forth therein. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from enforcing the state minimum standard codes as provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Penalty for false certification and false inspection. 
(1)  An owner who knowingly participates in furnishing a code compliance certificate to the city which contains a false certification that all multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this Code for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the certification is shown to be false and can be fined as provided by this Code for each violation. 
(2)  A certified building inspector who furnishes an inspection report which knowingly contains fraudulent information that a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit meets the minimum housing standards of the city as shown by the inspection report provided by the city from which this ordinance is derived shall be guilty of a violation of the Dunwoody Code of Ordinances and the inspector's right to submit inspection reports to the city may be suspended for a stated period of time, up to five years, by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Certified building inspector requirements. All inspectors wishing to submit or participate in the apartment evaluation program must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The inspector must be a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or hold one of the following certifications from the International Code Council (ICC): property maintenance and housing inspector, housing rehabilitation inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
(2)  The inspector must submit a copy of his or her business license and applicable certification to the city to be placed on an approved inspector list prior to inspecting any apartment complex. 
(3)  The inspector must meet with the chief building official or the code compliance official upon approval prior to performing any services to comply with this section. 
(4)  Mandatory meetings will be called by the city which all inspectors participating in the program must attend. Ample notice will be provided by the city of no less than two weeks. 
(5)  The inspector must provide an inspection report or a certificate, similar to the inspection report provided by the city, executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in the inspection report. The inspector must sign and date the report upon completion. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04-12, § 1, 4-26-2010) 
Sec. 8-90. - Gate access. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  RFID means radio frequency identification and, for the purpose of this section, refers to a mode of access to open a gate in a gated community utilizing radio frequency waves to activate the gate's locking mechanism and opening the gate. 
(2)  SOS means siren operating sensor and, for the purpose of this section, refers to a sensor that triggers the opening of gated access as a result of the emergency vehicle siren. 
(3)  Emergency vehicle means any marked or unmarked law enforcement vehicle, fire truck, fire rescue staff vehicle, ambulance and/or ambulance staff vehicle and rescue units. 
(4)  Gated development means any residential development which may be fenced and has a secured gate located at the roadway entrance to the facility, preventing free access by the public. 
(b)  Each new or existing gated development, access to which is limited by security gate(s) which are unmanned or otherwise not physically attended by a person on a 24-hour basis shall be required to install an RFID/SOS gate access system on each roadway entrance gate to allow for silent radio frequency or siren-activated access by emergency vehicles. This requirement shall apply to all such gates that exist or are installed as part of the gated development, whether leading outside the development or internal to the development. 
(c)  The cost of the RFID/SOS system for existing gated developments shall be borne by the City of Dunwoody; the cost for new gated developments approved after the date of this section shall be borne by the gated development. The cost of installation and continuous maintenance of the system shall be the responsibility of the gated development. 
(d)  Existing gated developments shall have 12 months from the effective date of this ordinance [from which this section derives] to comply with the provisions of this section. Gated developments developed after the effective date of this ordinance [from which this section derives] shall comply with this section prior to or concurrent with installation of an unmanned security gate. For the purposes of this section, a gated development shall be considered an existing gated development if it has obtained construction plan approval prior to the effective date of this ordinance [from which this section derives]. 
(e)  Failure to install the required RFID/SOS gate access system in conformance with the provisions of this section shall be a violation of this ordinance [from which this section derives]. This section shall be administered by the Dunwoody Police Department. 
(f)  The provisions of this section are intended to insure minimum level of access by emergency personnel during emergencies and shall not be construed to guarantee the safety of a gated development during an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03-07, § 1, 3-23-2015) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES, LICENSES, AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Imposition and levy of occupational tax. 
(a)  Each person engaged in a business, trade, profession or occupation, whether with a location within the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupational tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(b)  Occupation taxes shall be based upon gross receipts in combination with profitability ratio and number of employees. The profitability ratio for the type of business will be determined from nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(c)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade or calling. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue or producing income. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without being limited to, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
License means a permit or certificate issued by the city that allows an entity to operate lawfully in the city. A license does not create any rights to operate in violation of any provision of this Code and it may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city at any time pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. This definition applies to any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Location or office means and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location, which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another, does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business. 
Practitioner of professions and occupants means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. This definition shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its municipal power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee does not include an administrative or registration fee. Regulatory fees do not include required occupation taxes for businesses and professions located in the city. 
Tax collector means an individual duly appointed and named as tax collector to serve in that capacity. In the absence of a duly appointed tax collector, the finance director or city manager may perform the duties of the tax collector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 2; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-3. - Business license required. 
(a)  Except as specifically exempted herein, all persons, firms, companies (including limited liability companies), corporations (including professional corporations) and other business entities, now or hereafter operating a business within the city, are hereby required to register their business or office, obtain an occupation tax certificate for their business or office, and pay the amount now or hereafter fixed as taxes and fees thereon as authorized under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location or has multiple business trade names, each trade name shall be considered to be separate for the purpose of the occupation tax, and the gross receipts of each will be returned on a form furnished by the finance department in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The occupation tax certificate shall serve as a business license. Additional business licenses may be required as established by the city. 
(d)  Stock or manufacturing companies or other companies, subsidiaries, agencies, district offices, branch offices, corporations or individuals, having either their business proper or their general branch offices located within the city, and either represented by the officers of the company, or any agent, for the purpose of soliciting patronage for the same, or for the transaction of any business pertaining thereto, shall be required to obtain a occupation tax certificate. 
(e)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees shall be required to file an application in each ensuing year. The applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses. 
(f)  Multifamily rental housing. Any application for an occupation tax certificate for multifamily rental housing shall comply with the City of Dunwoody's ordinance on property maintenance and housing standards for multifamily rental housing, contained in section 8-89, multifamily rental housing. Failure to comply with such ordinance and/or failure to provide any certificates or other documents required by such ordinance for each rental dwelling or unit shall be a violation of the City of Dunwoody Code of Ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 3; Ord. No. 2010-04-13, § 1, 4-26-2010) 
Sec. 10-4. - Estimation of gross receipts; filing of returns. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business transacted during the current calendar year and the number of employees to be employed in the business conducted. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, those businesses subject to the occupational tax shall, on or before March 15, file with the finance department a return showing all gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year ending on December 31. This return showing preceding calendar year gross receipts shall be used as the total of gross receipts for making payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The number of employees reported for the current year's business operations may be based upon the number of employees employed in the business conducted during the previous year. Applicants or owners engaged in the business shall be reported as employees of the business. For continuing businesses, the return required on or before March 15 showing the business' preceding year's actual gross receipts and number of employees shall also be used to adjust the estimated return for the same period. Should a business not continue or terminate during the year, such business shall notify the finance department's business occupation tax section and file a final return reporting the actual number of employees and those gross receipts not previously reported. 
(b)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(c)  If a business is to begin on or after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business and shall be based upon estimated gross receipts of the business from the date of commencement until the end of the calendar year. The business shall also file the required registration form. Differences shall be billed or credited to the business' occupation tax subsequent year's billing as required. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a lawyer begins or continues business after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the business begins or continues. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax within 120 days after December 31 shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on the 121st day of the year following the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupational taxes. In addition, a list of all delinquent lawyers may be sent to the State Bar of Georgia. The general penalty for continuing violations of this Code shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. Specifically, failing to comply with the article will not result in the city closing the business or penalizing the continued practice of law by fining, imprisoning or criminalizing noncompliance. 
(e)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have, nor shall the city require a business to pay an occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the business' gross receipts. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall pay an occupational tax for each principal office and each separate branch office located in the city based upon gross receipts derived from transactions with respect to property located within the city. Payment of the occupation tax shall permit the broker, the broker's affiliated associates and salespersons to engage in all of the brokerage activities described in O.C.G.A. § 43-40-1 without further licensing or taxing other than the state licenses issued pursuant to chapter 40 of title 43 of the O.C.G.A. 
(g)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in the state, occupation taxes include the gross receipts of business as defined in section 10-2. 
(h)  For purposes of this section, prima facie evidence of gross receipts generated during any period shall be a sworn statement under oath and penalty of perjury (affidavit) that the provided gross receipt information is true and correct as stated on the filed federal income tax return of the business for the applicable year, less allowed exemptions. If no federal tax return has been filed for the applicable year, the applicant must swear under oath and penalty of perjury that no federal tax return has been filed for the applicable year, and the gross receipts as presented to the city are true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge, ability and training. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 4; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-5. - Regulatory fee. 
A regulatory fee will be imposed on those applicable businesses listed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b) that the city deems necessary to regulate. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, adopted September 27, 2010, amended section 10-5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 10-5 pertained to administrative and regulatory fees, and derived from Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 5. 
Sec. 10-6. - Renewal returns and applications; due date; penalty for late payment. 
(a)  On or before March 15 of each year, businesses liable for occupation taxes levied under this article for the year shall file with the finance department's business occupation tax section, on a form furnished by the finance department, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year ending December 31. 
(b)  Occupational taxes on businesses continuing from the preceding year shall be due and payable on January 1 of each subsequent year. Occupational tax due from businesses continuing operation in the current year from the preceding year shall be considered delinquent if not paid by April 15 of each year. Any business failing to pay the occupational taxes within 120 days after January 1 shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fees due and interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on the 121st day of the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupation taxes and regulatory fees. 
(c)  If any person or business whose duty it is to obtain a registration in the city begins to transact or offers to transact any kind of business after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, such offender shall be assessed interest according to the rate as provided by state law and penalties under the provisions of section 1-6. 
(d)  The finance department may issue an execution for failure to pay taxes against the person so delinquent and against such person's property for the amount of the occupational tax required to be paid for the purpose of carrying on any of the businesses enumerated in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 6; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-7. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city, for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Professional occupation tax. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based-on number of employees and gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in this article; or 
(2)  $400.00 for the year 2009 and subsequent years, but a practitioner paying according to this shall not be required to provide information relating to the gross receipts of such practitioner. The tax is for each professional described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
(b)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by instrumentalities of the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to register or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 8; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-9. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; city and state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license next to the city occupation tax receipt in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep both the state license and the city occupation tax receipt there at all times while valid. 
(c)  Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry their occupational tax receipt either upon such person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in such business, and such person shall exhibit it to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a lawyer shall not be required to post the city occupation tax receipt. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 9; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-10. - Change of location. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the finance department of this move and shall submit the new address in writing on a form provided by the finance department prior to the day of the moving. A new receipt for the occupational tax will be issued for the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Transferability. 
Occupational receipts shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. Filing a new registration application and payment of applicable fees and taxes shall be required of the new owner of the business. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 11) 
Sec. 10-12. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of city registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 12) 
Sec. 10-13. - Inspections of books and records; audits; confidential information. 
(a)  The finance department, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books or records of any business for which returns have been based upon the number of employees and gross receipts. Upon demand of the finance department, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative or agent of the city within 30 days. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classified as agents for the purposes of this article. Failure of submission of such books and records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the occupation tax registration currently existing in the city. If it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of under reporting, additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed the interest as provided by state law and penalties provided for by this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no attorney shall be required to disclose any information that would violate the attorney/client privilege. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, information provided by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(c)  Information provided to the city by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 13) 
Sec. 10-14. - Business classifications for determining tax levy. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in business requiring the payment of occupational taxes is classified in accordance to the major line of business as defined by the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, United States Treasury Department, or Internal Revenue Service. The finance department shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biannual basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. 
(b)  Classifications by business profitability to be established by the city council are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article. All separate businesses engaged in more than one business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. 
(c)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts and number of employees returned to the city to the business' profitability classification established for each business type. The gross receipts tax shall include a flat rate of $125.00 for the first $20,000.00 of gross revenue, and a fee per employee. Gross revenues above $20,000.00 are taxed using a fee class table based on profitability. 
(d)  A copy of business classifications shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by all interested persons. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 14; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-15. - Casual and isolated transactions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions to register the business and pay occupational tax therefor, where the activity or commercial transactions: 
(1)  Involve personal assets; 
(2)  Are not the principal occupation of the individual; and 
(3)  Gross less than $12,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Street vendor, transient vendor or flea market vendor activities shall not be considered to be casual and isolated business transactions and shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 15) 
Sec. 10-16. - Exemption for disabled veterans, disabled indigent persons, certain organizations. 
(a)  Persons who qualify for a state veteran's or disabled indigent person's license shall be eligible for exemption from the city occupational tax fee. Any such person claiming an exemption shall secure evidence of qualification for the exemption from the proper authority and present it to the finance department. 
(b)  Organizations which are exempt from federal income taxation under the United States Internal Revenue Code shall be eligible for exemption from the city occupational tax. Any such organization claiming an exemption shall provide to the finance department a federal tax exemption letter showing the code section under which an exemption is claimed unless filing for exempt status with the IRS is not required (such as a church.) However, with respect to any activity for which an organization otherwise entitled to an exemption under this section shall be liable for federal income tax on unrelated business income or shall be deemed to be a feeder organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code, the exemption from payment of occupational taxes shall not be available. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the exemption from payment of city occupation taxes, an exempt person or business under this section shall comply with the same laws and regulations as are required of other registered businesses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 16; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-17. - Special classification. 
(a)  Registration and occupational tax payment is required from any satellite subscription television system. The term "satellite subscription television system" means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services utilizes a master antenna type system or earth dish system designed to receive and distribute satellite television signals; particularly, a system to provide service to one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership wherein any wiring necessary to operate the system does not cross adjacent non-owned property lines and does not cross city right-of-way. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person that is franchised by the city council to own and operate a cable system. 
(b)  Registration and occupational tax payment is required from any broadcast subscription television system. The term "broadcast subscription television system" means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services transmits premium programming from one or multiple sources by transmitting or retransmitting programs to the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 17) 
Sec. 10-18. - Denial, revocation or suspension; appeals. 
(a)  An occupation tax certificate may be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraud in the operation of the business or occupation he practices or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
(2)  The applicant or certificate holder is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(3)  The applicant or certificate holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent he is unable to perform his duties under the business or occupation; 
(4)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(5)  The applicant or certificate holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If, after having been granted a certificate, the applicant pleads guilty, is convicted of, or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(6)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(7)  The business or establishment is not authorized to operate within the city, or within the zoning district within which it is located, or is otherwise not in conformity with locational requirements of any of the city's ordinances; 
(8)  The business or establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(9)  The business or establishment has been found by a court of law to have been operating unlawfully; 
(10)  Any other violation of this article; or 
(11)  Violation of another statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation that governs the operation of the business in question. 
(b)  Within 45 days of the filing of a completed application, the finance department shall either issue an occupation tax certificate to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny an occupation tax certificate for one or more reasons set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(11) of this section. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The written notice shall also notify the applicant of the right to appeal said decision as designated in this section. 
(c)  Should the city manager or designee find cause for one or more reasons set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(11) of this section for an occupation tax certificate to be suspended or revoked, the city manager or designee shall notify the occupation tax certificate holder by written notice of intent to suspend or revoke said occupation tax certificate. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall state the grounds for the suspension or revocation of said occupation tax certificate and notify the holder of the right to appeal said decision as designated in this section. 
(d)  The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Should an aggrieved person or entity desire to appeal a decision under this article, the following procedure shall apply: a notice of appeal must be filed with the city manager or designee within 15 calendar days after receipt of the decision. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision of the city. The notice of appeal shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the time allowed, the right to appeal is lost. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the city manager or designee shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The notice shall specify the time, place and date, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the date the notice is issued, on which the mayor and city council, or such hearing officer or board as the mayor and council may designate, shall conduct a hearing on the city manager or designee's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the occupation tax certificate. Said hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the administrative hearing procedures as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(f)  The mayor and city council, or such hearing officer or board as the mayor and council may designate, shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke an occupation tax certificate, the decision shall become final unless the applicant or certificate holder files an appeal by petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court within 30 days of the date of the decision. In case of intent to deny, if the decision concludes that no grounds exist for denial, of the occupation tax certificate, the city tax collector shall, within three business days of the issuance of the decision, issue the occupation tax certificate to the applicant. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to attorneys in the practice of law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 18; Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-19. - Proration of fee. 
No license fee shall be prorated. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 19) 
Sec. 10-20. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The finance department shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of this state or the Constitution of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational tax. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 20) 
Sec. 10-21. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of the article to impose the taxes set forth in this article upon all businesses and practitioners operating in the city consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and laws of the state. In the event that the fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner, or taxes and fees shall be in excess of the maximum amount authorized by law, such taxes and fees shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 21) 
Sec. 10-22. - Amendment of article. 
This article may be amended so as to increase the occupation tax on any business or practitioner only after the conduct of at least one public hearing pertaining thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 23) 
Sec. 10-23. - Additional requirements for pain management clinics. 
(a)  Definition. "Dispense" shall mean to issue one or more doses of any drug in a suitable container with appropriate labeling for subsequent administration to, or use by, a patient. This definition excludes hospitals, surgery centers, in-patient care facilities, assisted living facilities, outpatient facilities operated or owned by a hospital system or pharmacy, and pharmacies. 
(b)  Each applicant for an occupation tax certificate under this article, or renewal of same, whose business dispenses, or intends to dispense, Schedule II, III, or IV drugs, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-34-23, shall state same on each original or renewal application for an occupation tax certificate and shall, along with its occupation tax return pursuant to this chapter, submit to the city the following documents: 
(1)  The name and DEA number of every licensed physician practicing, associated or with an ownership interest in the business, along with a copy of a valid license for each such physician; 
(2)  The business' website address, if available; 
(3)  List of locations of any other clinics or practices associated with or owned by the same parties as applicants; and 
(4)  List of the board of directors, officers and partners of the business and all persons with a financial interest in the business. 
(c)  A business described herein is not eligible for an occupation tax certificate in the city if any convicted felon owns, manages, has a financial interest in, or is a director, officer or partner of the business. A nolo contendere plea shall be considered as an adjudication of guilty for the purposes of this provision. 
(d)  A business described herein is not eligible for an occupation tax certificate in the city if any physician practicing, associated or with an ownership interest in the business is on probation or suspended by any medical board for issues related to dispensing drugs. 
(e)  A business described herein, and all physicians practicing, associated or with an ownership interest in the business must be registered with the State of Georgia Composite Medical Board as dispensing physicians, and provide proof of such registration prior to being eligible for an occupation tax certificate in the city. 
(f)  A business described herein shall follow the storage standards and requirements for drugs as set forth by the Georgia Drugs and Narcotics Agency in order to remain eligible to receive an occupation tax certificate or a certificate of occupancy, if one is required. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03-11, § 1, 3-28-2011) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 10-23 by Ord. No. 2011-03-11, Ord. No. 2010-09-34, § 1, adopted September 27, 2010, repealed the former section 10-23 in its entirety, which pertained to repealer, exceptions, and derived from Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 1, § 25. 
Secs. 10-24—10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS; DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS AND PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, adopted April 23, 2012, repealed former Art. II, §§ 10-50—10-57, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, Art. 2, §§ 1—8. 

Sec. 10-50. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accepted identification means an official document, most commonly in the form of a plastic coated/sealed card, issued for purposes of identification or driver's license. These documents must be issued by one of the 50 states or a branch of the U.S. military, i.e. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard, or current State of Georgia and counties of Georgia probation and parole cards. The identification must at a minimum bear a true photograph of the person presenting it, date of birth, description of the person, and an address for the person. 
Acquire means to purchase, exchange, transfer, collect, or otherwise obtain physical possession of regulated secondhand items from another person or entity not licensed as a secondhand dealer. 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means: 
(1)  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(2)  Any person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Deceptive business practice means: 
(1)  Any use or possession of a false weight or measurement, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity in connection with any scale or service; 
(2)  Any sale of, offer to sell or delivery of less than the represented quality or quantity; 
(3)  Any attempts to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity, when as buyer or broker, such person furnishes the weight or measure; 
(4)  Any service which is of an unreasonably lesser quality than the service offered or represented; 
(5)  Any other practice designated as unlawful by O.C.G.A. § 10-1-300 et seq.; 
(6)  Any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Employee means any person who works for a secondhand dealer, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not, and regardless of whether such person is treated as a W-2 employee or a Form 1099 contractor. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Interest in a secondhand dealership means any full or part ownership if the person involved, or any member of his or her family, is the outright owner of the secondhand dealership; a co-owner of the secondhand dealership; a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or part of the secondhand dealership; a stockholder, member, partner or individual with an ownership interest in any corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other legal entity organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of the secondhand dealership. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Occupation tax certificate means permission to operate a business pursuant to chapter 10, article I of the Code of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Pawnshop means the physical location at which a pawnbroker is licensed to operate. 
Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledgor or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time 
Permit means permission to be employed or work in a secondhand dealership or to be a secondhand dealer. 
Person means an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this Code section, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. "Pledged goods" shall not include choices in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
Regulated secondhand items means the following goods: 
(1)  Precious metal or gems; 
(2)  Goods made from precious metals or gems; 
(3)  Pledged goods; or 
(4)  Tangible property acquired by a pawnbroker. 
Secondhand dealer means any person whose business, in whole or in part, is dealing in acquiring, purchasing, selling, or trading regulated secondhand items, and such term expressly includes dealers in precious metals and gems and pawnbrokers. 
Secondhand dealership means the physical location at which a secondhand dealer is licensed to operate, and such term expressly includes pawnshops. 
Seller means the person from whom a secondhand dealer or employee acquired secondhand items or the person from whom a pawnbroker acquired pledged goods. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-52. - Annual permit required; other violations. 
No person shall acquire any regulated secondhand items or transfer any previously acquired regulated secondhand items as a secondhand dealer, or become an employee of a secondhand dealer, without a permit. It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer or employee to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for a permit required by this article; or 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-53. - Exempt transactions. 
The following transactions are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Transactions in which a non-profit entity, exempt from federal income tax pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Sections 501(c), 501(d), or 501(e), is a party; 
(2)  Transactions occurring at one-day auctions and/or permitted yard sales, unless a dealer in precious metals or gems or pawnbroker is a party to such transaction; and 
(3)  Transactions involving numismatic coins, unless a pawnbroker is a party to such transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-54. - Fixed physical location. 
No secondhand dealer or employee may operate except at a fixed permanent physical business location with an occupation tax certificate from the city; no secondhand dealer or employee may operate as a peddler or transient merchant. Permits acquired under this article are valid only for the location stated on the permit and said permit is not transferable from one location to another. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-55. - Secondhand dealer and employee permits. 
(a)  Qualifications. All secondhand dealers and employees, as defined herein, shall be not less than 18 years of age. Any person who has been convicted of or pled guilty to any felony, any crime involving theft or fraud, or any crime against property under the laws of this state, any other state of the United States, or any federal law shall not be eligible for a secondhand dealer or employee permit under this article until ten years after the completion by said person of the subject sentence. 
(b)  Disclosure. Every secondhand dealer and employee must disclose any ownership or interest in any other secondhand dealership, including any other pawnshop(s), whether it is located locally or out-of-state and must disclose the nature of such ownership or interest. 
(c)  Approval of employment. Before any person may work on the premises of a secondhand dealership, he shall file an application with the city finance department setting out the information required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section and submit an application fee as approved by resolution of city council. Each applicant must be fingerprinted by the Dunwoody Police Department. The city shall have 45 days to investigate the information submitted by the applicant. If the application information conforms to the requirement of this article, the city shall approve the applicant for a permit authorizing the person to be employed at a secondhand dealership. Upon such approval, the applicant may begin working on the regulated premises. It shall be the duty of the secondhand dealer to assure compliance with the provisions of this section. Every permit holder is required to notify the city of any change in information or circumstances which occurs after the original approval was granted. If approval is denied, the applicant may, within 15 days of the denial, appeal in writing to the city manager for reconsideration pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation of the occupation tax certificate or permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of the city, rules or regulations of the city, or conviction of any felony or any crime involving theft, fraud or a crime against property shall subject the employee to suspension or revocation of the permit, and in the case of an owner or secondhand dealer, shall subject the party to suspension or revocation of any permit authorized under this article and the occupation tax certificate for the secondhand dealership. Suspension and revocation procedures shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations established by this article. 
(e)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or occupation tax certificate holder of any secondhand dealership. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-56. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, including any association, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, trust, joint venture or other legal entity, desiring to obtain a permit to operate as a secondhand dealer as required by this article shall make application to the city through its designated representative. Additionally, if such person desires to operate as a pawnbroker, they must specifically provide for same in such application. 
(b)  Each application for a permit to operate as a secondhand dealer or as an employee for a secondhand dealer shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full true and legal name(s) and any other aliases or name changes used in the last ten years. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the individual applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the ten years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(5)  The secondhand dealer permit history of the applicant, including any other permits authorizing such applicant to operate as a dealer in precious metals or gems or as a pawnbroker, and whether, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory, the applicant has had such permit revoked or suspended. If such permit has been revoked or suspended, the applicant must state the reason, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  Whether the applicant is seeking to operate as a pawnbroker. 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall set forth the name, residence, address and dates of birth of the members, and it shall furnish a copy of its certificate filed with the secretary of state. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name, residence, address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate filed with the secretary of state. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation(s), limited liability company(s) or partnership(s) shall designate one of its officers, members or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated applicants shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual owner under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. No secondhand dealership shall operate under any name other than the name of the applicant and the name of the business as specified on the permit. 
(8)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to, in a court of competent jurisdiction, any felony, any crime involving theft or fraud, or any crime against property within the last ten years. A pleading of nolo contendere shall be considered as a conviction for the purposes of this provision. 
(9)  If the applicant is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name, properly recorded, must be provided. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name and the last annual report, if any, must be provided. 
(10)  Address of secondhand dealership to be regulated. 
(11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(12)  Nature and character of the business to be conducted, including whether the applicant intends to operate as a dealer in precious metal and gems or as a pawnbroker. 
(13)  Each application for a secondhand dealership or employee permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by the applicant and all ownership if for a secondhand dealership permit. 
(14)  Any ownership interest in any other secondhand dealership or pawnshop, whether it is located locally or out-of-state and the nature of such ownership interest. 
(15)  Statement that there are no fees, taxes, fines, utilities or other charges due to the city from the applicant. 
(16)  Any other information that may be required by the city, including any information required by state law, including, but not limited to, the source of financing for the business operation and proof of legal residence. 
(c)  Proof of an existing and valid occupation tax certificate from the city for the location of the proposed secondhand dealership, if not applied for concurrently. 
(d)  The applicant shall submit to a fingerprint-based background check in accordance with the provisions of section 2-62 of this Code. 
(e)  Upon completion of the review of the application by the city, no more than 45 days after filing of a completed application, the permit shall be granted by the city manager or designee if the application conforms to all the requirements of this article. If the application does not conform to all the requirements of this article, the city manager or designee shall deny said application by sending a written denial to the applicant(s) by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the reasons for same and informing the applicant(s) of their right to appeal said denial within 30 days of the denial letter pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 5, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 5, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-57. - Reasons for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. 
The city manager or designee may reject an application for a permit, or suspend or revoke a permit for the following reasons: 
(1)  The required fees or taxes have not been paid. 
(2)  The secondhand dealership is, or will be, located within 2,500 feet, front door to front door, by the shortest walking route, of another secondhand dealership. 
(3)  Application does not conform to all the provisions required by the article. 
(4)  The owner/employee has failed to fully cooperate with the investigation required by this article. 
(5)  Any owner/employee has had any license or occupation tax certificate issued under the police powers of any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision involuntarily suspended or revoked within the last ten years for any reason whatsoever. 
(6)  The owner/employee, as a previous holder of a license or occupation tax certificate to operate a secondhand dealership has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(7)  Any owner/employee has been convicted of or pled guilty to, in a court of competent jurisdiction, any felony, any crime involving theft or fraud, or any crime against property within the last ten years. A pleading of nolo contendere shall be considered as a conviction for the purposes of this provision. 
(8)  Any owner/employee has engaged in any deceptive business practice. 
(9)  Any owner/employee is less than 18 years of age. 
(10)  Any owner/employee has failed to obtain any paper or document necessary in pursuance of this business or this application as may be required by any officer, agency or department of the city, county, state or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the city, state or United States or has failed to be properly eligible for legal residence in this state or the United States. 
(11)  Any owner/employee has made any false statements in the application. 
(12)  The applicant or holder of the permit has violated any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-58. - Renewal of permits. 
Permits for secondhand dealers and employees may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. Each secondhand dealer must file a verified annual report showing the person's gross receipts from the business and the amounts paid to the employees for the preceding calendar year and such shall be submitted with the renewal applications. Renewal applications shall be submitted by January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested along with a fee to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-59. - Permit nontransferable. 
No secondhand dealer or employee permit may be sold, transferred or assigned to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permit holder is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without affecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit upon notification to the city shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner(s). 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-60. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Contents of record book. All secondhand dealers shall keep a book wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all regulated secondhand items, as specified in section 10-51, acquired by the secondhand dealer, including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks and numbers, and the name, address, and date of birth of the person from whom purchased or acquired and the date and hour of the purchase. These entries shall be made as soon as possible after the transaction is had, in no case more than one hour thereafter. 
(b)  The secondhand dealer shall require all sellers to show proper identification prior to acquiring any regulated secondhand item. Proper identification is defined as a government-issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. The secondhand dealer shall make a digital photograph of the identification and maintain in the same manner as other digital photographs required under this section. 
(c)  A digital photograph shall be made by the secondhand dealer or employee at the time of acquisition of any regulated secondhand item of the item and the item's serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the photograph if imprinted on the item. If the item was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the photograph shall show the entire item. All such digital photographs shall be submitted to the reporting system as indicated below. Further, a digital photograph of the seller's face, similar to those on accepted identification, shall be made at the time of each and every acquisition and submitted to the reporting system. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the seller's face along with the secondhand dealer's receipt and/or, if the secondhand dealer is a pawnbroker, the pawn ticket number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(d)  The secondhand dealer shall obtain from each seller the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which the event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The electronic digital fingerprint scanner will be the primary method of entry required. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the seller. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature shall be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained upon each occasion of acquisition. 
(e)  Inspection. The secondhand dealer shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years, and make them available for inspection and examination by the police department upon request. 
(f)  Every secondhand dealership shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system, who will, in turn, electronically transmit all transactions to the Dunwoody Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-61. - Entries to be numbered serially; property to be tagged. 
Every entry required to be made in the secondhand dealer's book required by section 10-60 shall be numbered serially, and the property described in the entry shall have attached to it a tag bearing the same serial number until the property is disposed of by sale, trade or other lawful means. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however, the secondhand dealer shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-62. - Acquiring articles with serial number mutilated or altered. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase or acquire any watch, clock, pistol, gun, automobile tire or battery or any other article commonly branded with a serial number upon which the number has been mutilated, altered, or removed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-63. - Daily reports to police; form and contents. 
Every secondhand dealer identified in this article shall make a daily report in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, which may be electronic, of all property purchased or acquired by the dealer during the 24 hours ending at 12:00 midnight on the date of the report. The reports shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Daily reports shall list all regulated secondhand items acquired, the transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the regulated secondhand items including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, and date of birth of the seller of the items, along with the date and time of the transaction. Unless otherwise provided, an electronic automated reporting system shall be utilized to transmit said reports. The secondhand dealer shall be required to register with the designated system within one week of receipt of a permit under this article. 
(2)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, or has not been employed, secondhand dealerships will be notified as soon as possible. Secondhand dealerships that incur electronic system failures or other events that would cause partial or complete loss of electronic reporting should notify the police department forthwith with the reason for the failure. In this event, the secondhand dealers will be required to make records of transactions on paper forms. A digital camera will be used to collect the required pictures and transferred to a CD for submittal, and a fingerprint ink pad will be used to collect fingerprints. The paper forms must include information as enumerated in this article. Secondhand dealers shall maintain a minimum three-day supply of these paper forms. On a daily basis, all transactions not reported in electronic automated reporting system, will be delivered to the police department by the secondhand dealer within two hours of the end of the business day for every day until the event has been corrected or electronic automated reporting system designated. 
(3)  The chief of police or his designee shall designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed, and any fee for use of same may be collected by the third party administrator of the automated reporting system, pursuant to the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-64. - Examination and inspection of articles by police; segregation of suspicious articles. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall at all times be subject to examination and inspection by the police department. If, upon the inspection, a police officer shall have reasonable cause to believe that any of the property is stolen, he shall segregate it. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the person in possession of the property to dispose of it, or in any manner mutilate, melt or disfigure it, until 15 days have elapsed from the date of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-65. - Property to be held after acquisition. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall be held for not less than 15 days, or longer if directed by the police department, before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. All property and/or titles must be kept on the premises. During such fifteen-day period, these secondhand items will be maintained in an area not accessed by customers. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-66. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to acquire any property of the kinds described in this article from any person under the age of 18 years, provided that any secondhand dealer will not be held subject to the provisions of this section if the person produces a valid identification, as defined in this article, showing he/she is at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-67. - Suspensions, revocations and appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The city manager may suspend or revoke a secondhand dealer or employee permit pursuant to the reasons stated in this article. If the city manager or designee intends to suspend or revoke said permit(s), the city manager or designee shall send a written notice of suspension or revocation, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder at the address for the secondhand dealership or pawnshop stated on the permit and, if an employee permit, to the address stated on the employee's application. The written notification shall inform the permit holder of the reason for the suspension or revocation and shall inform the permit holder of his/her right to appeal said determination to the city council or designated hearing officer within 30 days of the suspension or revocation letter, pursuant to the procedures stated herein. 
(b)  If the applicant chooses to appeal a denial of a permit by the city manager, or suspension or revocation of a permit by the city manager, pursuant to this article, the applicant/permittee shall do so in writing to the city manager within the thirty-day period following the denial, suspension or revocation letter. Upon receipt of the request to appeal, the city shall schedule a hearing in front of the city council or designated hearing officer within 60 days of the receipt of the appeal request. The city shall inform applicant/permitee of said hearing no less than 14 days prior to the hearing, in writing, of the location and time of the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the administrative hearing procedures as established by resolution of city council. The city council or designated hearing officer shall render a decision to affirm or reverse the city manager's decision to deny, suspend or revoke the permit in writing within five business days from the date of the hearing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant/permitee. The decision of the city council or designated hearing officer shall be final. 
(d)  The applicant/permitee may appeal an adverse decision of the city council or hearing officer by filing a petition for writ of certiorari with the county superior court in accordance with state law within 30 days of the council or hearing officer's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-68. - Redemption; lost or damaged goods. 
Any person properly identifying him or herself and presenting a pawn ticket to the pawnbroker shall be presumed to be the pledgor or seller and shall be entitled to redeem the pledged goods described in such ticket. In the event such pledged goods are lost or damaged while in the possession of the pawnbroker, it shall be responsibility of the pawnbroker to replace the lost or damaged goods with like kinds of merchandise and proof of replacement shall be a defense to prosecution. For the purposes of this section, lost includes destroyed or having disappeared because of any cause, whether known or unknown, that results in the pledged goods being unavailable for return to pledgor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-69. - Additional registration and regulations applicable to dealers in precious metals and gems. 
In addition to the provisions contained in this article, dealers in precious metals and gems shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq., and shall register with the police department as required by State law, in addition to compliance with this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals and gems without first registering to do so pursuant to this section. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals or gems. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 10-70. - Additional regulations applicable to pawnbrokers. 
Nothing in this article shall supersede the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; rather, the provisions provided herein shall be construed as cumulative to such state law provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04-05, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Secs. 10-71—10-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESMEN 

Sec. 10-88. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensed solicitor means and includes any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor on his person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence means and includes every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 10-89. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of soliciting, calling on residences door-to-door without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(b)  The requirement of subsection (a) of this section is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. 
(1)  It is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political, or other nonprofit purposes provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
(2)  It does not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state, or federal governments, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(c)  Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the city carry upon his person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(d)  Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association by whom the solicitor is employed or represents, a photograph of the solicitor, and physical description. Such photograph shall be provided by the solicitor and shall be at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(e)  The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than three months. Upon expiration of the maximum three-month period, the permit holder may receive a renewal for an additional three-month period without any additional fees and without having to comply with section 10-90, so long as no more than one complaint has been submitted to the city concerning the permit holder. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 3, § 2; Ord. No. 2011-09-30, § 1, 9-26-2011) 
Sec. 10-90. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The city shall have applications available on request. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
(2)  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
(3)  Age of applicant; 
(4)  Physical description of the applicant; 
(5)  Name and address of the person, firm, or corporation or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
(7)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
(9)  Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow; 
(10)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this chapter, if any; 
(11)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(12)  Names of magazines, books, or journals to be sold; 
(13)  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
(14)  Proposed method of operation; 
(15)  Description and license plate number of vehicles intended to be operated by applicant; 
(16)  Signature of applicant; and 
(17)  Social security number of applicant. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit to fingerprint-based background check in connection with the application for the permit, pursuant to the requirements of section 2-62 of this Code. 
(d)  The city manager shall cause to be kept in his office or designee office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
(f)  The fee for a permit shall be valid for a six-month period. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 3, § 3; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 6, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 6, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-91. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city manager if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  The permit may be revoked by the city manager after a hearing in front of the city manager or designee if the city receives at least two complaints against the permit holder alleging any violations of this article. The hearing shall be noticed in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder and shall not be less than ten days following the receipt of the notice by the permit holder. The notice shall state in specificity the time and place of the hearing and the reason(s) for the intended revocation. At the hearing, the city shall present evidence of the permit holder's violation of this article either through documents or affirmative testimony of the complaining parties and the permit holder shall be given an opportunity to rebut same and present his own evidence that no such violations have occurred. The burden of proof shall be on the city by preponderance of the evidence. If the city meets its burden, the city manager shall revoke the permit no later than five days following the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. 
(d)  Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void and must be turned in to the city manager's office. 
(e)  A permit holder whose permit has been revoked in accordance with subsection (b) shall have the right to appeal said revocation to the city council or designated hearing officer by giving notice to the city manager no later than ten days following receipt of the revocation notice by the permit holder. The appeal hearing shall be scheduled no later than 30 days following the receipt of said appeal request and notice of same given to permit holder by mail no later than ten days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the permit holder shall have the right to present evidence as to why the decision of the city manager or designee should be overturned and shall have the burden to show same by the preponderance of the evidence. The city council or designated hearing officer shall make a decision to sustain or reverse the city manager's decision within five days of the hearing and shall notify the permit holder of same in writing. 
(f)  Any permit holder aggrieved by the final decision of the city council or designated hearing officer may appeal same by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County in accordance with the law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 3, § 4; Ord. No. 2011-09-30, § 2, 9-26-2011) 
Sec. 10-92. - Routes. 
To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes which he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the city manager's office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 3, § 5) 
Sec. 10-93. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Any licensed solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating, or misrepresentation, whether himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined if the occupant of said residence has made it clear, by written sign or otherwise, that solicitors are not invited. 
(c)  Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(d)  Times allowed. 
(1)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 6:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, or on a state or national holiday. 
(2)  Solicitations for political purposes shall not occur prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 3, § 6) 
Sec. 10-94. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum fine allowed by state law for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 3, § 7) 
Secs. 10-95—10-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PANHANDLING 

Sec. 10-117. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive panhandling means and includes: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or words intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 10-118. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to aggressively panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor within any public area in the city, or: 
(1)  In any public transportation vehicle, or public transportation station or stop; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check-cashing business or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check-cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(3)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
(4)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(b)  Unauthorized solicitation shall constitute an ordinance violation. 
(c)  Aggressive panhandling shall constitute an aggravated ordinance violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 10-119. - Applicability. 
This chapter regulates the time, place and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 4, § 3) 
Secs. 10-120—10-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 10-137. - Operation of taxicab to be in compliance with article. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a taxicab in the city except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 1) 
Sec. 10-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Line jumping. Taxicabs shall be placed on stands only from the rear and shall be moved forward and to the front of the stand immediately as space becomes available by the departure or movement of preceding taxicabs. Violation of this rule constitutes line jumping and shall be grounds for suspension of a taxi driver's permit. 
Operator means any person, firm, or corporation in the business of transporting passengers in taxicabs. 
Taxicab means any passenger-carrying vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for hire which does not have fixed termini, including but not limited to, any unmarked automobiles used in the business of transporting passengers for hire by contract or requested special services that do not have fixed termini. 
Taximeter means a device that automatically calculates, at a predetermined rate, and indicates the charge for hire of a vehicle. Taxicabs operating with nonelectronic taximeters shall be furnished with a sign, approved by the city code enforcement, immediately adjacent to the taximeter which explains the way the fare shall be calculated if the taximeter reaches its highest fare before the passenger's destination is reached. This sign shall be pointed out to the passenger by the driver at the beginning of the trip. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 2) 
Sec. 10-139. - Operations deemed to be doing business in the city. 
A taxicab shall be deemed to be doing business in the city when its original terminus, that is to say, the place from which it operated and is subject to calls, shall be located in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 3) 
Sec. 10-140. - License fees for annual operation and driver's permit. 
License fees are hereby levied per annum for each taxicab maintained or operated, and per annum for each driver's permit. The license fees are established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. The business occupation tax shall be in accordance with the current business occupation tax ordinance. The following criteria must be met to maintain a taxicab license: 
(1)  Establishment and maintenance of an office in a commercially zoned area of the corporate boundaries of the city; 
(2)  Submission of a copy of current lease or proof of ownership of office space; 
(3)  Establishment and maintenance of a publicly listed telephone number; 
(4)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company; 
(5)  Maintain an off-street parking lot capable of accommodating all company vehicles; 
(6)  Maintain a file for each vehicle containing proof of current instruments; 
(7)  Possess a valid six-month auto insurance policy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 4) 
Sec. 10-141. - Permits for operation. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  No person shall operate a taxicab or conduct the business of operating taxicabs in the city until the person, firm, or corporation has first applied for and obtained an occupation tax certificate and a taxicab license. The applications for the occupation tax certificate and license shall be made to the city upon forms provided for that purpose. The license for vehicles shall be issued by the city. Permits for drivers will be issued by the city police department, or its designee. 
(2)  No person shall operate a taxicab in the corporate boundaries of the city until the person has first applied for and obtained a driver's permit. Permits for drivers will be issued by the city police department, or its designee. 
(b)  Description of business. The application shall contain, among other things, a detailed description of the equipment to be used in the business and the name of the operators thereof, the point of original terminus of the business, and the address and telephone number of the office or call station from which the business is operated. 
(c)  Indemnity insurance. No taxicab license to operate taxicabs shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof shall file with the business tax division a policy of indemnity insurance in some indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which policy shall have limits equal to or in excess of the following sums for each taxicab operated: 
(1)  For bodily injury to each person, $50,000.00; 
(2)  For bodily injury to all persons sustained in any one accident, $50,000.00; and 
(3)  For property damage and liability for baggage of passengers, $25,000.00. 
The policy shall be conditioned to protect the public against injury or damage proximately caused by the negligence of the holder of such permit. Additional drivers or new drivers hired after issuance of the occupation tax certificate shall be covered by a rider to the policy prior to the issuance of a driver's permit. 
(d)  Ages of vehicles. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business is no more than six years old. By December of each year, automobiles of a model year seven years prior to that year must be replaced. 
(e)  Annual renewal. All fees for taxicab licenses and taxi drivers' permits are due no later than June 30 of each year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 5) 
Sec. 10-142. - Certificate of inspection. 
(a)  A certificate of inspection completed on forms provided by the city and issued by an ASE certified mechanic shall be located inside the taxicab at all times certifying that the taxicab and equipment therein are safe and in compliance with applicable law. This certificate must be renewed every 90 days, and the operator of any taxicab business shall be required to keep his taxicab and equipment therein in safe condition conforming to all laws under penalty of having his permit to conduct a taxicab business suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Each taxicab must produce proof of taximeter inspection and calibration for issuance and renewal of taxi decal. 
(c)  The city police department, or its designee, may conduct random inspections to ensure the safety and welfare of the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 6) 
Sec. 10-143. - Additional equipment. 
The operator of a taxi business shall register with the city each additional piece of equipment put in use, and same shall be subject to inspection and registration as herein provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 7) 
Sec. 10-144. - Operators' duty to file with city; drivers' qualifications. 
It shall be the duty of all operators to file with the city the names and addresses, age and physical description of the persons employed as drivers. All drivers shall hold licenses from the state department of public safety as drivers of vehicles for hire, and drivers' permits issued by the city police department. No person shall be employed or shall drive a taxicab who has, within the past five years, been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., or to the offense of driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, or to any open container violations, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, violence, or the violation of a spirituous, vinous, or malt beverage statute or if the driver has been convicted of an offense of causing death by vehicle. No driver can be issued a taxi driver's permit if the driver has received three or more moving violations in the preceding 12-month period. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 8) 
Sec. 10-145. - Taxi stands; parking. 
Operators and drivers of taxicabs shall not park taxicabs in any congested area as defined by the regulations of the city council at any place other than the place or places designated as "taxi stand." The parking of taxicabs shall be subject at all times to the direction of police officers should such direction be necessary or desirable for the relief of an emergency traffic condition. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 9) 
Sec. 10-146. - Information to be displayed. 
(a)  Information to be displayed inside the taxicab at all times. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a map or street guide of the city, the name and photograph of the driver of the taxicab, and a schedule of fares. Each taxicab used in active business shall also bear on the outside thereof a numbered decal to be furnished by the city. 
(b)  Information to be displayed outside the taxicab at all times. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business bears on the outside thereof a numbered decal to be furnished by the city, the name of the company and business telephone number which must be permanently affixed to the taxicab, a dome light on the roof which must be at least six inches in height permanently affixed to the roof and bear the term "taxi" or the company name. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 10) 
Sec. 10-147. - Operators responsible for violations by drivers. 
To the extent provided by law, operators are responsible for violations of this article by their taxicab drivers whether such drivers are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 11) 
Sec. 10-148. - Notice of denial of license. 
In the event that an application is denied, the city shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial of the taxicab license. The notice of denial shall include the grounds for denial. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 12) 
Sec. 10-149. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the city now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(c)  Whenever the city manager determines there is cause to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder, the city manager's office shall give the licensee a ten-day written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the license. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the licensee may present a defense to the suspension or revocation before the city council or such board as the city council may designate. The ten-day written notice shall include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing will be held. After the hearing, the council or designated board may suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder if any of the grounds set forth below exist. A license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the city council or their designee and a driver's permit may be suspended or revoked by the city police department upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The original application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or permit under this article; 
(4)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period; 
(5)  Refusing to accept a client solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, or sex. Operators and drivers shall not refuse to accept a client unless the client is obviously intoxicated or dangerous; 
(6)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing a driver to operate in the city in violation of the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The establishment or driver is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(8)  Not taking the most direct route; or 
(9)  For violation of any part of this article. 
(d)  After the city manager makes a recommendation to the mayor and city council to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the mayor and city council, or such board as the mayor and city council may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. 
(1)  At the hearing, the city manager or his designate proceeds first and shall have ten minutes to present all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
(2)  The mayor and the city councilmembers or their designates will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(3)  After the city manager makes his presentation, the licensee or the licensee's legal counsel shall have ten minutes to present evidence and argument as to why the license issued hereunder should not be suspended or revoked. The mayor and city councilmembers or their designate will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(4)  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the mayor and city council will render a decision. The suspension or revocation of a taxicab license is final unless the licensee files a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 13) 
Sec. 10-150. - No proration of license fee. 
No license fees shall be prorated. Taxi driver's permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 14) 
Sec. 10-151. - Repealer; exceptions. 
All resolutions providing for taxicab license fees and driver's permits in conflict with this article are hereby repealed; provided, however, that nothing herein shall affect any resolution providing for occupation or business taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 15) 
Sec. 10-152. - Intent of article; severability. 
It is the intent of this article to regulate the operation of taxicab businesses as set forth in this article upon all businesses operating in the corporate boundaries of the city consistent with the requirements of the constitution and laws of the state. In the event that the regulations and/or fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner or regulation and/or fee shall be in excess of the maximum amount authorized by law, such regulation and/or fee shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. The invalidity of any part of this article shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion hereof. In the event that this article may not be enforced against any class of business mentioned herein, such inability to enforce the same shall not affect its validity against the other business specified herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 5, § 16) 
Secs. 10-153—10-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROFESSIONAL BONDSMEN 

Sec. 10-173. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Professional bondsman means all persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bail bonds for compensation, and who are licensed as provided in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 1) 
Sec. 10-174. - Compliance. 
All professional bondsmen licensed through the city must comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 and all related and pertinent sections of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated at all times when acting as bonding agents in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 10-175. - Surety requirement. 
Prior to the issuance of a license, professional bondsmen shall post a surety or property bond with the city clerk in an amount of at least $50,000.00, and such bond shall be kept current at all times; or the professional bondsman may sign an agreement with the city providing for an escrow account in a financial institution designated as a city depository. Any such escrow account shall be not less than $5,000.00, and shall be ten percent of that company's capacity for posting bonds. Upon acceptance of either the surety bond or the escrow account and payment of the administrative fee set forth form time to time by the city council, the city shall issue a business license to the bonding company. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 3) 
Sec. 10-176. - Nonappearance of principal. 
In the event of the nonappearance of the principal in the municipal court on the appointed date and time, the judge shall, at the end of the court day, forfeit the bond and order an execution hearing. Procedures for forfeiture of bonds and judgment absolute set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 17-6-70 through 17-6-72 shall be followed. In addition to the penalties set forth in state law, if the judgment absolute is entered, and payment is not made promptly to the city, the license of the bail bondsman shall be suspended until such time as the judgment absolute is satisfied, or the defendant is returned to the custody of the court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 4) 
Sec. 10-177. - Cancellation of bond. 
When the condition of the bond is satisfied or the forfeiture of the bond has been discharged or remitted, the judge shall make an order canceling the bond. Conviction or acquittal of the defendant shall satisfy the terms of the bond written by a bail bondsman. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 5) 
Sec. 10-178. - Suspension of bail bond license. 
The city may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any bail bondsman's business license for any of the following causes: 
(1)  For any violation of state statutes or city code; 
(2)  Material misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining the license; 
(3)  Misappropriation, conversion or unlawful withholding of money belonging to others and received in the conduct of business under this license; 
(4)  Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of business under this license; 
(5)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(6)  Failure to return collateral security to the principal who is entitled thereto; 
(7)  Failure to meet the obligations or standards set forth by the state or the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 6) 
Sec. 10-179. - Return of license. 
Any professional bondsman who discontinues writing bail bonds during the period for which he is licensed shall notify the city clerk and immediately return his license certificate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 7) 
Sec. 10-180. - Monthly reporting. 
All bondsmen licensed to do business in the city shall provide the city clerk with a list of all outstanding bonds posted with the city on a monthly basis. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 6, § 8) 
Secs. 10-181—10-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ESCORT SERVICES 

Sec. 10-199. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of this article to regulate the operation of escort and/or dating services operating for profit in the city consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and laws of the state. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 1) 
Sec. 10-200. - Compliance. 
No person shall conduct the business for profit of an escort and/or dating service in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 2) 
Sec. 10-201. - Copy of article. 
Upon request, the city manager or designee shall provide each applicant hereunder with a copy of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 3) 
Sec. 10-202. - Information concerning employees to be filed with city manager; fingerprint-based background check required. 
(a)  All licensees under this article must file with the city manager or designee their home address, home telephone number, and place of employment. Changes thereto shall be filed with the city manager or designee within ten days from the date the change becomes effective. 
(b)  All employees of the licensee must submit to a fingerprint-based background check, pursuant to section 2-62 of this Code, not less than 15 days prior to commencing work to allow for the investigation of the employee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 4; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 7, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 7, 3-12-2018) 
Editor's note— Section 7 of Ord. No. 2017-01-02, adopted Jan. 9, 2017, changed the title of § 10-202 from "Information concerning employees to be filed with the city manager; background investigation required" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 10-203. - Records of clients. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving escort and/or dating services and to provide the name of the employee providing such service. Records shall be kept for a minimum of three years. These records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city manager or designee and the city police department. 
(b)  Failure to maintain records as required in this section is a violation of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 5) 
Sec. 10-204. - License required; application; information to be given. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of providing and/or arranging dates, escorts, or partners for persons shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, file an application with the city manager or designee and obtain a license. This application shall be typewritten or legibly handwritten and shall contain the following as appendices: 
(1)  Name, home and business address of the applicant, date of birth, and sex. 
(2)  The applicant and employees must submit to a fingerprint-based background check in accordance with section 2-62 of this Code. 
(3)  The applicant must furnish a list of at least three character witnesses by name, address, and telephone number. 
(4)  Applicants shall furnish the name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant (in whatever position) for the last two years, if applicable. 
(5)  Applicants shall provide two recent identical photographs to the city manager or designee. The photographs must have been taken within the past six months and be a good likeness of the applicant. The photographs must be clear with a full front view of the applicant's face. Photographs may be in color or black and white and the size must be two inches by two inches. The photograph must be taken without head covering unless a signed statement is submitted indicating that the head covering is worn daily for religious or medical reasons. Dark glasses may not be worn in the photographs unless a doctor's statement is submitted supporting the wearing of dark glasses for medical reasons. The city manager or designee shall permanently affix one photograph to the permit. 
(b)  The city police department shall be notified within ten days of any change of ownership and/or partners or employees. 
(c)  A corporation, partnership, or other business entity being established for the purpose of engaging in the business, trade or profession of providing and/or arranging dates, escorts, or partners for persons, must also obtain a license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 6; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 8, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 8, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-205. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No occupation tax certificate or license shall be granted pursuant to this article to any person less than 18 years of age or any person who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 7) 
Sec. 10-206. - Fees. 
License fees and the background investigation fee shall be as established by the city council. No license can be issued by the city manager or designee until the applicant satisfies the qualifications listed in this article and pays all license fees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 8) 
Sec. 10-207. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
No person less than 18 years of age shall be employed by an escort and/or dating service in any capacity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 9) 
Sec. 10-208. - Notice of denial of license. 
The city manager or designee shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial of the escort and/or dating service license. The notice of denial shall include the grounds for denial. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 10) 
Sec. 10-209. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the city now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(c)  Whenever the city manager or designee determines there is cause to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder, the city manager or designee must give the licensee a ten-day written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the license. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the licensee may present a defense to the suspension or revocation before the mayor and city council or such board as the mayor and city council may designate. The ten-day written notice must include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. After the hearing, the board may suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder for any of the grounds set forth in this subsection. A license may be suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The licensee is engaged in the escort and/or dating service under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(2)  The licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his duties; 
(3)  The licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(4)  The licensee has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-6-1 through 16-6-25, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If, after having been granted a license, the licensee is found not to be of good moral character, or pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, said license shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(5)  The application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The licensee fails to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The licensee fails to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to initial issuance of a license under this article; 
(8)  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
(9)  Any other violation of this article. 
(d)  After the city manager or designee makes a recommendation to the city council to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the city council, or such board as it may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. 
(1)  At the hearing, the city manager or his designee proceeds first and presents all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
(2)  After the city manager or his designee makes his presentation, the licensee or the licensee's legal counsel, will present evidence and argument as to why the license issued hereunder should not be suspended or revoked. The city council or its designee will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(3)  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the city council will render a decision. The suspension or revocation of an escort or dating service license is final. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 11) 
Sec. 10-210. - Proration of license fee. 
No license fees established in this article shall be prorated. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 7, § 12) 
Secs. 10-211—10-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 10-229. - Rationale and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and 
(2)  Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food and Beverage Systems v. Ft. Launderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); 5634 E. Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); Gammob v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); High Five Investments, LLC v. Floyd County, No. 4:06-CV-190, R. 128 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 14, 2008); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); and 
(3)  Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia, 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food and Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); 
(4)  And based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas—1986; Indianapolis, Indiana—1984; Garden Grove, California—1991; Houston, Texas—1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona—1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee—1999-2003; Los Angeles, California—1977; Whittier, California—1978; Spokane, Washington—2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota—1994; Littleton, Colorado—2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma—1986; Dallas, Texas—1997; Ft. Worth, Texas—2004; Kennedale, Texas—2005; Greensboro, North Carolina—2003; Amarillo, Texas—1977; Jackson County, Missouri—2008; New York, New York Times Square—1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); 
(5)  The city council finds: 
a.  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
b.  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
c.  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(c)  Adoption of findings subject to adverse secondary effects. The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 1) 
Sec. 10-230. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specialized sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A substantial business activity exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
(2)  At least 25 percent of the wholesale value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
(3)  At least 25 percent of the retail value (defined as the price charged to customers) of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
(4)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of the foregoing items; 
(5)  The establishment maintains at least 25 percent of its interior business space for the display, sale, and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "interior business space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); 
(6)  The establishment maintains at least 500 square feet of its interior business space for the display, sale, and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "interior business space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items) and limits access to the premises to adults only; 
(7)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 1,000 of the foregoing items and limits access to the premises or to the portion of the premises occupied by said items to adults only; 
(8)  The establishment regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, using "adult," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(9)  The establishment maintains an "adult arcade," which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
Employ, employee or employment describes and pertains to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not otherwise employed by the city, who is licensed to practice law in the state, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
Influential interest means any of the following: 
(1)  The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business; 
(2)  Ownership of a financial interest of 30 percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business; or 
(3)  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Interior business space means the floor area inside a sexually oriented business that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. The term "operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
Regularly means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio. 
(1)  The term "semi-nude model studio" means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
(2)  The term "semi-nude model studio" does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
b.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
c.  In a structure: 
1.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
Sexual device means any three dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. This definition shall not be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, or any establishment that does not limit access to its premises or a portion of its premises to adults only. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theater, a semi-nude model studio, or a sexual device shop. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified offenses for which less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(1)  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
(2)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
(3)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of a child in sexual performance; 
(4)  Any offense related to any sexually oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; 
(5)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(6)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate acts been committed in this state, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room means the room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 2) 
Sec. 10-231. - Classifications. 
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
(2)  Adult cabaret; 
(3)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(4)  Semi-nude model studio; and 
(5)  Sexual device shop. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 3) 
Sec. 10-232. - License required. 
(a)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in section 10-230, of a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the city manager or his designee a completed application made on a form provided by the city manager or his designee. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) of this section and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years; 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant; 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency; 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business; 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process; 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article and, if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable; 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking; 
(8)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city manager or his designee within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(9)  The applicant shall submit him/herself to a fingerprint-based background check pursuant to the provisions of section 2-62 of this Code. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  Maintenance and disclosure of applicant information. The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the office of the city manager or his designee on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by court order. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 4; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 8, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 8, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-233. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the city manager or his designee shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the city, and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the city manager or his designee shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city manager or his designee shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age; 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid; 
(4)  The sexually oriented business is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article or is not in compliance with locational requirements of this article or the locational requirements of any other part of this Code or state law, including the city zoning ordinance; 
(5)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking; 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city manager or his designee shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the city manager or his designee shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city manager or his designee shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age; 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid; 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking; 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(c)  Required information, display of license. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 5) 
Sec. 10-234. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: 
(1)  $100.00 for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license and $50.00 for annual renewal; 
(2)  $50.00 for the initial sexually oriented business employee license and $25.00 for annual renewal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 6) 
Sec. 10-235. - Inspection. 
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the city manager and his agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 7) 
Sec. 10-236. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 8) 
Sec. 10-237. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the employee has knowingly violated this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 9) 
Sec. 10-238. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this article or has knowingly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article, and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business; or 
(6)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of 18 years to consume alcohol or appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city council revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 10) 
Sec. 10-239. - Hearing; notice of license denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  When the city manager or his designee issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city manager or his designee shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (hereinafter "respondent") by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city manager or his designee for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the city manager, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city manager's or his designee's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the 30th day after it is issued, and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(1)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the city manager or his designee shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
(2)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his behalf, and cross examine any of the city manager's or his designee's witnesses. The city manager or his designee shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
(3)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city manager or his designee to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the city manager or his designee shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing, if any, within 30 days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the city manager or his designee: upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the city manager or his designee shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. The provisional license shall not be construed to provide the applicant with any substantive right, entitlement, or claim of estoppel beyond the ability to continue operation or employment until the court enters judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 11) 
Sec. 10-240. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 12) 
Sec. 10-241. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 13) 
Sec. 10-242. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos on premises. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, videocassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city manager or his designee may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person; 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited; 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited; 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises; 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsections (a)(5)a through d of this section. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this subsection remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsection (a) of this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No patron shall knowingly enter or remain in a viewing room less than 150 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron. 
(d)  No patron shall knowingly be or remain within one foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 150 square feet or larger in area. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 14) 
Sec. 10-243. - Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: 
(1)  Ensure that at least two conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the premises are posted on the premises; 
(2)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on the premises by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(3)  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. Said lighting shall be of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(b)  If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level, and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises. 
(d)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lots for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 15) 
Sec. 10-244. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such. 
(b)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to enjoin, prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings shall be brought in the name of the city; provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 16) 
Sec. 10-245. - Applicability of article to preexisting businesses. 
All preexisting sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating in the city in compliance with all state and local laws prior to the effective date of this article, and all sexually oriented business employees working in the city prior to the effective date of this article, are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of 90 days following the effective date of this article. By the end of said 90 days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the requirements of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 17) 
Sec. 10-246. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 600 square feet. 
(c)  No employee who regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented business shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  No person shall sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of 18 years to be or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(f)  No operator or licensee of a sexually oriented business shall knowingly violate the regulations in this section or knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the regulations in this section. 
(g)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city manager or his designee, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (a) through (e) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No person shall cover, obstruct, or obscure said sign. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 18) 
Sec. 10-247. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 19) 
Sec. 10-248. - Failure of city to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a city official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this article within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of the constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the city official under this article, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of conditions necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city's action has passed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 20) 
Sec. 10-249. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Distance. It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: 
(1)  500 feet from any parcel in the city zoned R-200, R-150, R-30,000, R-20,000, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, R-A5, R-50, R-A8, R-CH, R-CD, R-DT, RM-150, RM-100, RM-85, RM-75, RM-HD, MHP, TND, or NCD; 
(2)  600 feet from any business in the city licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises; and 
(3)  1,000 feet from any house of worship or a public or private elementary or secondary school in the city. 
(b)  Measurement. For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on a boundary line of the sexually oriented business parcel to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel in the city zoned R-200, R-150, R-30,000, R-20,000, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, R-A5, R-50, R-A8, R-CH, R-CD, R-DT, RM-150, RM-100, RM-85, RM-75, RM-HD, MHP, TND, or NCD. Measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of the structure containing the sexually oriented business to the closest part of any structure in the city occupied by a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, or a business licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises. 
(c)  Preexisting sexually oriented businesses. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, a nonconforming sexually oriented business, lawfully existing in all respects under law prior to the effective date of this article, may continue to operate for one year following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location. At the conclusion of said one year, the use will no longer be recognized as a lawful nonconforming use, except that a nonconforming sexually oriented business may obtain an extension of the original one-year period upon a showing of financial hardship. An application for an extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion of the aforementioned one-year period. If a hardship extension is granted, subsequent applications for hardship extensions shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion of the non-conforming sexually oriented business's current extension period. 
(d)  Procedure for seeking hardship extension. An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the city manager or his designee, and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, appraised value of the property and/or leasehold interests, and costs of relocation. Within ten days after receiving the application, the city manager or his designee shall schedule a hearing on the application before the hearing officer, which hearing shall be conducted within 30 days after the city manager's or his designee's receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be provided to the applicant via certified mail at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to confront and cross examine witnesses. 
(e)  Issuance, grounds for hardship extension. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten days after the hearing on the application for a hardship extension. The hardship extension shall be granted upon a showing of financial hardship. Such a showing shall be established if the hearing officer makes the following findings: 
(1)  The applicant has, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, made a substantial investment, including but not limited to lease obligations incurred in an arms-length transaction, in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; 
(2)  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
(3)  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment prior to the conclusion of the one-year period. 
Any extension granted under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 15, art. 10, § 21) 
Secs. 10-250—10-264. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SPAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2011-01-04 states the following: "All massage establishments operating under a valid City of Dunwoody Occupation Tax Certificate as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance shall have sixty (60) days from the adoption of this Ordinance to submit an application for all licenses and permits required by this Ordinance and shall have one hundred and twenty (120) days from adoption of this Ordinance to obtain a valid massage establishment license and all necessary valid work permits provided by this Ordinance. Any massage establishment which has not submitted an application for the licenses and permits established by this Ordinance within 60 days of its adoption, or obtained same within 120 days of its adoption, shall be in violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to all penalties related thereto, including, but not limited to, potential revocation of the establishment's existing Occupation Tax Certificate pursuant to Chapter 10, Article I of the Code of the City of Dunwoody." 

Sec. 10-265. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the operation of massage establishments and spa establishments as an exercise of the city's police power in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, it is a further purpose of this article to regulate the practice of massage therapy by massage therapists that have not been licensed by the state, who restrict their practice to the manipulation of the soft tissue of the hands, feet, or ears of the human body, who do not have clients disrobe, and who do not hold themselves out as a massage therapist whose practice is not so limited. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-266. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying for a license to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment, as defined herein, or a person applying for work permit, as provided for herein. 
Massage or massage therapy means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including but not limited to the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of water, oils, lotions, creams, lubricants, salt glows or scrubs, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, cold packs or other topical preparations. This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry or medicine is required by the state. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power which is utilized by a massage therapist for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means any business or commercial establishment (i)(a) having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage which employs or contracts with one or more massage therapists or operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, or (b) which for good or valuable consideration offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages, and (ii) which has fixed a place of business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities defined as "massage." This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Massage therapist means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
Spa establishment means any business or commercial establishment operated to derive income from the provision of any of the following personal services: body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak, or other similar personal services purported to assist patrons with improving their physical condition or appearance and which require the patron to disrobe. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-267. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-268. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses and permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the certificate or permit only and shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent or restrict in any manner: 
(1)  Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, massage therapist that is not operating a massage or spa establishment, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of said profession; 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state; or 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-269. - License required; application. 
(a)  In addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate pursuant to this chapter, all persons, firms or corporations operating or desiring to operate a massage or spa establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business or profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this article. Applications for licenses shall be made on forms provided by the city. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the application must be executed by an officer, member, partner or shareholder, as applicable, and, if a different person, the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the massage or spa establishment. The applicant to operate a massage establishment must be the owner of the premises wherein the business will be conducted or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the certificate. All applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant and the aforementioned persons of all material facts as determined by the city manager or designee to be relevant to the requirements of this chapter, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(2)  Copies of all required state licenses with regard to each employee, independent contractor, agent and partner, general or limited, associated with the operation of the massage therapy establishment. Those employees who will be performing massages, and/or managers or supervisors, who are exempt from getting a state license pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 24A shall comply with the work permits provision of this article, section 10-271. 
(3)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor, then the partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall submit a complete list of the legal entity's (i) officers, (ii) directors, and (iii) partners, members, or shareholders (natural persons) holding a ten percent or greater ownership interest in such legal entity, or if there is no shareholder (natural person) with at least a ten percent interest, the ten shareholders with the greatest ownership interest, (iv) the name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for operation of the massage or spa establishment, and (v) the names of all on-premises managers or supervisors for the establishment. Such list shall include the names, current addresses, phone numbers and occupations of the aforementioned natural persons. 
(4)  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state and must submit copies of the certificate of organization or incorporation, as applicable, and articles of organization or incorporation, as applicable. 
(5)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver's license or a valid identification card as reliable proof thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver's license or a valid identification card for each person listed in subsection (a)(3). 
(6)  A sworn and notarized statement of a registered agent who is a resident of DeKalb County, Georgia and at least 18 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the applicant. 
(7)  The applicant shall submit him/herself to a fingerprint-based background check in accordance with section 2-62 of this Code. 
(b)  A license issued to an individual shall be in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership, in the name of a partner or officer, and, if different from such named person, in the name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. A license issued to a limited liability company shall be issued in the name of the limited liability company, in the name of one member or officer, and, if different from such named person, in the name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued in the name of the corporation, in the name of at least one shareholder (listed pursuant to subsection (a)(3)) or officer of the corporation, and, if different from such named person, in the name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. 
(c)  No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment unless it shall appear that such person, or, if the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, all persons listed in subsection (a)(3) for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such license have not been convicted or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving: 
(1)  Illegal gambling; 
(2)  Any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, disorderly conduct, or misdemeanor involving any type of sexual-related crime; 
(3)  Any theft or violence against person or property; 
(4)  Any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; 
(5)  Distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law; or 
(6)  Criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses. 
(d)  No person under the age of 18 shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity shall not be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment if any of the persons listed in subsection (a)(3) are under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 9, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 9, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-270. - Regulatory fee; expiration. 
(a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee, consisting of a nonrefundable investigative fee and a license fee, for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city. The investigative and license fees shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. The full regulatory fee shall be paid with the license application and shall not be prorated under any circumstances. If the applicant withdraws the application or the license is denied, the applicant shall be refunded the full license fee paid. No refund shall be allowed once the license has been issued. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and expire on December 31 of each year. Each subsequent application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. Existing licensees shall file applications by December 1 of each year for the following license year. Applications received after December 1 shall be subject to a ten percent late fee. 
(c)  Any person applying hereunder who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(d)  No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-271. - Work permits required. 
(a)  A work permit shall be required for any and all (i) on-premises owners, managers or supervisors who are in charge of managing the massage establishment as required by subsection 10-272(c) and who do not otherwise hold a license issued hereunder, and (ii) massage therapists not possessing a state-issued massage therapist's license who desire to engage in the business, trade or profession of massage therapy or manage a massage and/or spa establishment. A work permit does not authorize an individual to perform any activity requiring state licensure. 
(b)  Massage therapists who hold a current and valid massage therapist license issued by the state do not have to obtain a work permit, but shall provide a copy of their state license to the city and post their state license in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at all times while the license remains valid. 
(c)  Any person required to obtain a work permit shall apply to the city manager or designee for such permit. A separate work permit per individual is required for employment at each establishment within the city. The permit will be valid for a period of one year from the date in which the application is received by the city and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit shall make themselves available for fingerprint-based background checks pursuant to section 2-62 of this Code. The nonrefundable fee for a work permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. Replacement of lost permit(s) shall be issued upon payment of one-half of the fee(s) charged for work permits. 
(d)  Any person required to obtain a work permit shall apply to the city manager or designee for such permit. A separate work permit per individual is required for employment at each establishment within the city. The permit will be valid for a period of one year from the date in which the application is received by the city and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit shall make themselves available for photographing and such other investigation as may be required by the city. The nonrefundable fee for a work permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. Replacement of lost permit(s) shall be issued upon payment of one-half of the fee(s) charged for work permits. 
(e)  The city manager or designee may suspend or revoke an employee's work permit, following notice and hearing pursuant to this article, and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter, any state law or applicable local ordinance. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose work permit has been suspended or revoked to refuse to return the work permit to the city manager or designee or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the work permit. 
(g)  An applicant for a work permit shall not have been convicted within the five years preceding his/her application of any federal, state or local law involving crimes set forth in subsection 10-269(c). A guilty plea, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered. 
(h)  A new fingerprint-based background check shall be conducted for each application, irrespective of whether it's for a new permit or a renewal. 
(i)  When the city manager intends to deny or revoke any work permit, the city manager or designee shall issue to the applicant or permit holder a letter setting forth the reasons for denial or revocation, and, in the case of a revocation, the letter shall notify the applicant of his or her right to an administrative hearing before the city manager or designee, which hearing shall be held in accordance with section 10-275. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final unless the applicant or permit holder files a notice of appeal to the city manager within 30 days of receiving written notice of said decision. Appeals to the decision set forth by the city manager or designee shall be heard by the city council or designated hearing officer in accordance with section 10-275. Appeals of the city manager or designee's decision to deny the permit shall be directly to the city council or designated hearing officer. Following a hearing by city council, or designated hearing officer, the applicant shall have a right of review of any denial by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court within 30 days of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 2017-01-02, § 10, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-01, § 10, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-272. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all massage establishment licensees holding a license under this article to keep on file the name of all employees, their home addresses and home telephone numbers, their duties and services performed for the massage establishment and whether such employee has a state license or city work permit. The holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and required supplement information for new employees to be filed with the city manager or designee within ten days from the date of such change. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any massage establishment granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment, the type of treatment administered and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city manager or designee, or the chief of police or designee. 
(c)  The establishment shall have an owner, manager or supervisor on the premises at all hours the establishment offers massage therapy. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager or supervisor on the premises, the establishment must cease operations and close to the public until an owner, manager or supervisor is on the premises. Such owner, manager or supervisor in addition to the licensee shall be responsible to make sure all persons performing massage therapy at any time has either an appropriate state license or city work permit and their failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of a license. Records shall be made available to the city manager or designee, during business hours, at the certificate holder's business location in the city, within ten business days of any such request. 
(e)  The establishment shall be subject to inspection at any time during business hours by the city manager or designee and by the chief of police or designee, to ensure compliance with this article. 
(f)  All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of customers receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this article, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck, and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(g)  No massage or spa establishment shall be engaged in and no place of business shall be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(h)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(i)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code, as adopted by the city council, and at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(j)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any establishment. 
(k)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of the license, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly-licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the massage establishment to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize a massage establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
(m)  No massage practitioner or any of his employees shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs or anus of any person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-273. - Issuance of license; denial. 
(a)  When a license application for the operation of a massage or spa establishment is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted, and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the city manager or designee. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the city shall cause to be conducted a criminal background investigation of the applicant and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the background investigation and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the city manager or designee shall either issue the license or deny the application within 60 days of receiving the completed application. The city manager or his designee shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified in this article; 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in this section; or 
(3)  Contains false, misleading or incomplete information in the application or attached documents. 
(c)  Service of any notice for denial, suspension or revocation of a massage or spa establishment license under this article shall be delivered by hand or posted by certified and first class mail to the permit holder's address provided on the application. Delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following deposit in the United States mail. 
(d)  Should the city manager or designee deny an application under this article, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the city manager or designee setting forth the reason(s) for the denial, and advise the applicant of the right to appeal to the city council or designated hearing officer. 
(e)  Any decision by the city manager or designee denying, suspending or revoking an application shall be final unless the applicant files a notice of appeal with the city manager or designee within 30 days of receiving notice of such denial. Any such appeal shall be subject to de novo review and shall be in accordance with section 10-275. In case of a direct appeal to the city council or designated hearing officer as a result of a denial, a hearing before the city council or designated hearing officer shall be scheduled within 60 days following the receipt by the city manager or designee of the applicant's notice of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-274. - Grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
The license of a massage or spa establishment may be denied, revoked or suspended upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or holder has failed to meet or maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The applicant or holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in being issued the license for the massage or spa establishment; 
(3)  The applicant or holder is engaged in the operation of a massage or spa establishment under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another massage therapist of a like or different name; 
(4)  The applicant or holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire or disorderly conduct, criminal solicitation of any of the foregoing offenses, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony; 
(5)  Any of the applicant's or holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, criminal solicitation of any of the foregoing offenses, or disorderly conduct in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment; 
(6)  The applicant or holder has failed to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article; 
(7)  The applicant or holder has failed to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; 
(8)  The applicant or holder, or employees, agents or independent contractors associated with the establishment, have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article; or 
(9)  The applicant or holder has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 10-275. - Hearings. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager or designee determines there is cause to suspend or revoke the license or work permit issued hereunder, the city manager or designee shall give the licensee written notice of said intent, stating the reason for same, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal to the city manager for an administrative hearing in front of the city manager or designee no later than 30 days following the letter of intent. Upon receipt of same appeal, the city manager shall set an administrative hearing within 30 days of the receipt of the letter of appeal and shall notify the licensee in writing at least 15 days prior to an administrative hearing of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement or the charge(s) upon which the administrative hearing before the city manager or designee shall be held in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The procedure for administrative hearings heard under this chapter by the city manager shall be set forth by the city manager. The city manager or designee shall reach a decision on the matter before them within ten days following the close of the hearing and give written notice of said decision. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final unless the licensee or city work permit holder files a notice of appeal to the city manager or designee within 30 days of receiving notice of said decision. 
(c)  The city council or designated hearing officer shall hear appeals to decisions by the city manager or designee to deny applications for permits, as well as appeals to administrative hearing decisions by the city manager or designee to suspend or revoke such permits. 
(d)  Any such appeal to the city council or designated hearing officer shall be subject to de novo review and shall be in accordance with subsections (d), (e) and (f). A hearing before the city council or designated hearing officer shall be scheduled within 60 days following the receipt by the city manager or designee of the applicant, licensee or work permit holder's notice of appeal. 
(e)  Applicants, licensees or work permit holders shall be given written notice of the date, time, and place when the matter at issue will be heard by the city council or designated hearing officer. The applicant, licensee or work permit holder shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Twenty days' notice shall be deemed reasonable. 
(f)  The procedure for hearings of the city council or hearing officer under this chapter shall conform to the administrative hearings procedure as passed by resolution of the city council. Upon close of the public hearing, the city council or hearing officer shall reach a decision on the matter before it, and the decision of the city council or hearing officer shall be final unless the applicant or permit holder applies to the county superior court by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council or hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Chapter 12 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; appointment of judges of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq.; training courses for judge of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-11; municipal court clerk training, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-13. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Creation of the court. 
In accordance with section 4.01 of the Charter, the city hereby creates the city municipal court. The powers and jurisdiction of said court are described in article IV of the Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Judges and judge pro-tem. 
(a)  In accordance with section 4.02 of the Charter, the municipal court chief judge shall be nominated by the mayor subject to approval by the city council with compensation to be fixed by the council. 
(b)  In accordance with section 4.02 of the Charter, the mayor shall also nominate a judge pro tempore subject to approval by the city council to serve as requested. The number of judges pro term shall be fixed by resolution of the council. 
(c)  The chief judge and judge pro tempore shall serve a term of four years but may be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 4.02(d) of the Charter. 
(d)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he shall have attained the age of 28 years and shall have been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for a minimum of three years. 
(e)  The judge pro tempore shall serve as requested by the chief judge and shall have the same qualifications as the judge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 12-3. - Additional personnel. 
(a)  Clerk of the court. The city manager shall appoint a municipal court clerk, who shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The municipal court clerk shall also serve as the administrator of the court. 
(b)  Law enforcement. Police officers of the city police department or the county police department or county sheriff's department or any other law enforcement officer may execute warrants and other writs in furtherance of the court's jurisdiction and orders. 
(c)  Bailiff. At least one city police department officer or an officer from the county sheriff's department will serve as a bailiff whenever the municipal court is in session. 
(d)  Solicitor. In accordance with section 3.08 of the Charter, the city attorney may be the prosecuting officer or solicitor in the municipal court. The council may also, from time to time, appoint and contract with other attorneys who are members of the State Bar of Georgia to serve as prosecuting attorneys in municipal court. The compensation of said attorney shall be fixed by the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Additional support. 
(a)  Indigent defense. The city shall provide indigent defendants with counsel as provided by state law. 
(b)  Translator. The city shall provide translation services as required by state law. 
(c)  Intermediary interpreter. The city shall provide interpreter services as required by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 12-5. - Court sessions. 
The court shall be in session at least one day per month and other times as determined necessary by the municipal court chief judge to keep the court dockets current; the court clerk shall direct staffing of the sessions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 12-6. - Court fees. 
(a)  The municipal court chief judge may recommend to the city council for its approval a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(b)  The council may set fines for violations of city ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 1, § 6) 
Secs. 12-7—12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS 

Sec. 12-31. - Rules. 
The municipal court chief judge shall adopt specific rules of procedure. No rules shall be inconsistent with the laws of the state or the Constitution of the United States. Such rules shall be made available on the city website or by other means determined by the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 12-32. - Contempt of court. 
The municipal court may find persons in contempt of court and punish said persons in accordance with section 4.01 of the Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 12-33. - Summons, issuance. 
Any officer of the city police department, or its designee, the solicitor of the municipal court and the assistant solicitor, in all cases where a complaint is made or information is obtained of any violation of this Code or other laws or ordinances of the city, shall issue a summons, directed to the accused, requiring the accused to appear before the municipal court to answer the charge. The summons shall enumerate the specific charges against the person, designate the time and place of trial and shall be signed by the officer of the city police department or its designee, the solicitor, or assistant solicitor issuing it, and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at the place of residence of the accused. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 12-34. - Failure to appear. 
It shall be unlawful for any defendant lawfully summoned to answer charges in the municipal court to fail to appear at the time and place specified in the summons or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence. The trial may be continued to such time as the municipal court may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the police chief, or other members of the city police department, or its designee, to arrest the defendant and bring the defendant before the court to answer both the initial charges and the charge of failure to appear. The defendant shall remain in custody until brought before the court, unless the defendant posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 12-35. - Subpoenas, issuance. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of the municipal court shall issue a subpoena directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served by the police chief or other police officers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 5) 
Sec. 12-36. - Failing or refusing to obey. 
If any person lawfully summoned as a witness before the municipal court fails to attend the trial for which the person has been summoned or fails to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence, the person may be cited for contempt and be fined in a sum not to exceed $200.00. If the cause is continued because of the absence of this person, the court may issue attachment against the person requiring the person to show cause on the day appointed for trial why the person should not be cited for contempt. The police chief or other police officer shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest the person and keep the person in custody until the person is brought before the court, unless the person posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 6) 
Sec. 12-37. - Fines. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have the discretion to enter fines consistent with this Code, state and federal law. For fines due from any defendant, execution may be issued by the court clerk and collected as provided by law. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations or other offenses as specified by the court may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged. Persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and other serious offenses, as determined by the municipal court judge, shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 7) 
Sec. 12-38. - Sentences. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty or pretrial diversion, in addition to any applicable fines, the municipal court judge may impose a sentence of confinement, compulsory work, or both; commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; place the defendant on probation; or defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. The court may punish for violations within its jurisdiction a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both, except as otherwise provided by this Code or state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 8) 
Sec. 12-39. - Appeals. 
Unless specified elsewhere in this Code or the Charter, all appeals from decisions and judgments of the municipal court in criminal and ordinance violation cases shall be appealable, by right of certiorari, to the county superior court under the laws of the state regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 2, § 9) 
Secs. 12-40—12-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BAIL 

Sec. 12-67. - General provisions. 
Bail and bond considerations shall be consistent with section 4.04(c) of the Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 12-68. - Minor traffic offenses. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11, any person cited for a traffic offense shall be released in lieu of bail upon showing his driver's license. This provision does not apply to any charges of driving under the influence or other serious offenses designated by the municipal court judge. 
(b)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 3, § 2) 
Sec. 12-69. - Professional bondsmen. 
No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless the person holds a current business license in the city, is approved by the chief of police, and has fully complied with all other city requirements for bonding companies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 3, § 3) 
Sec. 12-70. - Failure or refusal to give bond. 
If the accused or a witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required under this article, the person so failing or refusing may be confined or kept under guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify, as the case may be. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 18, art. 3, § 4) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Compliance with state law. 
All elections and challenges thereto shall be in compliance with the Georgia Election Code codified at O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 14-2. - General elections. 
In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Special elections. 
Special elections shall be held as needed according to the city Charter section 2.03 and shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Superintendent. 
The city manager shall appoint the municipal superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70.1. The council shall provide for the superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-71. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Conducting elections. 
The city shall coordinate all elections with the county board of elections and registration. The city may contract or otherwise decide by agreement with the county board of elections and registration for that board to coordinate and conduct all elections in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 1, § 5) 
Secs. 14-6—14-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 14-29. - Candidate requirements. 
(a)  Residency. In accordance with Section 2.02 of the Charter, candidates for mayor and city council must have been a resident of the city for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of election; and each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. In addition to the above requirements, no person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember representing a council district unless that person has been a resident of the district such person seeks to represent for a continuous period of at least six months immediately prior to the date of the election for councilmember and continues to reside in such district during that person's period of service. 
(b)  Age. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person is at least 21 years of age. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 14-30. - Notice of candidacy. 
Filing of notice of candidacy for municipal office shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132, as amended. The qualifying period shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. In special elections, the qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of the call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 14-31. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, each candidate shall pay a fee of three percent of the total salary of the office sought. Such fee shall be deposited into the city treasury in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
(b)  A pauper's affidavit may be filed in lieu of the qualifying fee in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 14-32. - Withdrawal. 
Any candidate may withdraw his name as a candidate prior to October 15 of the election year. No refund will be made to any candidate for the fee remitted to qualify for office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 2, § 4) 
Secs. 14-33—14-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VOTING 

Sec. 14-53. - Electors to be registered by county. 
The city council shall provide for the use of the county voter registration list. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the county shall be eligible to vote in any municipal primary or election. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 14-54. - Absentee ballots. 
Voting by absentee ballots in a method consistent with state law shall be permitted in municipal elections. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 3, § 2) 
Secs. 14-55—14-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VOTING RECORDS 

Sec. 14-82. - Maintenance. 
To the extent required by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-72, voting records and documents shall be made available in accordance with that statute. The maintenance of said records shall be kept in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-73. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 10, art. 4) 
Chapter 16 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-10-14, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 14, 2013, repealed former Ch. 16, Land Development, §§ 16-1—16-915, and enacted a new Ch. 16 as set out herein. Former Ch. 16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. of 2008, ch. 14. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text have been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets and obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. 

ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

Sec. 16-1. - Title. 
The official title of this chapter (chapter 16) is the Land Development Regulations of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. For convenience, it is referred to throughout this chapter 16 as the "land development regulations." 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-1.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-2. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted by the city council in order to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the city and to help implement relevant provisions of the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans and policies. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-1.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-3. - Minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, these land development regulations must be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. The regulations must be liberally construed in favor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-1.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-4. - Compliance with other laws. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all development must comply with all other applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-1.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-5. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  State or federal regulations. If the provisions of these land development regulations are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls. 
(b)  Other city regulations. If the provisions of these land development regulations are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the city, the more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. If the regulations of these land development regulations conflict with the city's standards and specifications, the standards and specifications govern. 
(c)  Private agreements and covenants. 
(1)  These land development regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of these land development regulations impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement or covenant, the provisions of these land development regulations control. 
(2)  Private restrictive covenants to which the city is not a party are not regulated by or enforced by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-1.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-6. - Severability. 
The several provisions of these land development regulations are separable in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  Should any court of competent jurisdiction adjudge any section or provision of these land development regulations to be invalid, such judgment does not affect the validity or continued application of the land development regulations as a whole or any section or provision other than the sections or provisions specifically adjudged to be invalid. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges as invalid the application of any section or provision of these land development regulations to a particular property, building or structure, such judgment does not affect the application of the section or provision to any other property, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-1.60), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 16-7—16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former §§ 16-46—16-56 as §§ 16-26—16-36. 

Sec. 16-26. - Intent. 
(a)  The environment and natural resource regulations of this article establish public policies for the protection of the natural environment and specify standards for land development to ensure achievement of these public policies. 
(b)  By declaration of public policies for protection of the environment and natural resources, the city council expresses its intent to protect the public interest by seeking to ensure, where appropriate, maintenance of natural resources and the environment and prevention of its degradation, and assuring high-quality land development. The city council further declares its intent that these policies constitute the public policy framework within which a comprehensive program for protection of the natural environment and implementation of a comprehensive drainage and stormwater management program will be accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-27. - Purpose. 
(a)  The environment and natural resource regulations of this article are adopted for the purpose of: 
(1)  Regulating the alteration of land and topography; 
(2)  Regulating the removal and requiring the replacement of certain vegetation; 
(3)  Requiring erosion control and sedimentation control; 
(4)  Protecting city streams and floodplains from substantial alteration of their natural functions and from sediment and debris accumulation; 
(5)  Specifying standards for stormwater management system design; 
(6)  Ensuring the continuous and efficient operation of the stormwater management system; and 
(7)  Protecting water quality within intermittent and perennial streams throughout the city. 
(b)  It is the city council's intent that land development be accomplished in conformity with the public policy statements. To that end, the plans required under applicable provisions of this chapter must be reviewed by the city to enable a full exchange of information between the city and the applicant as to the city's public policies for land development. 
(c)  The city council further declares its intent that these public policies be evaluated periodically so as to reflect the community's interests in protection of the natural environment and to give direction to city actions in matters affecting the natural environment and land development. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-28. - Applicability. 
The environment and natural resource regulations of this article apply to all development activity within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-29. - Development permits. 
(a)  Pre-application meeting. Before filing a land development application on a project for review and approval, the applicant must meet with the department to discuss the procedure for approval of a land development permit and the requirements as to the general layout of streets, parking, open space/lot coverage, street improvements, stormwater management, sewage, fire protection and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services, including schools. The department and the applicant must review the applicant's stormwater management plans, inspection and maintenance requirements and water quality control requirements. The department may advise the applicant, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed project with those officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the project coming within their jurisdiction. This meeting will also allow city officials to discuss with the applicant the necessary regulations that will properly accomplish the project. 
(b)  Complete applications. 
(1)  In order to be deemed valid and complete, an application for a land-disturbance permit must include at least the following: 
a.  Three copies and one electronic/digital copy of complete civil plans, which must include a site plan, a grading and stormwater management plan, a utility plan, a soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan, a landscape plan, and a tree survey; 
b.  One hydrology report and completed stormwater quality site development review tool documentation; 
c.  An application signed by the owner of the property or a completed indemnification agreement signed by the owner of the property; and 
d.  Payment of the appropriate development review application fee. 
(2)  A valid and complete application for a sketch plat approval must include at least the following: 
a.  Three copies of the preliminary plat site plan (and one electronic/digital copy) that is in conformance with the zoning of the property in effect at the time of the application, and a tree survey; 
b.  An application signed by the owner of the property or, if the application is not signed by the owner, a completed indemnification agreement signed by the owner of the property; and 
c.  Payment of the appropriate development review application fee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-30. - Site plans. 
(a)  All site plans submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter must meet the requirements for their preparation and must also provide information to enable a determination to be made by the community development director as to plan conformance with the public policy statements of this chapter. 
(b)  All persons proposing developments, redevelopments or construction must submit site plans to the community development director illustrating the means by which conformance with policy provisions may be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
(c)  Electric, telephone and gas utilities must submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions are exempt from these requirements for new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or where such lots are located within special flood hazard areas must be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this division and other applicable provisions of this chapter. Owners and developers of individual single-family lots are required to use best management practices to prevent sedimentation from leaving the site. 
(d)  Grading, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and stormwater management plans must be prepared by or under the supervision of a state-registered and authorized professional, as may be appropriate for project planning and design. Tree protection plans may be prepared by and implemented under the supervision of a currently state-registered professional architect, forester, landscape architect or engineer as may be appropriate for project planning and design. When the hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles for flood routing, super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies or other advanced hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis must be made by a currently state-registered professional with demonstrated proficiency in hydrology. 
(e)  Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with this chapter must be submitted in accordance with the applicableprovisions of the city zoning ordinance and all conditions of zoning and must include the following: 
(1)  Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this chapter for grading, vegetation alteration, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans must illustrate existing and proposed contours to the two-foot interval at a minimum. Water quality plans must include the identification of existing wetland areas within the development site and must demonstrate use of the stormwater quality site development review tool. Related plans must show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits, buffer areas, stream buffers, state buffer zones, and proposed alterations to the existing site. 
(2)  A hydrologic engineering analysis of stormwater runoff under pre-developed and post-developed site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. In determining downstream effects from stormwater management structures, BMPs, and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies must extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed. This analysis must include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross-section area required to carry the affected runoff. 
(3)  Delineation of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas for streams draining in excess of 100 acres. The actual building site in relation to the special flood hazard areas boundaries must be shown; the same information must be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected. 
(4)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and stormwater management plans as related to other major items of construction. 
(5)  Upon development project completion, location, size and invert elevations of piped segments of the stormwater management system, of control weirs, BMPs and water surface elevations and volumes in detention ponds must be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on as-built drawings for other developments, which must be submitted to the community development director prior to approval. The authorized, state-registered professional reviewing the construction must provide a certificate that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans. As-built elevation certifications prepared by currently state-registered land surveyors or currently state-registered professional engineers for all developments, including fill, allowed within a floodprone area, must be submitted to the community development director. 
(6)  A separate tree protection plan in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-31. - Administration. 
(a)  The community development director is responsible for administering and enforcing the environment and natural resources regulations of article II, divisions 2—5, including the following specific duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  Advise permittee when additional federal or state permits may be required and, if specific federal or state permits are known to be required, that copies of such permits are to be provided and maintained on file with the development permit; and 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(b)  The community development director is responsible for administering and enforcing those provisions article II, divisions 2—5 that apply to developed and occupied areas and to property in an undeveloped state affecting city responsibility for maintenance of the stormwater management system. The community development director must ensure that maintenance is provided within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-32. - Variances. 
(a)  Authorized variances. Except as further limited herein, an applicant may request a variance from the grading regulations of article II, division 2, the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control regulations of article II, division 3, the stream buffer regulations of article II, division 4, and the stormwater management regulations of article II, division 5. See section 16-141 for information about variances to flood damage prevention regulations. 
(b)  Authority to hear and consider. The zoning board of appeals is authorized to hear variance requests. The zoning board of appeals may not consider or grant variances that are the responsibility of the director of the environmental protection division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and other relevant state statutes and regulations. 
(1)  Improvements related to city approved plans. City council is authorized to consider applications for variances to the stream buffer requirements of section 16-78 but not within the 25-foot state buffer zone adjacent to waters of the state as set forth in section 16-59 for city improvements that are part of a city council-approved plan. All public notice requirements as outlined in chapter 27 and all appeal processes as outlined in chapter 16, section 16-34 apply. 
(c)  Stream buffer variances. The zoning board of appeals is authorized to consider applications for variances to the stream buffer requirements of section 16-78 but not within the 25-foot state buffer zone adjacent to waters of the state as set forth in section 16-59. Where variances involving the same project are requested from both the state director of the environmental protection division and the community development director, the community development director may not take action on any such request for variance until the state acts on the subject application. Receiving a variance from the director of the environmental protection division does not obligate the zoning board of appeals to permit the project to proceed if the project does not also meet all the other requirements of this chapter. No variance from the provisions of this chapter may be authorized except as expressly authorized in this section or another section of this chapter. 
(d)  Applications. Applications for variances authorized in subsection (a) must be made in writing to the community development director and must contain all of materials and documents necessary to demonstrate that the request meets the criteria for granting variances. The community development director must review the variance request and make a recommendation of approval or denial to the zoning board of appeals. 
(e)  Decision-making criteria. In considering a request for a variance authorized in subsection (a), the zoning board of appeals must make all of the following findings: 
(1)  The request, while not strictly meeting the requirements of this chapter, will be, in the judgment of the zoning board of appeals, at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as would a plan which met the strict application of these requirements. In making such a judgment, the zoning board of appeals must examine whether the request will be at least as protective of the natural resources and the environment with regard to the following factors: 
a.  Stream bank or soil stabilization; 
b.  Trapping of sediment in surface runoff; 
c.  Removal of nutrients, heavy metals, pesticides and other pollutants from surface runoff; 
d.  Terrestrial habitat, food chain, and migration corridor; 
e.  Buffering of flood flows; 
f.  Infiltration of surface runoff; 
g.  Noise and visual buffers; 
h.  Downstream water quality; and 
i.  Impact on threatened and endangered species, as those species are designated by law or federal or state regulation. 
(2)  By reason of exceptional topographic or other relevant physical conditions of the subject property that were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for any development under any design configuration unless a variance is granted. 
(3)  The request does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief and does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties that are similarly situated. 
(4)  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the area in which the property is located. 
(5)  The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this chapter would cause an extreme hardship, provided the hardship was not created by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-02-05, § 1, 2-11-2019) 
Sec. 16-33. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
(a)  Applicability. The procedures of this division apply to appeals of administrative decisions authorized under these land development regulations. 
(b)  Authority to file. Any person or entity (i.e.: an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor, or a neighbor whose property is within 1,500 feet of the subject property aggrieved by an administrative decision may appeal the decision. 
(c)  Application filing. Decisions by the community development director made pursuant to this division may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals (ZBA) by filing a request with the community development director within 30 days of the community development director's decision. Decisions will be published on-line, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and provided in writing via first class mail to adjacent property owners. The 30-day appeal period shall commence from the date written notification is sent to adjacent property owners. Appeal shall be in accordance with procedures and conditions of this division. If no appeal is made within the 30-day period, the decision of the community development director is final. If an appeal is made to the ZBA, the ZBA must set a hearing date for the appeal within 30 days of the appeal being requested and the decision of the ZBA is final. The 30-day appeal deadline may be waived by the ZBA if the appellant can show evidence that the appeal was filed within 30 days of their actual or constructive notice of the decision. 
(d)  Effect of appeal. The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the official whose decision is being appealed certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court on notice to the official whose decision is being appealed and on due cause shown. 
(e)  Record of decision. Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal, the community development director or other administrative official whose decision is being appealed must transmit to the zoning board of appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. 
(f)  Hearing notice. Mailed notice of the zoning board of appeals hearing must be provided to the appellant at least ten days before the date of the zoning board of appeals hearing. 
(g)  Hearing and decision. 
(1)  The zoning board of appeals must hold a hearing to consider all appeals of administrative decisions. 
(2)  Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the zoning board of appeals must make a decision. The decision must be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing. Final action on an appeal requires a simple majority vote of the board of appeals members present and voting. 
(3)  In exercising its powers, the zoning board of appeal may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. To that end, the board has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(h)  Review and approval criteria. An appeal shall be sustained only upon a finding by the zoning board of appeals that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.80), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-34. - Appeals of zoning board of appeals' decisions. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the zoning board of appeals, including any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court for a writ of certiorari, setting forth the alleged errors. The petition must be filed within 30 days of the date that the zoning board of appeals renders its final decision. 
(b)  When a petition is for a writ of certiorari is filed, the zoning board of appeals must be designated the respondent in certiorari and the city the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the zoning board of appeals is authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ on behalf of the zoning board of appeals, as respondent. Service upon the city as defendant must be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.90), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-35. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the community development director determines that development activity or inactivity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plans, that approved and required erosion, sedimentation and pollution control facilities or devices have been altered, damaged or destroyed, or that any other activities violate the provisions of this chapter, the community development director must issue a notice of violation. Whenever the community development director determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, the community development director must issue a notice of violation. The provisions of this section apply in addition to any other penalty provisions applicable to this chapter. The notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto must be addressed to the owner of the property or the owner's agent and to the person found to be violating the provisions of this chapter and must: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  List the specific provisions of this chapter that have been violated; 
(4)  State that, if these repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector, summons must be issued for the person to appear in municipal court. However, in the judgment of the community development director, where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this chapter or constitutes a public health and safety hazard or endangers the ecosystem, the community development director may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(b)  Penalty. It is unlawful for any person to do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this chapter, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by the provisions of this chapter, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in municipal court is subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-6 of the municipal code. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof is deemed a separate offense. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof where anything in violation of this chapter exists, and any architect, builder, engineer, contractor, or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits, or assists in the commission of, any violation, is guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Inspections. 
(1)  Upon presentation of city identification to the applicant, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, city employees may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development or construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with all ordinance provisions. 
(2)  All new developments and redevelopments must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement that will bind all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(3)  City employees may inspect any drainage or stormwater management system within or outside of an existing easement. All stormwater management facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, must be accessible at all times for city inspection. Where stormwater management facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements must be provided. Reasonable access must be provided to all easements for inspection and maintenance functions. 
(4)  The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant must authorize the community development director to conduct a search or inspection of property without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
a.  Inspection warrants may be issued by municipal court when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; and 
2.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by law. 
b.  The inspection warrant must meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; 
2.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection; 
3.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
4.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.100), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-36. - Emergency maintenance. 
(a)  The city may conduct emergency maintenance operations on private land and on drainage and stormwater management systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance may constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the community development director or public works director create a condition potentially injurious to life, property and the public road system. 
(b)  The provisions of article II, division 6 do not apply in the case of tree trimming, removal or cutting necessitated by emergencies such as floods, windstorms, ice storms or other disasters. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater management system does not constitute a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-3.110), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-37—16-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRADING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former §§ 16-66 and 16-67 as §§ 16-46 and 16-47. 

Sec. 16-46. - Purpose. 
The grading regulations of this division are intended to help: 
(1)  Encourage the design of grading plans to provide the natural appearance of land contours and to provide ease of use in public areas; 
(2)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading on existing vegetation; 
(3)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading on the drainage system by strict erosion control and sedimentation control measures; and 
(4)  Minimize erosion and shear failure by encouraging limited cutting and filling. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-4.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-47. - Regulations. 
(a)  All grading operations must be conducted in compliance with an approved site plan. 
(b)  Before beginning construction activity, the floodplain must be identified throughout the entire development by staking or other identifying mechanisms no less than every 100 feet. 
(c)  Grading must be performed to avoid the restriction of drainage through drainageways and drainage easements. Grading must be performed to provide positive drainage to storm drainage inlets, swales, channels, ditches or gutters. 
(d)  Finish grade slopes on residential projects and lots may not be steeper than 3:1, unless absolutely impractical due to vegetation, topography, or soil conditions. Three-to-one finish grade slopes must transition to 2:1 slopes at all perpendicular stream crossings. 
(e)  Large-scale general grading must include installation of approved soil and erosion control measures and be limited to phases approved by the community development director and completed prior to commencing building construction. 
(f)  Grading and filling in floodplains is prohibited, except as expressly allowed by article II, division 8. 
(g)  The burying, piling, or concealing in any way of construction waste is prohibited. No certificate of occupancy may be issued until the applicant provides written certification to the community development director, accompanied by a landfill receipt, indicating that all construction waste has been removed from the property. 
(h)  Fills must be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of six inches per layer. In all areas where structures, parking lots and drives, streets, dams and utilities are to be placed fill must be compacted to a density of at least 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot, as determined by ASTM D 698 All other fills must be compacted to a least 85 percent, except for the upper one foot of roadways, which must be compacted to 98 percent. 
(i)  Fill dirt, permitted through the issuance of a separate land disturbance permit on any residentially-zoned property shall be limited to: 
(1)  A cumulative maximum of 1,000 cubic yards per property; and 
(2)  No more than 20 trips per day, including trips to and from the permitted property. 
(3)  Separate land disturbance permits issued under this subsection must be used only in accordance with the provisions of the zoning district on which the property is situated and its intent and not for any commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-4.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-10-16, § 1, 10-27-2014; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-48—16-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former §§ 16-76—16-84 as §§ 16-56—16-64. 

Sec. 16-56. - Purpose. 
The soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control regulations of this division are primarily intended to: 
(1)  Minimize the removal of vegetation; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of bare earth to precipitation by encouraging the scheduling of land development in increments of workable size which can be completed within a single construction season or within a time period compatible with the type and size of the project; 
(3)  Provide for the reestablishment of vegetation within a reasonable period following completion of final grading and utility installation; 
(4)  Give priority to the installation of streets, parking lots and other areas within a reasonable time following completion of final grading; and 
(5)  Encourage the use of erosion control and sedimentation techniques found in the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia, as published by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-57. - Compliance with state law. 
Any land-disturbing activity permitted under this division must be carried out in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A., § 12-7-1 et seq., all applicable city regulations and any conditions attached to the land-disturbance permit issued under section 16-60. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-58. - Applicability and exemptions. 
The soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control regulations of this division apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for granite quarrying; 
(3)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in only minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of a single-family residence when that construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section, provided however, that construction of a single-family residence must comply with the minimum requirements of section 16-59; 
(5)  Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; providing, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 16-59, no other land-disturbing activities except for normal forest management practices are allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area, provided however, that this exemption does not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of one acre or more or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, excluding channels and drainageways that have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that do not have water in them year-round, provided however, that any person responsible for a project that involves less than one acre that involves land-disturbing activity and that is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which the project is located and provided further, that these provisions do not preclude the city from regulating any project that is not expressly exempted by subsections (1)—(7) or by subsection (9) or subsection (10); 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects undertaken or financed in whole or in part by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project undertaken by any county or municipality, provided however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority that disturb one or more contiguous acres of land are subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1, except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit must be submitted to the Local issuing authority, and the Local issuing authority must enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations are subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local issuing authority must enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations are subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-03-06, § 1, 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-59. - Regulations. 
(a)  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities that are not expressly exempted by this division must contain provisions for soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. These provisions must be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices must be applied to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, stormwater management facilities, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures must be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. The community development director may require that land-disturbing activities be phased. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans must address appropriate measures to effectively control soil erosion during successive phases of construction. 
(b)  Best management practices. 
(1)  The best management practices set forth of this section (subsection (b)) and the minimum protections established in subsection (c) are required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design by phases, installation and maintenance of best management practices constitutes a complete defense to any action by the director of the environmental protection division or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained constitutes a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters must be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director of the environmental protection division. This section does not apply to any land-disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices constitutes a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the environmental protection division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director of the environmental protection division may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  Protections. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities require, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, grading and other development activities must be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation must be retained, protected and supplemented as provided in article II, division 6. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements must be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil must be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching must be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices must be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this section, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control must include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediment on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2). 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16), there is established a 25-foot state buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director of the environmental protection division approves a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director of the environmental protection division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this section, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that, under normal circumstances, has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, must remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director of the environmental protection division, as provided in this section. The following requirements apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities may be conducted within a buffer and a buffer must remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer does not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented at: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less must have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director of the environmental protection division may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities may be conducted within a buffer and a buffer must remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer does not apply to stream crossings for water lines or stream crossings for sewer lines, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented at stream crossings for the sewer or water lines. 
(d)  Injury to other property. The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another does not constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-03-06, § 1, 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-60. - Land-disturbance permits. 
(a)  Required. No person may conduct any land-disturbing activity within the city without first obtaining a land-disturbance permit from the community development director to perform such activity and providing a copy of the notice of intent to the environmental protection division, if applicable. 
(b)  Review of plans and ordinances. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers must review the general development plans and detailed plans of the Local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They must review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local issuing authority. However, the owner is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(c)  Applications. 
(1)  The application for a permit must be submitted to the community development director and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. The plans must include, at a minimum, the data specified in subsection (d). Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans must conform to the provisions of section 16-59. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by eight copies of the applicant's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications must contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources. 
(2)  A permitting fee, as determined by the city council must be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees may not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees must be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees must be paid prior to issuance of the land-disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied must be submitted to the EPD; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) must be submitted in full to the EPD, regardless of the existence of a Local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local issuing authority must refer the application and plan to the soil and water conservation district for its review and approval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The soil and water conservation district must approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the soil and water conservation district to act within 35 days will be construed as an approval of the pending plan. The results of the soil and water conservation district review must be forwarded to the Local issuing authority. No permit may be issued unless the plan has been approved by the soil and water conservation district, all required fees have been paid and any variances required by section 16-59 and any financial guarantees required in accordance with subsection (c)(6) have been obtained. Such a review will not be required if the Local issuing authority and the soil and water conservation district have entered into an agreement which allows the Local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the soil and water conservation district. The Local issuing authority must approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt of a complete application. Failure of the Local issuing authority to take action within this required 35-day period means that the revised plan has been deemed approved by the issuing authority. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the community development director may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The community development director may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the community development director may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Plans. 
(1)  Applications and plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements of subsections (c) and (d). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent alternate design criteria which conform to conservation and engineering practices including, but not limited to, design criteria published by the city or the city's approved stormwater management policy. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set forth herein. The plan for the land-disturbing activity must consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Site plans must be submitted, which include all of the information required by the applicable, current erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the soil and water conservation commission. The site plan must also include the following minimum data: 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information; notes or narrative are to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes; 
b.  A description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project; 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner; 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion, sedimentation and pollution controls; 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres; 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. The following statement must be on the site plan in bold letters: "The installation of erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices must occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities"; 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas; 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding; 
i.  Detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, but must be site specific; 
j.  Maintenance statement: "Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures must be implemented to control or treat the sediment source."; and 
k.  Other information pertinent to requirements of this chapter as required by the community development director. 
l.  Requirements for construction site operators to control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, or sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse water quality impacts. 
(3)  Maps, drawing, and supportive computations must bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion, sedimentation and pollution control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity must meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the soil and water conservation commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans must contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north; 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets; 
c.  Boundary line survey; 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary; 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan; 
g.  The names of property owners and current zoning of all abutting property; 
h.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas; 
i.  The delineated stream buffers as required by article II, division 4, adjacent to state waters identified by the city; 
j.  The location of erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, "Chapter (6)" 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices, whether temporary or permanent, are at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(e)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits must be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the community development director and soil and water conservation district of a completed application, provided variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit may be issued by the community development director unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved and the community development director has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 16-59 are obtained, any financial guarantees required in accordance with subsection (c)(6) are provided and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial must be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a Local issuing authority are subject to the requirements of this division and to any other regulations relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the soil and water conservation district will enforce such requirements upon the Local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit is required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit must notify any successor in title of all conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  No permit may be issued until the applicant files documents with the community development director demonstrating compliance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-03-06, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-61. - Appeals. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions entitles the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with section 16-33. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-62. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The community development department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion, sedimentation and pollution. 
(2)  The city must regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees are responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary and tertiary permittees are responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the permittees are conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this division, a written notice to comply must be served upon that person by the community development director. The notice must set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and must state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, that person will be deemed in violation of this division. 
(3)  The community development director has the power to conduct any investigations necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this division, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(4)  No person may refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the soil and water conservation commission, or the soil and water conservation district who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor may any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(5)  The soil and water conservation district or the soil and water conservation commission or both may periodically review the actions of the city. The soil and water conservation district or the soil and water conservation commission or both may provide technical assistance to the city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The soil and water conservation district or the soil and water conservation commission must notify the EPD and request investigation by the EPD if the city's program is found to be deficient or ineffective. 
(6)  The Georgia Board of Natural Resources may promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a Local issuing authority. The EPD may periodically review the actions of the city which has been certified as a Local issuing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include review of the administration and enforcement of the city's ordinances. If such review indicates that the city has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the EPD must notify the city governing authority in writing. Upon receipt of the notification, the governing authority has 90 days to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local issuing authority. If the city does not take necessary action within 90 days after notification by the EPD, the EPD may revoke the certification of the city as a Local issuing authority. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining the permit, the person is subject to revocation of their business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the city. 
(2)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the community development director or other city authorized representative, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, must be immediately stopped. Such notice must be in writing and must be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and must state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice is required. 
a.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this division on a site, the community development director must issue a written notice of violation. The violator has five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the EPD or the Local issuing authority must issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the EPD or the Local issuing authority must issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
b.  For a third and each subsequent violation on a site, the EPD or the Local issuing authority must issue an immediate stop-work order. All stop-work orders are effective immediately upon issuance and remain in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
c.  When a violation in the form of land-disturbance without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local issuing authority or by the EPD director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order must be issued by the Local issuing authority or by the EPD director or his designee. All such stop-work orders are effective immediately upon issuance and remain in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Stop-work orders apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(3)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply must be served by the community development director upon that person. The notice must set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and must state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, they will be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, will be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 16-60. The community development director may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(4)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this division, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this division, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the community development director issued as provided in this division, is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of city ordinances, the municipal court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought under city ordinances approved under this division is authorized to impose penalties for such violations, not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-03-06, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-63. - Liability. 
(a)  The approval of a plan under the provisions of this division or the compliance with provisions of this division does not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another does not constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this division or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this division permits any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved under the Act or pollute any waters of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.80), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-64. - Education and certification. 
All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity must meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the state soil and water conservation commission in consultation with the environmental protection division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-5.90), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-65—16-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STREAM BUFFERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former §§ 16-96—16-100 to §§ 16-76—16-80. 

Sec. 16-76. - Applicability. 
The stream buffer regulations of this division apply along all perennial and intermittent streams throughout the city except as expressly exempted or permitted in accordance with section 16-79. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-6.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-77. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the city's stream buffer regulations is to preserve existing mature riparian vegetation that can provide shade, leaf litter, woody debris and erosion protection for streams. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-6.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-78. - Minimum stream buffer requirements. 
(a)  Stream buffers are established along all perennial and intermittent streams in the city. These required stream buffers begin at the stream bank and extend 75 feet away from the stream. The buffers must remain undisturbed except as otherwise provided in section 16-79. 
Figure 6-1: Minimum Stream Buffer Requirement  
(b)  Any new stormwater discharge crossing a stream buffer or state buffer zone must be designed to ensure that sheet flow is established through the stream buffer and to prevent channelized flow through the stream buffer. 
(c)  Piping of streams is not allowed in required stream buffers unless a variance is granted in accordance with section 16-32. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-6.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-79. - Exemptions and special administrative permits. 
(a)  Exemptions. The stream buffer regulations of this division do not apply to any of the following activities, provided that any activity within a state-mandated stream buffer must meet state requirements. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption from any other activity proposed on a property or a requirement to obtain a building/land development permit. 
(1)  Work consisting of the usual and customary repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this section. Such usual and customary repair and maintenance activities cannot create any land disturbance, and must occur within the preexisting disturbed area; 
(2)  Maintenance, including the full replacement, of existing decks, porches or similar improvements attached to a dwelling that encroach into a city stream buffer so long as the work does not increase the degree of encroachment or any nonconformity. The complete replacement of these improvements is provided for, including the replacement of stairs and all supporting beams, posts and footings subject to compliance with applicable city codes. The necessary construction of new or improved footings as required to comply with current building codes is allowable up to a maximum of 100 square feet of land disturbance; 
(3)  Construction of new decks, porches or other similar additions no more than 200 square feet in area, to existing structures without a deck, porch or similar structure, provided that such construction does not require more than 100 square feet of land disturbance and does not further encroach more than ten feet into the city stream buffer; 
(4)  Existing development and on-going land-disturbance activities including existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land-disturbance activities on such properties is subject to all applicable buffer requirements; 
(5)  Public sewer line installation in easements running parallel with the stream where necessary, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance within a state waters' buffer must meet state requirements. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption may not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses expressly identified in this paragraph; 
(6)  Removal of unwanted ground cover (e.g., poison ivy) using hand tools as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; 
(7)  Land development activities within a dedicated transportation right-of-way existing at the time this section takes effect or approved under the terms of this section; 
(8)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this section takes effect or approved under the terms of this section, land-disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures; 
(9)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed, the person performing it must report such work to the community development department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten business days thereafter, the person must apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the community development department to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area; 
(10)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land-disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer; 
(11)  Activities to restore or enhance stream bank stability, riparian vegetation, water quality or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used; 
(12)  The removal of dead, diseased, insect-infested, or hazardous trees (without any associated land disturbance), provided the property owner provides a tree removal permit; and 
(13)  Multi-use trails and related improvements that are part of a city council-approved plan. Unless otherwise approved by the state, such encroachments must be located at least 25 feet from the banks of state waters when, after study of alternative trail alignments, the community development director determines that the alignment is the most desirable alternative and that they are designed to minimize impervious surfaces and incorporate BMPs and other mitigation practices that minimize the impact of encroachments on water quality. Trail improvements that are part of a city council-approved plan are not counted as part of a site's impervious surface area for purposes of site development-related calculations and regulations. 
(b)  Special administrative permits. The following activities may be approved within the stream buffers required by section 16-78 by special administrative permit, pursuant to the process outlined in chapter 27, article V, division 7: 
(1)  Stream crossings by utility lines, roads, driveways or similar transportation routes, including trails for nonmotorized transportation; 
(2)  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
(3)  Land development necessary to provide access to a property; 
(4)  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the stream, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
(5)  Stormwater outfalls to the stream, by pipe or channel, necessary to protect the buffer from erosion caused by high-flow velocities due to steep slopes; 
(6)  Exclusive of the exemptions in [subsections] (a)(2) and (a)(3) above, minor land-disturbing activities totaling no more than 200 square feet in area and located more than 25 feet from the stream, for the construction of decks, porches, or other additions to existing structures, and accessory structures where riparian vegetation is restored or replaced in any disturbed areas; and 
(7)  Construction and land disturbance that results in the reduction or removal of impervious surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-6.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-04-04, § 1, 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § III, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 16-80. - State-mandated stream buffers. 
See section 16-59. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-6.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-81—16-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 16-91. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations of this division are adopted to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. These regulations seek to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the predevelopment hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Stormwater manual. All land development in the city must comply with the criteria, technical specifications, and standards of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be hereafter amended. The rainfall intensities used in hydrologic and hydraulic computations must be those published in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(c)  Applicability. The stormwater management regulations of this division apply to all land development activities that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Involves the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that meets the definition of a stormwater hotspot, as determined by the community development director; or 
(3)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria of paragraphs (1) or (2), above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(d)  Exemptions and waivers. 
(1)  The following activities are exempt from the stormwater management requirements of this division: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the community development director. 
(2)  If 50 percent or less of a site is to be redeveloped, stormwater requirements must be met for the redeveloped area only and the non-disturbed area will be treated as pre-developed prior to the redevelopment. But if more than 50 percent of the site is to be redeveloped, then the entire site must meet all stormwater requirements. 
(e)  Information required with land development permit applications. Except as otherwise expressly exempted, land development permit applications must be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 16-92; 
(2)  Performance bond, if applicable; and 
(3)  Applicable permit application and plan review fees. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-7.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-92. - Stormwater management plans. 
(a)  General. Stormwater management plans must identify how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet all applicable requirements of this division. Plans must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the stormwater design manual. 
(b)  Information required. The stormwater management plan must ensure compliance with the requirements and criteria in this division and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan must consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan must include all information required by the stormwater management site plan checklist of the stormwater design manual, including all of the following: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)  Vicinity map; 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis (see subsection (c)); 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis (see subsection (d)); 
(5)  Stormwater management system design (see subsection (e)); 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis (see subsection (f)); 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan (see subsection (g)); 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan (see subsection (h)); 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan (see subsection (i)); 
(10)  Maintenance access easements (see subsection (j)); 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements (see subsection (k)); 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits (see subsection (l)); 
(13)  Any proposed off-site facilities (see subsection (m)). 
(c)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. 
(1)  The existing conditions hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities must include all of the following: 
a.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
b.  Acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
c.  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; 
d.  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; 
e.  Direction of flow and exits from the site; 
f.  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
g.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
(2)  For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions must be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(d)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities must include all of the following: 
(1)  A topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
(2)  Total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
(3)  Calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 16-94; 
(4)  Location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; 
(5)  Documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; 
(6)  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
(e)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system must include all of the following: 
(1)  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
(2)  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
(3)  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
(4)  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
(5)  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 16-94; 
(6)  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and 
(7)  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(f)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis must include the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report must address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis must focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area must extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis must be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The capacity of the drainage systems must be analyzed to the ten percent point. 
(g)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan must also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(h)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: 
(1)  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
(2)  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
(3)  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; 
(4)  Density of plantings; 
(5)  Descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and 
(6)  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(i)  Operations and maintenance plan. This plan must include a detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. They must identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan must include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures must be included in the plan. 
(j)  Maintenance access easements. 
(1)  The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access must be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist must be recorded and must remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(2)  The access easement to the facility may not have a profile slope steeper than 33 percent and a cross slope of no more than ten percent. The elevation of the maintenance easement around the facility must be established at the top of the dam or wall elevation and be constructed with a cross slope of no more than ten percent to the drainage facility. Fencing that complies with the requirement section 16-93 must be constructed on the outside edge of the maintenance easement. Gates that comply with the requirements of section 16-93 must be constructed on each maintenance easement. 
(k)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(1)  Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, the applicant must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that is be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement must identify by name or official title the persons responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, will remain with the property owner and will pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements must be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements must designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(3)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule must be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement must also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and include remedies for the default thereof. 
(4)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this division and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(l)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant must certify and provide documentation to the (local permitting authority) that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(m)  Off-site facilities. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project must provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures must be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan showing the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility must be submitted to the community development director. 
(3)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in any of the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-7.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-93. - Design. 
(a)  Detention designs. Detention designs may be rejected if they incorporate structures and facilities that will demand considerable maintenance or will be difficult to maintain or will utilize numerous small structures if other alternatives are physically possible. 
(b)  Discharge velocities. Discharge velocities from detention facilities must be reduced to provide a nonerosive velocity flow from a structure, channel, or other control measure as set forth in the approved Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(c)  Design storm. The drainage system being developed must have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a 100-year storm event. 
(d)  Drainage outfalls. The drainage system from a proposed development must discharge into an outfall that has adequate capacity to accommodate the runoff from the development. If the connecting downstream system is not able to accommodate the allowable design flow from the site, then the design engineer must design on-site drainage facilities that result in no exacerbation of existing downstream conditions. 
(e)  Detention storage. 
(1)  The live detention storage to be provided must be calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall as published in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The detention system must be adequate for the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the post-development, with a release rate that does not exceed the pre-development release rate during the same duration storm. Detention control structures and other drainage improvements must be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. 
(2)  Detention and sedimentation control facilities may not be placed in any of the following: 
a.  Transitional buffer zones as defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
b.  Floodplains. 
c.  Wetlands. 
d.  Stream buffer zones. 
e.  State buffer zones. 
(3)  Perforated standpipes or a French drain, in accordance with published design standards available from the community development director, or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing water and inadequate drainage, must be installed within all the detention and sedimentation control facilities. 
(f)  Combined detention. When the applicant requests and the community development director determines that development and construction projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined detention or other stormwater management facilities more practical, the city may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two or more properties by two or more applicants. 
(g)  Fencing. 
(1)  Permanent fencing at least four feet in height is required around all stormwater and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater if they have a water storage depth of greater than four feet or they are designated by the city or board of health as a public health hazard. 
(2)  Required fencing must be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. Fencing must be established on the outside edge of a facility. The fence must include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. The gate must be placed in a manner such that the gate does not obstruct reasonable access or become obstructive. The community development director may waive fencing in nonresidential areas where a pond is more than 500 feet from a residential zoning district and in residential zoning districts when detention is provided in natural areas such as stream channels and fencing in the opinion of the community development director would damage the environment or affect stream flow. 
(h)  Special flood hazard area elevation contours. In residential districts, not less than 70 percent of the minimum lot area, as established by applicable zoning district development standards, must be above the special flood hazard area elevation contours with the exception that lots in the R-150 district must conform to requirements of the R-100 district. 
(i)  Street centerline elevations. The profile elevation of the centerline of all public streets must be constructed a minimum of one foot above special flood hazard area elevation contours. The community development director may grant exceptions to this provision in cases where construction of the street elevation is within a special flood hazard area and elevation contours would improve drainage or reduce the effects of flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-7.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-94. - Performance criteria. 
The performance criteria of this section apply to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site must be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the community development department are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. 
a.  Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation must be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
1.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
2.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and 
3.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
b.  The community development director is authorized to waive the detention storage requirements of subsection (2)a.2. for sites that discharge directly into piped stormwater drainage systems, larger streams, rivers, wetlands, lakes, estuaries, tidal water or other situations where flows will not have a negative impact on stream bank stability or channel integrity. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection must be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection must be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities must be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the community development director before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the community development director may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants must consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1). The applicant may, if approved by the community development director, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, thereis a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are identified in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters must be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows must be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems must be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities must be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site that proposes a dam must comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-7.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-95. - Inspections and maintenance. 
(a)  Inspections during construction. 
(1)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction must be conducted by the community development department or conducted and certified by a professional engineer approved by the community development director. Construction inspections must utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections must be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(2)  If any violations are found, the applicant must be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspections and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy may be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance bonds or financial guarantees. 
(c)  Long-term maintenance and inspections. 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this division. 
(2)  A stormwater management facility or practice must be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the public works director must notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice must specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and must specify the time within which such measures must be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may pursue all available enforcement actions and penalties. 
(3)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(d)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement must provide authority for authorized city or city contracted officials to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation. 
(e)  Maintenance responsibilities. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, commercial and/or multifamily residential property owner is responsible for the maintenance of the stormwater management facilities during grading, construction, and following final approval of the completed project. This maintenance and certification obligation is binding on all future owners, successors and assigns of the property. 
(2)  Stormwater management facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed under permits issued prior to the adoption of the city ordinance assigning maintenance responsibility will not be accepted for city maintenance unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the public works director and suitable access easements are provided. The public works director shall make a decision within 30 days of submittal of the request. The applicant shall be empowered to appeal the decision of the public works director to the mayor and city council, which shall hear the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. 
(f)  Records. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility must provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the public works director. 
(g)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the public works director, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice is deemed sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owners of the facility for the cost of repair work, which will be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(h)  Special drainage system maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Pursuant to all applicable city and county law, trash, garbage, construction materials, construction by-products or other debris may not be deposited in any part of the drainage system. 
(2)  No restriction or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage system or special flood hazard areas without first obtaining a development permit. When on-site or off-site debris has accumulated within a special flood hazard area in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties adjacent to special flood hazard areas, the community development director must require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water. 
(3)  No impoundment of water which retains in excess of 0.5 acre-foot of runoff may be removed without first obtaining a development permit, which may only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the applicant show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-7.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-01-01, § I, 1-28-2019) 
Secs. 16-96—16-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TREE PRESERVATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former §§ 16-126—16-135 as §§ 16-106—16-115. 

Sec. 16-105. - General. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development and building construction process for the purpose of making the City of Dunwoody a more attractive place to live, provide a healthy living environment, and to better maintain control of flooding, noise, glare and soil erosion. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to facilitate the preservation and/or replacement of trees as part of the land development, construction, and tree removal permit process as defined in section 16-106. 
(c)  Benefits. Benefits derived from tree protection and replanting include: 
(1)  Improved control of soil erosion; 
(2)  Moderation of stormwater runoff, and improved water quality; 
(3)  Interception of airborne particulate matter, and the reduction of some air pollutants; 
(4)  Enhanced habitat for desirable wildlife; 
(5)  Reduction of noise and glare; 
(6)  Climate moderation and the reduction of the heat island effect; 
(7)  Aesthetics, scenic amenity; 
(8)  Increased property value; and 
(9)  Assistance in traffic calming. 
(d)  Applicability. The terms and provisions of this section apply to any activity on real property which requires the issuance of a development permit, substantial building permit, or tree removal permit within the City of Dunwoody. No development permit or substantial building permit may be issued by the city without it being determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-10-19, § I, 10-9-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-10-19, § I, adopted Oct. 9, 2017, renumbered former § 16-106 to § 16-105. 
Sec. 16-106. - Tree removal permit. 
(a)  Applicability. The tree removal permit is established for tree removal occurring outside of a land development permit or substantial building permit. A tree removal permit is required for the removal of: 
(1)  Any hardwood with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of ten inches or greater, softwoods with a DBH of 20 inches or greater, and understory with a DBH of six inches or greater on non-residential, mixed-use, and multi-family zoned lots; and 
(2)  Any tree located within the city's 75-foot stream buffer. 
(b)  Requirements. To obtain a tree removal permit, the owner/applicant shall submit the following information: 
(1)  A completed tree removal permit application; 
(2)  A site plan, or a detailed map sketch illustrating the species, approximate size, and location of each existing tree to be removed and preserved; 
(3)  Picture of each tree to be removed, including any particular evidence of dead, diseased, dying, insect-infested, or hazardous trees; 
(4)  Payment of the applicable tree removal permit fee as listed on the City of Dunwoody fee schedule; and 
(5)  In cases where the aforementioned information is not sufficient to accurately review the removal and replacement of trees, the city arborist may request additional information from the applicant (i.e. tree survey, tree replacement plan, third party arborist report, and/or planting plan). 
(c)  Exemptions. A tree removal permit is not required for the removal of: 
(1)  Any hardwood less than ten inches, softwood less than 20 inches, and understory trees less than six inches on non-residential, mixed-use, and multi-family zoned lots, with exception of any tree located within the city's 75-foot stream buffer; 
(2)  Any tree as necessary for construction, repair, or maintenance of public assets, including but not limited to the right-of-way, public roads, utilities, or drainage structures; 
(3)  Any trees found on single-family lots, located outside of the 75-foot city stream buffer; and 
(4)  Any trees damaged during the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, wind storm or other act of nature whereby the community development director or his/her designee may waive the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Tree removal permit application. The community development director and their designee(s) shall develop such forms as necessary to facilitate the tree removal permit application process. 
(e)  Approval. The city arborist will approve the removal of the tree(s) within five business days of receipt of a completed tree removal application, provided the following applicable standards are met: 
(1)  On non-residential, mixed use, and multi-family lots, the site plan and/or tree replacement plan must be sufficient to produce a total site density factor of 20 units per acre; 
(2)  For specimen trees located outside of a stream buffer on non-residential, mixed use and multi-family lots, the tree replacement plan shall demonstrate that the removed trees will be replaced by species with potential for comparable size and quality as noted in section 16-110(d) "removal of specimen trees"; and 
(3)  Stream buffer tree(s) that are deemed dead, dying, diseased, insect-infested or hazardous. 
(d)  Denial. If tree(s) are denied removal, they may be appealed per section 16-114(c). 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-19, § I, 10-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 16-107. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Submittal of tree protection plan. All applications for a development permit or a substantial building permit must be accompanied by a tree protection plan prepared and sealed by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist, or registered forester. The tree protection plan must include the following information: 
(1)  Tree survey. The tree survey must be a to-scale map or site plan that has been prepared and sealed by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist, registered forester, registered surveyor, or registered engineer. The tree survey must include the following minimum requirements: 
a.  All specimen trees are to be located and labeled with their size and species. Their critical root zone must be delineated and the spot elevation at the base of their trunk must be indicated. They must also be labeled in a way to determine if they are intended for removal or preservation. 
b.  All trees with a DBH measurement of ten inches or larger over-story and six inches or greater for understory must be located and their size and species must be indicated. 
c.  Sampling methods may be used to determine tree density calculations for forested areas over five acres. 
(2)  Definition of spatial limits. 
a.  Limits of land-disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
b.  Tree protection zones. 
c.  Areas of revegetation. 
d.  Indication of staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, debris burn, and other areas where tree protection may be affected. 
e.  Locations of existing and proposed structures, paving, driveways, cut and fill areas, detention areas, utilities, etc. 
(3)  Detail drawings of tree protection measures (where applicable). 
a.  Protective tree fencing; 
b.  Erosion control fencing; 
c.  Tree protection signs; 
d.  Transplanting specifications; 
e.  Tree wells and aeration systems; 
f.  Staking specifications; and 
g.  Other applicable drawings. 
(4)  Tree density calculations. See appendix A. 
(5)  Installation and maintenance measures Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of tree protection measures. 
(b)  Site inspection. An on-site inspection will be made by the city arborist prior to the commencement of any development activity. 
(c)  Review. All landscape plans, tree protection plans, and related documentation must be reviewed by the city arborist for conformance to the provisions of these regulations and either approved, returned for revisions, or denied within 30 days of receipt. If denied, the reasons for denial must be annotated on the landscape plan or otherwise stated in writing. 
(d)  Permit issuance. Issuance of the development permit or a substantial building permit is contingent upon approval of the required tree protection plan and landscape plan and an on-site inspection by the city arborist for tree protection measures. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 16-108. - Protected zones. 
(a)  Nothing in these regulations may be construed as allowing the removal of vegetation in a natural, undisturbed buffer required by zoning or land development regulations. 
(b)  Trees may not be removed from any protected zone. When preserving trees in a protected zone will result in a documented hardship, an appeal may be made to the community development director or the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to section 116-114(c). The documentation proving the hardship must be submitted as part of the tree protection plan and submitted variance application. 
(c)  When no trees are present in a protected zone or when it is proposed that any portion of a protected zone be disturbed, it is the responsibility of the owner/developer to landscape the areas (where improvements are not constructed) with trees or other plant materials. 
(d)  Trees may not be removed from a floodplain or stream buffer except as follows: 
(1)  Those trees found to be hazardous, dead, diseased, or insect-infested by the city arborist as prescribed in section 16-106; and 
(2)  As necessary for construction, repair, or maintenance of public roads, utilities, or drainage structures. 
(e)  No person shall intentionally or unintentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree in a stream buffer; attach any rope, wire, nails; allow gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(f)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-10-19, § I, 10-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, 7-23-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, adopted July 23, 2018, changed the title of § 16-108 from "Tree removal" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-109. - Tree replacement and revegetation. 
(a)  Applicability. Replacement of trees in the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by this section, must occur under the following conditions: 
(1)  To establish the minimum tree density requirements for the site. 
(2)  Where grading occurs outside the buildable area of the lot. 
(3)  If the buildable area of the lot leaves no protected zone. 
(4)  If no trees are present within an existing protected zone. 
(5)  Where specimen trees or specimen stands of trees within the buildable portion of the lot are to be removed. 
(6)  Where specimen trees or specimen stands of trees, and trees within otherwise designated tree protective zones have been irreparably damaged or removed through development or construction activities. 
(b)  Replacement quantity. 
(1)  Except as specified for single-family residential lots in subsection (b)(2), the quantity of replacement trees on a site must be sufficient to produce a total site tree density factor of no less than 20 density units per acre (Note: the terms unit and tree are not interchangeable). Procedures for determining the site density requirements and the subsequent tree replacement requirements are provided in appendix A. A required buffer or trees located in the floodplain may not be counted towards tree density. Understory trees may constitute no more than 25 percent of the required replacement trees, but lots smaller than 8,000 square feet in area are exempt from this limit. 
(2)  The following number of trees must be planted or preserved on all single-family residential lots developed in the city: 

 
(c)  Spacing. The spacing of replacement trees must be compatible with spatial limitations, and within responsible considerations towards potential species size. 
(d)  Specimen trees. All reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. ("Reasonable effort" includes alternate building design, building location, parking area layout, parking area location, water retention location and equivalent or similar measures). 
(e)  Tree save areas. Tree save areas are encouraged and will be given credit of up to 50 percent individual lot requirements when the number of trees in the tree save areas is equal to or greater than the total number of trees required on the total number of lots within the subdivision. 
(f)  Tree replacement fund. Occasionally, the tree replacement requirements of this section cannot be met because a project site will not accommodate the required density of trees. In this case, the city arborist is authorized to approve a contribution to the City of Dunwoody Tree Replacement Fund. The following standards have been established for administering these contributions: 
(1)  The city arborist must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance may 100 percent of the required site density be met through alternative compliance. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site in question. 
(2)  No permit may be issued until the required contribution has been made to the tree replacement fund. 
(3)  The amount of the contribution must be determined from the fee schedule for the community development department. 
(4)  The City of Dunwoody Tree Replacement Fund must be used for planting trees on public property. Funds may be used for the purchase of trees, installation of trees and irrigation, and the purchase of mulch and soil amendments for the planted areas. 
(5)  Species selected for replacement must be quality specimens and must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. No single tree species may be used for more than 35 percent of replacement trees. Evergreens may not be used for more than 25 percent of the trees in non-buffer areas. Standards for transplanting and selecting quality replacement stock must be in accordance with standards of the International Society of Arboriculture, National Association of Arborists, American Standard for Nursery Stock and appendix B. 
(6)  Understory replacement trees may account for no greater than 25 percent of the required tree density units. The city arborist is authorized to approve the additional use of understory trees for meeting density requirements on single-family lots if the size and/or layout of the lot does not allow for large overstory trees. 
(7)  Species selection and replacement densities are subject to approval by the city arborist. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-10-19, § I, 10-9-2017) 
Sec. 16-110. - Specimen and special trees. 
(a)  Criteria. Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. These trees are referred to as specimen or special trees. The following criteria are used by the city arborist to identify specimen and special trees. Both the size and condition must be met for a tree to qualify. 
(1)  Tree size. 

 
(2)  Tree condition. 
a.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay. 
b.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs. 
c.  No major insect or pathological problems. 
d.  No major pruning deficiencies, i.e. topping. 
e.  At least 75 percent of the critical root zone in a natural, undisturbed state. 
(b)  Tree density credit. In order to encourage the preservation of specimen and special trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen and special trees which are successfully saved and maintained. Credit for any specimen or special tree thus saved would be one and one-half times the assigned unit value shown in appendix A. Should the property owner retain the services of a certified arborist to improve the quality of the trees (services include, but are not limited to, installation of cabling and bracing, installation of lighting protection, corrective pruning, removal of deadwood, supplemental irrigation, introduction of mycorrhizae, etc.), the density credit will be increased to two times the assigned value designated in appendix A. The property owner must supply a letter of commitment from the certified arborist and/or provide documentation of services provided in order to receive the increased density credit. 
(c)  Preservation of tree stands. The city arborist may identify and require the preservation of a tree stand if it contains one or more specimen or special trees and the trees are interlocked with other members of the stand in such a manner as to imperil the individual tree if other members of the stand were to be removed. 
(d)  Removal of specimen trees. All specimen trees must be replaced by species with potential for comparable size and quality with three-inch caliper or larger trees at a density of one and one-half times the unit value of the tree removed; for example, a 30-inch DBH specimen tree (4.9 density units) must be replaced with 7.35 units. Specimen tree replacement density is in addition to the minimum required density for the site. 
(1)  Any specimen tree which is fatally damaged during construction, as determined by the city arborist, or removed without the appropriate review and approval of the city arborist, must be replaced with four-inch caliper or larger trees with a total density up to three times the unit value of the tree removed. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval. Additionally, the area that encompassed the critical root zone of the specimen tree must remain undisturbed to allow for the planting of replacement trees. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 16-111. - Tree protection measures. 
The following minimum tree protection measures must be in place for all tree save areas: 
(1)  Tree protection fencing. Trees identified for preservation must have protection fencing that is a minimum of four feet high installed at the edge of the critical root zones. The city arborist is authorized to require the installation of four-foot fencing in those areas where the likelihood of possible encroachment occurs. All tree protection zones must be designated as such with signage posted visibly on all sides of the fenced area. Signs requesting workers' cooperation and compliance with tree protection standards are recommended at the site entrance(s). 
(2)  Silt fences. All tree protection zones must be designed to prevent the sedimentation of erosion material. Silt fences must be placed along the outer uphill edges of tree protection zones at the development interface. 
(3)  Encroachment. No person may encroach into the tree protection zones. Construction activities, including but not limited to, parking, vehicle and foot traffic, material storage, concrete washout, debris burning, and other activities must be arranged so as to prevent disturbance within the protected areas. 
(4)  Utilities. Reasonable efforts must be made to locate utility lines along corridors between tree protection zones. If utility lines must encroach into the protection zones, they must be installed by tunneling rather than trenching. 
(5)  Maintenance of tree protection. All tree protection devices must remain in fully functioning condition until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
a.  Any tree, designated for preservation, which is negligently damaged during construction or removed without the appropriate review and approval, as determined by the city arborist, must be treated in accordance with the National Arborists Association Standards. If fatally damaged, the tree(s) must be replaced with four-inch caliper trees equal to the unit value of the tree removed. Any specimen tree damaged as described above must be replaced with trees equal to three times the unit value of the tree removed. 
b.  All tree protection zones must be mulched with at least four inches and not more than eight inches of organic mulch, such as pine straw, wood chips, tree leaves, or compost. 
c.  Construction activity is prohibited inside the tree save areas, including but not limited to, grading, paving, and construction of buildings and other structures. 
d.  The site must be designed and maintained in a manner to ensure proper drainage in tree save areas during and after construction. 
(6)  Tree protection supervisors. The developer must designate a tree protection supervisor. This person must demonstrate knowledge in the area of tree protection practices during construction and must be on-site to ensure tree protection measures are enforced. The tree protection supervisor must participate in a pre-construction conference with the city prior to the commencement of any development. The tree protection supervisor must notify the city arborist immediately should any tree damage occur on the site. 
(7)  Inspections. Tree protection inspections must be performed by a certified arborist or registered forester during construction. The inspections must be conducted prior to the commencement of development, immediately following the clearing and grubbing phase, immediately following the grading phase, and at the end of the project before a certificate of occupancy (commercial developments) is issued or the final plat approved (residential developments). The site must be inspected to ensure all tree protection regulations are being met and to identify any existing or developing tree-related problems that require treatment. An inspection report must be prepared and certified by the inspector and submitted to the city arborist. Any damage noted must be treated in accordance with the recommendation of the inspector prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval of the final plat. The city arborist is authorized to require additional reports should he/she determine significant construction damage has occurred, the tree protection supervisor has failed to enforce minimum protection standards, or if other development processes, including but not limited to utility placement and building construction, may impact the tree save areas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-10-19, § I, 10-9-2017) 
Sec. 16-112. - Maintenance. 
All maintenance activities performed on preserved or planted trees to be included in the tree density requirements must be performed in accordance with the most current professional standards, including, but not limited to, the standards described below. It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure such work is in compliance. Should maintenance activities on the trees not be in compliance with such professional standards, the property owner will be responsible for replacing the damaged trees with new trees of an equivalent density value, based on the DBH at the time damage occurs. 
(1)  Nursery stock. All nursery stock must meet standards defined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.(1). 
(2)  Pruning. All pruning must be done in accordance with ANSI A300 (Part 1) Standards for Tree Care Operations—Pruning. Tree topping is not allowed. Crown reduction pruning must be used instead to reduce the height of a tree when necessary. Topped trees may not be counted toward tree density requirements. 
(3)  Fertilization. All tree fertilization must be performed in accordance with ANSI A 300 (Part 2) Standards for Tree Care Operations—Fertilization. 
(4)  Cabling and bracing. All cabling and bracing installation and maintenance must be performed in accordance with ANSI A300 (Part 3) Standards for Tree Care Operations—Cabling and Bracing. 
(5)  Lightning protection. All lightning protection installation and maintenance must be performed in accordance with ANSI A300 (Part 4) Standards for Tree Care Operations—Lightning Protection. 
(6)  Safety. All tree-related work must be performed in accordance with ANSI Z13(3)1 Standards for Tree Care Operations—Safe Work Practices. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-113. - Alternative compliance. 
The city arborist is authorized to approve alternate methods of compliance with the provisions of this division when he/she determines the overall intent of the division and/or specific guidelines can be met. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.80), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-114. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. It is city arborist's and his/her designee duty to enforce this section. The city arborist and his/her designee has the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any development permit and the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof. 
(b)  Violation and penalties. The person, firm, or corporation responsible for violating any of the provisions of this section may be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation. Each tree cut, damaged, or poisoned shall constitute a single offense and the responsible party shall be subject to a fine up to $1,000.00 per tree. The Dunwoody Municipal Court has jurisdiction to try offenses to these regulations. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the city arborist or his/her designee relating to the application of this section may appeal to the community development director for relief or reconsideration within 30 days from the date of the adverse determination by the city arborist. Decision by the community development director made pursuant to this division may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals (ZBA) by filing a request with the community development director within 30 days of the community development director's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.90), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-10-19, § I, 10-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 16-115. - Additional information. 
The following rules and regulations are approved by the city council from time to time and are kept and maintained by the community development department: 
(1)  Lists of approved street trees as listed in section 16-116; 
(2)  Standards for substantial building permits and tree removal permits; and 
(3)  Tree replacement and planting rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-8.100), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 16-116. - General tree list and street trees. 

 
(Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § I, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 16-117—16-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former § 16-146 as § 16-126. 

Sec. 16-126. - Environmental planning criteria. 
Development within groundwater recharge areas, as delineated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 and DNR's Pollution Susceptibility Map, must comply with the criteria for the protection of groundwater recharge areas established in chapter 391-3-16-.02 of DNR's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-16-.02). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-9.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-127—16-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-10-16, adopted Oct. 8, 2018, amended div. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 8, §§ 16-136—16-141 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10-14, § 1(Exh. A §§ 16-10.10—16-10.60), adopted Oct. 14, 2013; and Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2015. 

Sec. 16-136. - General. 
(a)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effects of obstructions in special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to flood damage and loss. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of the flood damage prevention regulations of this division to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in special flood hazard areas; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a special flood hazard area; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions. 
(c)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this division includes methods and provisions to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(d)  Applicability. The flood damage prevention regulations of this division apply to all areas within the City of Dunwoody. 
(e)  Compliance. All structures and land may hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered only in full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations. 
(f)  Violations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) constitutes a violation of this chapter. Any person who violates the flood damage prevention regulations of this division or who fails to comply with any of its requirements will, upon conviction, be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-6 of the municipal code. Each day such violation continues is a separate offense. The city council may take any other lawful action necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. See also the general enforcement provisions of section 16-35. 
(g)  Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas. 
(1)  The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the flood insurance study dated June 15, 1994, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps dated June 15, 1994, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division. 
(2)  The flood insurance study and accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps depict the minimum area of applicability of this division and may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of this division and that are recommended to the city council by the floodplain coordinator. 
(3)  Examples of other studies that may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia that has been prepared by FEMA-approved methodology and approved by the community development director. 
(4)  Examples of other studies that may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia that has been prepared by FEMA-approved methodology approved by the community development director. 
(h)  Repetitive loss structure and cumulative substantial damage. A building must be brought into compliance with requirements for new construction if it has incurred flood-related damages on two or more occasions during a ten-year period in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average, was 25 percent or more of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event, or if damage of any origin is sustained and the cost of restoring the building to its pre-damage condition is 50 percent or more of the market value of the building before the damage occurred. 
(i)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division does not create liability on the part of the city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-16, § II, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 16-137. - Definitions. 
See division 2. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-16, § II, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 16-138. - Administration. 
(a)  Floodplain coordinator. 
(1)  Appointment. The community development director is appointed as the floodplain coordinator to administer and enforce this division, in accordance with its provisions. 
(2)  Powers and duties. 
a.  Permit review. The floodplain coordinator is responsible for reviewing all development permits to determine that: 
1.  Permit requirements of this division have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding. 
b.  Review, use and development of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided, the community development director is authorized to require the applicant to obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer the regulations of this division. 
c.  Notification of other agencies. Before the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the community development director must: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources; and 
2.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(3)  Documentation of floodplain development. The community development director is responsible for reviewing and maintaining for public inspection all elevations and certifications required under subsection (b). 
(4)  Map determinations. The community development director is authorized to make interpretations where needed to determine the location of the boundaries of special flood hazard areas. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations must be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary must be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. 
(5)  Remedial actions. The community development director is responsible for enforcing and taking actions to remedy violations of this division. 
(b)  Development permits. A development permit must be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any special flood hazard area. Application for a development permit must be made on forms furnished by the floodplain coordinator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. 
(1)  Application stage. An application for a development project with any special flood hazard area located on the subject site must include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, which must include all of the following information: 
a.  Site plan, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
2.  Spot ground elevations for all proposed structures, at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprints, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
3.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
4.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
5.  Proposed grading plan; 
6.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
7.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
8.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
9.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
b.  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
3.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 16-140; 
4.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 16-140; 
5.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
c.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
d.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
e.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
f.  All certifications required under this division. The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan must include certification by the applicant that all development activities will be carried out in accordance with the plan or previously approved revisions. Development permits and use and occupancy certificates and permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict compliance with approved plans. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder must provide to the administrator an as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate must be provided after completion of construction, including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, the certification must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications is at the permit holder's risk. The administrator must review the referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review must be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the required correction is cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(c)  Record maintenance. All records pertaining to the provisions of this division must be maintained in the department of community development and must be open for public inspection. 
(d)  Appeals. The zoning board of appeals is authorized to hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain coordinator in the enforcement or administration of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-16, § II, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 16-139. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, must be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations must be provided by the community development director. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it must be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the community development director. 
(b)  Floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway must be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the floodway must be provided by the community development director. If floodway data is not available from the city, then it must be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the community development director. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development is allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation by 0.01 foot or more; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development that is allowed within the future-conditions floodplain pursuant to the preceding paragraph (1) must also comply with the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity must occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and must be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case may any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (predevelopment) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas must be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions must be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics must be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection (d); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain must be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal is subject to approval by the community development director using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The applicant is responsible for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant must submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 16-140 apply. This study must be prepared by a registered professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information must be submitted to and approved by the community development director before the approval of any permit that would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. The study must include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the community development director. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information must be obtained whenever available. Computations must be shown duplicating FIS results and must then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study must include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which clearly defines all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within special flood hazard areas are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increasing flood heights. Therefore the following provisions apply within floodways: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the floodway, except for activities expressly allowed in the following paragraph (2). 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide the required supporting technical data and certification of the findings. 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway may be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the community development director. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner is responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the subject property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The community development director is authorized to direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-16, § II, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 16-140. - Flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General regulations. The following regulations apply in all special flood hazard areas: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, are not allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) are met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures must be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures must be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures must be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls must be designed to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure must be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide at least two openings having a total net area of at least one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of these regulations, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure may only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area may not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities must be designed and/or located at least three feet above the base flood elevation or at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes must be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard is in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems must be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to structures that do not comply with the provisions of these regulations, may be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards govern. 
(b)  Within future-conditions floodplain. In addition to the general regulations of subsection (a), the following additional regulations apply within the future-conditions floodplain: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes is not allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 16-139(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of section 16-139(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least three feet above the base flood elevation or at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, is not allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) have been met, all substantial improvements must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least three feet above the base flood elevation or at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, is not allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) shall have the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, at least three feet above the base flood elevation or at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). New construction that has met all of the requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and must provide such certification to the community development director. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, is not allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) have been met. Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) shall have the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, at least three feet above the base flood elevation or at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of section 16-139(c), (d), and (e) may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and must provide such certification to the community development director. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (e.g., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) that are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain must be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection (a)(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for substantial improvement of residential buildings in accordance with subsection (b)(1)b., including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes are not allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 16-139(c), (d) and (e) have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with subsection (a)(7). 
(c)  Adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, must be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, must be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). 
(d)  Streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
(1)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision within a special flood hazard area, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the community development director must review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. 
(2)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, may be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
b.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures must have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). 
(e)  Areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Special flood hazard areas may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, must be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters must be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5). 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice. 
(3)  Drainage paths must be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals must identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal must have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain so that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans must provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 16-138(b); 
(4)  All subdivision proposals must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals must have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals must include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of (jurisdiction) to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-16, § II, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 16-141. - Variances. 
(a)  Nature of variance. 
(1)  The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this division would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
(2)  It is the duty of the city to help protect citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance procedures provided in this division are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(b)  Factors for consideration. 
(1)  In passing upon requests for variances, the zoning board of appeals must consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this division, and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(2)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted must be given written notice over the signature of the community development director that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice must be recorded by the floodplain coordinator in the office of the clerk of county superior court in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(3)  The floodplain coordinator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(c)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)  Variances may not be issued within any mapped floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(3)  Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. The term "minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this division. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the zoning board of appeals need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the zoning board of appeals believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. Variances may only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of this section (subsection (c)) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
(5)  Variances may not be issued "after the fact." 
(6)  Upon consideration of the factors in subsection (b) and the purposes of this division, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this division. 
(d)  Appeals of zoning board of appeals' decisions. Any person aggrieved by a flood damage prevention variance or appeal decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal the decision to the county superior court by petition for a writ of certiorari pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-16, § II, 10-8-2018) 
Secs. 16-142—16-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 16-156. - Policies and purposes. 
(a)  Policies. 
(1)  It is declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the city's official comprehensive plan in order to promote the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. 
(2)  Land to be subdivided must be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)  The existing and proposed public improvements must conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the comprehensive plan, official map, the capital improvement budget and other adopted city plans, and it is intended that these regulations supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, zoning ordinances, the comprehensive plan, official map and land use plan, and the capital improvement budget and other plans of the city. 
(b)  Purposes. The city's subdivision regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  To protect and conserve the value of land and the economic stability of all communities in the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the city through appropriate growth management techniques, including consideration of the timing and sequencing of development, consideration of infill development in existing neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities; 
(4)  To guide public policy and both public and private actions in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and public services and support facilities; 
(5)  To provide for the safe and efficient circulation of motorized and nonmotorized traffic throughout the city; 
(6)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both motorized and nonmotorized, in new land developments; 
(7)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; 
(8)  To ensure to the extent legally possible that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision; 
(9)  To protect and restore the highest quality of the city's air and water resources, to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities, to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the city and the value of the land; 
(10)  To preserve the natural beauty, environment, and topography of the city and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-11.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, amended and renumbered former § 16-176 as § 16-156. 
Sec. 16-157. - Applicability. 
No person may record any subdivision plat until it has been approved and accepted by the community development director, as the city's designee, nor may any lot be sold by reference to any subdivision plat whether recorded or not, if the plat is made after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless it has been approved and accepted by the community development director. The recording of a plat must be based on an approved plat and may not be recorded solely on the basis of a metes and bounds description. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-11.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former § 16-177 as § 16-157. 
Sec. 16-158. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Administration. It is the duty of the community development director to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of these regulations is deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in municipal court may be punished as is provided in section 1-6 of the municipal code. Each violation of these regulations is a separate offense. The owner of any structure, buildings, lots or parcels or parts thereof, where anything in violation of these regulations exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, is guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings, including the issuance of stop-work orders and actions in a court of law, may be taken by the city in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises. These remedies are in addition to the penalties described in subsection (b). 
(d)  Development permits, building permits and certificates of occupancy. No development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy may be issued for a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor does the city have any obligation to extend services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-11.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, repealed former § 16-178, which pertained to exemptions, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-11.30), adopted Oct. 14, 2013. Ord. No. 2015-01-04 renumbered former § 16-178 as § 16-158. 
Secs. 16-159—16-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, renumbered former §§ 16-191—16-195 as §§ 16-171—16-175. 

Sec. 16-171. - Applicability. 
Proposed subdivisions, including major changes to revised final plats, are eligible to be reviewed under the minor subdivision procedures of this division only when all of the criteria are met. 
(1)  The subdivision will result in the creation of no more than three lots; 
(2)  The subdivision does not require the extension of utilities (other than individual service lines) or other municipal facilities; 
(3)  No right-of-way dedication, no new streets, street improvements, or other required public improvements are required, as specified in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-12.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-172. - Minor subdivision procedure. 
Subdivisions eligible for processing as minor subdivisions require only review, approval and recording of a final plat in accordance with article III, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-12.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, changed the title of former § 16-192 from "One step procedure" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-173. - Public notice. 
(a)  The applicant must place a public notification sign on the site of the proposed minor subdivision. The sign must remain in place for at least 30 days before the date of approval of the minor subdivision plat. The community development director must verify that the sign has been posted. If applicant fails to properly post the required sign, the minor subdivision plat may not be approved until the applicant has properly posted the required notification sign. 
(b)  Once the application has been submitted, the applicant and members of the public may submit written comments to the community development director in support of or in opposition to the minor subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-12.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-174. - Compliance with design and improvement standards. 
Subdivisions eligible for processing as minor subdivisions are subject to compliance with all applicable land development regulations, including the design and improvement standards contained in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-12.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, changed the title of former § 16-194 from "Compliance with subdivision design and improvement standards" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-175. - Successive applications. 
A lot created through the minor subdivision procedures may not subsequently be resubdivided pursuant to the minor subdivision procedures for a period of two years, measured from the date of recordation of the final plat. Any re-subdivision before the end of such two-year period requires review and approval pursuant to the major subdivision procedures of article III, division 3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-12.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-176—16-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 16-186. - Applicability. 
Proposed subdivisions not eligible to be reviewed under the minor subdivision procedures of this article are required to be reviewed as a major subdivision and subsequent final plat, including major changes to revised final plats. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-187. - Preliminary plat procedures. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. Before filing the preliminary plat for a subdivision for review and approval, the applicant must meet with the community development director or his designee to present a generalized concept plan for the proposed project and to discuss the procedure for approval of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets, reservations of open space, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing infrastructure and services. This conference will allow early evaluation of the applicant's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance. This conference will also allow city officials to discuss with the applicant the necessary regulations that will properly accomplish the project. 
(b)  Application and preliminary plat required. The owner of the land where the proposed development is to occur, or his authorized agent, must file a preliminary plat with the department of community development along with an application for approval. The application must: 
(1)  Be made on forms prepared by the department of community development; 
(2)  Be accompanied by three copies of the preliminary plat, plus one electronic/digital copy, which must be prepared by a registered civil engineer, surveyor, architect, or landscape architect, as described in these regulations and complying in all respects with these regulations; 
(3)  Be accompanied by an application fee in the amount set by the city council; and 
(4)  Include the name, address and telephone number of an agent who is authorized to receive all notices required by these regulations. 
(c)  Plat information. The following information must be shown on the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Boundary lines. Perimeter boundary of the overall tract, bearings and distances, referencing the legal point of beginning; 
(2)  Streets on or adjacent to tract. Name, right-of-way width, and location of streets on and adjacent to the tract, and any existing railroad, sidewalk, trail, or bike lane; 
(3)  Contour data. Topographic contour data at no more than two-foot elevation intervals. The source of this data must be written on the plat. Existing contour data from the city geographic information system department may be used where available; 
(4)  Tree survey. A tree survey, in compliance with article II, division 6, or tree sample calculations where allowed by the city arborist which may be submitted as a separate plan; 
(5)  Historic resources. Any building, structure, site or district identified as historic by the county historic preservation commission, the county historic resources survey, the city historic preservation commission, if one is established, the comprehensive plan, by listing on the Georgia or national register of historic places, or by listing as a national historic landmark; 
(6)  Natural features on tract. Other conditions on the tract such as stream buffers, state waters, cemeteries, wetlands, existing structures, special flood hazard areas (where available), rock outcroppings, and archeological resources; 
(7)  Soils. Location of soils as shown on soil survey of DeKalb County, Georgia, by the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Geographical data. Numerical and graphic scales, north arrow, land lot and district numbers and lines, city and county names and limit lines; 
(9)  Prior subdivisions. Name and reference of any formerly recorded subdivision crossing any of the land shown on the plat; 
(10)  Zoning district. Show zoning district, case number and conditions of zoning; 
(11)  Permits. Show any special administrative permit number, special land use permit number, or zoning board of appeals case number and conditions; 
(12)  Variances. Show any administrative variance approvals; 
(13)  Septic tanks. Show existing septic tank and drain field location or note absence; 
(14)  Sewers. Show size and location of sanitary sewer mains available; 
(15)  Sewer easements. Show a sanitary sewer easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for lines not within public rights-of-way, unless otherwise required by the county water and sewer department; 
(16)  Water mains. Show size and location of water mains and fire hydrants; 
(17)  Water main easements. Show a water main easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for county maintained lines not within right-of-way, unless otherwise required by the county water and sewer department; 
(18)  Fire hydrants. Show new fire hydrants and eight-inch fire lines; 
(19)  Wetlands. Provide wetlands determination from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(20)  Receiving waters. Provide distance to and name of receiving waters; 
(21)  Certificate of conformity. Certification by the applicant that no lots platted are non-conforming or will result in any non-conforming lots; 
(22)  Bury pits. Show location of any existing inert waste bury pits; 
(23)  Seal. All sheets of plats must be sealed by a professional engineer, architect, surveyor, or landscape architect currently registered in the state; 
(24)  Title. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, if known, with the name of the property owners and designers and the date of the plat; 
(25)  Street names. The names of all proposed streets; 
(26)  Rights-of-way. Street rights-of-way and widths indicated, including any necessary right-of-way required for improvements as shown on the comprehensive transportation plan; 
(27)  Sidewalks. All proposed sidewalk and bike lane locations; 
(28)  Lots. Lot lines, lot numbers, block letters, and the total number of proposed lots within the development; 
(29)  Dedications. Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for common areas, public parks, open space, schools, playgrounds, multi-use trails, or other public uses, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of these dedications, if any; 
(30)  Yards. Minimum building setback lines as required under the yard requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
(31)  Zoning conditions. All conditions of zoning and proposed deed restrictions must be recited on the preliminary plat; 
(32)  Corner lots. Show that corner lots must have an extra width of not less than 15 feet more than required for interior lots for the zoning district within which they are located; 
(33)  Transitional buffers. Show transitional buffers, if any, and any required screening fencing; 
(34)  BMPs. Show conceptual location of stormwater management and water quality BMP facilities on preliminary plat; 
(35)  Covenants. Indicate whether the proposed subdivision will be subject to private covenants and whether a homeowner's association will be established; 
(36)  Fencing. Show any required fencing around detention ponds, if required; and 
(37)  Electrical service. Show the location of electrical service. 
(d)  Additional Information. The following additional information must be submitted with the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Owner consent. The property owner must consent in writing to the proposed development in a consent affidavit provided by the community development director with the application; 
(2)  Taxes. Provide statement from the county tax commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes on the property have been paid; 
(3)  Location. A small map of the city depicting the subdivision location within the city; 
(4)  Vicinity map. Vicinity map at a scale of 400 feet to one inch showing the location of the tract with reference to surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries, and streams within 500 feet of the tract, and showing zoning districts of adjoining property; 
(5)  Adjacent properties. Names of adjoining property owners and the zoning classification of adjacent properties; and 
(6)  Engineer. Name, address and phone of developer and engineer on plat. 
(e)  Scale. Preliminary plats must be prepared at an appropriate scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. Maximum sheet size may not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches, with a minimum text size of 0.08 inches. 
(f)  Application submittal. 
(1)  An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only when it fully complies with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  If the application and preliminary plat are not accepted, the community development director must inform the applicant of the deficiencies and request the applicant to resubmit the application and preliminary plat with the additional information. 
(g)  Referral of preliminary plat for review. 
(1)  Upon official acceptance of the application and the preliminary plat, the community development department, public works, and any other city or county department the community development director determines should be consulted for the particularities of the proposed subdivision, shall review the preliminary plat. As part of its review, each such department and receiving entity must make comments and recommendations regarding any required changes necessary to comply with all applicable regulations. 
(2)  Once the community development director has received each department's comments and recommendations, the community development director must either notify the applicant that the preliminary plat has been approved or notify the applicant that revisions to the preliminary plat are required. 
(3)  If a preliminary plat is not approved within 180 days of the official acceptance of the application, the application and preliminary plat is considered withdrawn without further action by the city. The community development director must approve the preliminary plat if the application and preliminary plat conform to all requested revisions, the requirements of this Code and state law and must deny the preliminary plat if the application and preliminary plat do not conform to all requested revisions, the requirements of this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-13.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-01-01, § II, 1-28-2019) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, amended, renumbered and retitled former § 16-206, "Sketch plat/preliminary plat," as § 16-187 to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-188. - Public notice. 
(1)  The applicant must place a public notification sign on the site of the proposed subdivision. The sign must remain in place of at least 30 days. The community development director must verify that the sign has been posted. If applicant fails to properly post the required sign, the preliminary plat may not be approved until the applicant has properly posted the required notification sign. 
(2)  Once the application has been submitted, the applicant and members of the public may submit written comments to the community development director in support of or in opposition to the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Following public notice period and determination that the application complies with all city codes, the community development director is authorized to approve or disapprove the proposed preliminary plat in accordance with the approval criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-01-01, § III, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 16-189. - Compliance with design and improvement standards and approval criteria. 
(a)  Subdivisions eligible for processing as major subdivisions are subject to compliance with all applicable land development regulations, including the design and improvement standards contained in article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  Approval criteria. 
(1)  The community development director may not approve a preliminary plat unless it is found that: 
a.  Provisions have been made for a water supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality for purposes of health, emergency, and adequate fire protection for the subdivision proposed; 
b.  If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate provision has been made for such a system and, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that such systems will comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations; 
c.  Adequate areas have been allocated within a subdivision to meet the regulations in this chapter for the long-term collection, management, and treatment of stormwater; 
d.  The proposed subdivision is designed to protect floodplains, watercourses, wetlands, exceptional or specimen trees and woodlands; 
e.  No platting of lots within the subdivision will create any non-conforming lots or increase the non-conformity of existing non-conforming lots on property within or adjacent to the subdivision; 
f.  If the subdivision abuts a state highway, all applicable statutory provisions are followed, including the rules of state department of transportation; 
g.  The proposed subdivision meets all the requirements of this chapter, the city zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, the comprehensive transportation plan, and all other standards and regulations adopted by all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the city and all other applicable laws from other relevant jurisdictions; 
h.  A properly issued certificate of appropriateness, when the subdivision or portions thereof lie within a designated historic area that required such a certificate as may be required by state law or this Code; 
i.  Lot lines have been laid out so as to minimize crossing municipal or county boundaries; and 
j.  All requirements of the preliminary plat procedures have been fulfilled. 
(2)  The community development director may require the applicant to submit a site plan for any lot to demonstrate that the lot contains adequate buildable area that is suitable for the intended use. 
(3)  After review of the preliminary plat and related comments, and where, in the judgment of the community development director, the preliminary plat conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter and the city zoning ordinance, all conditions of zoning, and any other applicable city regulations or law the preliminary plat shall stand approved. The following wording for approval must be shown on the preliminary plat: 
"This preliminary plat has been submitted to and approved by the City of Dunwoody, on this _____ day of _____, _____ _____. 
By: _____ _____ (By Dir.) 
Community Development Director, City of Dunwoody, Georgia" 
(c)  Effect of approval. The preliminary plat does not constitute nor provide assurance of approval of the final plat, but is to be used as the development design for the subdivision and for the acquisition of a development permit as provided for in the city zoning ordinance. The preliminary plat must be submitted to the community development department in a digital format acceptable to the city, prior to or simultaneous with an application for a development permit. 
(d)  Lapse of approval. The preliminary plat expires 24 months from the date of its approval. If more than 50 percent of linear feet of total road in the entire development shown on the preliminary plat is complete at the expiration of 24 months from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat, then the community development director is authorized to grant a one-time, one-year extension of the approval of the preliminary plat. An expired preliminary plat is null and void and is of no effect. An expired preliminary plat may not be renewed. 
(e)  Preliminary plat amendments. If the approved preliminary plat is amended or altered by the applicant, without an approved variance, after approval as a preliminary plat, then the applicant is required to resubmit the revised preliminary plat and begin anew the application process contained in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-01-01, § IV, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 16-190. - Appeals. 
The decision of the community development director to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat may be appealed to city council by request in writing to the community development director within 30 days of the community development director's decision. Decisions will be published on-line, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and provided in writing via first class mail to adjacent property owners. The 30-day appeal period shall commence from the date written notification is sent to adjacent property owners. If no appeal is made within the 30-day period, the decision of the community development director is final. The 30-day appeal deadline may be waived by the city council if the appellant can show evidence that the appeal was filed within 30 days of their actual or constructive notice of the decision. If an appeal is made to the city council, the city council must set a hearing date for the appeal within 30 days of the appeal being requested, and the decision of the city council is final. The city council's decision may be appealed only by a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. Any person or entity (i.e.: an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor, or a neighbor whose property is within 1,500 feet of the nearest property line of the proposed subdivision) aggrieved by a denial or approval of a preliminary plat, may appeal by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-191—16-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLATS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, amended and reorganized former § 16-207, "Final plats" in order to create a new div. 4, §§ 16-201—16-203. 

Sec. 16-201. - Applicability. 
Minor subdivisions are required to be reviewed under the provisions of this division. Proposed major subdivisions are required to be reviewed under the provisions of this division after completion of all required improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1 (Exh. A § 16-13.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-202. - Final plat procedure. 
(a)  Preparation. The applicant must have a registered surveyor prepare the final plat of the subdivision. An application for final plat approval may be made when a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been approved and construction of all required infrastructure is complete to ascertain its location as built, or as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Application filing. The final plat and a fee in the amount established by the city council must be filed with the city. The final plat and as-built drawings must also be submitted in a digital format acceptable to the city. 
(c)  Plat review. 
(1)  Upon receipt of the final plat, the community development director must forward copies of the final plat to the following city departments for certification that required improvements are complete and in conformity with the Code of Ordinances: 
a.  Appropriate official of the department of community development; 
b.  City geographic information system department; 
c.  Public works department; 
d.  Any other department or entity the community development director deems appropriate. 
(2)  Any department to which the final plat is submitted must note whether the development meets or fails to meet the requirements of this Code and of that department, specifically, whether all improvements were properly completed and whether the improvements are in conformity with the preliminary plat, when required by the procedures of this chapter. If the improvements are incomplete or if the improvements are not in conformity with the preliminary plat, the department must note the manner in which the plat fails to meet these requirements. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the annotated copies from all of the departments which received the final plat for notation, the community development director must independently review the final plat and determine whether it complies with all city zoning, environmental, and subdivision ordinances and regulations and all applicable state and federal laws. The community development director must certify in writing on the final plat his finding of whether the final plat complies with all city zoning, environmental, and subdivision ordinances and regulations and all applicable state and federal laws. 
(4)  The final plat must conform to the approved preliminary plat on file with the city, when one is required by the procedures of this chapter, and must comply with the city zoning and land development ordinances, including any conditions of zoning. 
(d)  Community development director approval. 
(1)  The community development director as the designee for the governing authority of the city must approve or disapprove the final plat. If the final plat is denied, the community development director must provide the reasons for denial in writing and such writing must be given to the applicant with the denied plat. If the final plat is approved, the community development director must place the following wording on the original as follows: 
"This plat has been submitted to and accepted by the Community Development Director of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia, and has been approved as required by state law and city codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the county superior court. 
Dated this _______ day of _____, _____ _____. 
By:_____ _____/_____/_____ 
[Community development director as designee of the governing authority]" 
(2)  Final plat acknowledgement and approval by the community development director constitute the approval, if any, required in order to file subdivision plats with the clerk of the county superior court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 
(e)  Appeals. The decision of the community development director to approve or disapprove the final plat may be appealed to the city council by request in writing to the community development director within 30 days of the community development director's decision. Decisions will be published on-line, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and provided in writing via first class mail to adjacent property owners. The 30-day appeal period shall commence from the date written notification is sent to adjacent property owners. If no appeal is made within the 30-day period, the decision of the community development director is final. The 30-day appeal deadline may be waived by the city council if the appellant can show evidence that the appeal was filed within 30 days of their actual or constructive notice of the decision. If an appeal is made to the city council, the city council must set a hearing date for the appeal within 30 days of the appeal being requested, and the decision of the city council is final. The city council decision may be appealed only by a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. Any person or entity (i.e.: an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor, or a neighbor whose property is within 1,500 feet of the nearest property line of the proposed subdivision) aggrieved by a denial or approval of a preliminary plat, may appeal by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. 
(f)  Recording. The approved final plat must be recorded with the clerk of the county superior court by the applicant and returned to the community development director. 
(g)  Dedications. The filing and recording of the final plat by the community development director will, upon completion of the improvements by the applicant and compliance with all procedures of this chapter, be deemed an acceptance of the dedication of the streets and other public land as shown upon the plat on behalf of the public. 
(h)  Material specifications. The final plat must be composed of mylar, or other durable, stable, and reproducible drafting medium approved by the community development director and must meet all provisions of the Georgia Plat Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67. 
(i)  Scale. Final plats must be prepared at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch and must have a maximum sheet size of not more than 24 inches in width and 36 inches in length, and a minimum sheet size of not less than 17 inches in width and 21 inches in length. 
(j)  Compliance with zoning ordinance. The final plat must comply with the requirements of the city zoning ordinance and all conditions of zoning for the subject property to be shown in the upper right corner of the final plat with text height at a minimum of 0.08 inches. 
(k)  Required information. The final plat must show the following: 
(1)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearings and lengths of every right-of-way, street line, lot line, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight; 
(2)  Tract boundary lines, land lot and district lines, city and county limit lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; 
(3)  All dimensions must be accurate to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest second; 
(4)  Name and right-of-way width of each street including necessary right-of-way required by the city's plans, policies, codes, and requirements; 
(5)  Sidewalk and bike path locations and width; 
(6)  House numbers: numbers will be assigned by the city geographic information system department and placed on the final plat; 
(7)  Title, north arrow, date, scale, land lot numbers and district numbers; 
(8)  Location, dimensions and purpose of easements and areas to be dedicated to public use, common areas or sites for other than residential use with notices stating their purpose and limitations; 
(9)  Special flood hazard area contour line and setback line required by this chapter, state waters/state streams, wetlands, and required stream buffers; 
(10)  Water and sewer utility locations, and the location and type of permanent stormwater management facilities and water quality facilities; 
(11)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; all lot and block numerals must be kept in a uniform sequence on all plats and units of the subdivision; 
(12)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers; within each subdivision set one monument on two front corners of the property adjacent to existing rights-of-way on interior streets, or as otherwise approved by the development director; each monument must be a minimum four-inch diameter disk by 24-inch high concrete monument with brass caps set flush with finished grade; and 
(13)  Lots that may not be built upon until detailed plans for grading and drainage have been approved by the community development director. 
(l)  Space for comments, certifications. A blank space of 50 square inches must be provided on the final plat to allow room for any stamps, notes, approval or denials as required to be placed thereon by city agencies and for the certification of the community development director and approval or denial by the city manager. 
(m)  Surveyor's and owner's acknowledgments. The acknowledgements of the surveyor and property owner must be provided and certified on the final plat in a form approved by the city. 
(n)  Protective covenants. The final plat may not contain protective covenants stipulating lower standards than the minimum restrictions required by the city zoning ordinance. 
(o)  Disclosure statement. 
(1)  Before any final plat for any residential subdivision and any multiphase residential development may be submitted for review by the city, a disclosure statement, sworn to by the applicant under penalty of perjury before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths, must be filed with the community development director. The disclosure statement must be in a form promulgated by the community development director and approved by the city attorney. 
(2)  Any applicant for the final plat, intending to make written or oral representations to potential purchasers of homes in any residential subdivision and any multiphase residential development must submit the information specified herein on the disclosure statement which must be made available to members of the public by the community development director: 
a.  An estimated date of completion of the entire residential subdivision; 
b.  A statement of the average size of homes to be constructed in the subdivision, any specified style of architecture, landscaping, the type of construction materials to be used (i.e., brick, stone, stucco, pressboard, etc.) and the average size of lots; 
c.  A statement of the applicant's commitment to build any community amenities within the subdivision, including, but not limited to, a clubhouse, tennis courts or swimming pool; 
d.  A statement of the general terms and conditions at which the applicant proposes to dispose of the lots and/or homes in the residential subdivision; 
e.  Copies of all forms of conveyance to be used in selling lots to potential purchasers; 
f.  A statement of all deed restrictions, easements and covenants applicable to the residential subdivision; 
g.  Copies of instruments creating any deed restrictions, easements and covenants applicable to the residential subdivision; 
h.  A statement regarding whether there will be a mandatory membership in any homeowners association and if so, a copy of the budget for the association for its first year of operation including the estimated amount of the first year's assessments and the estimated amount of revenue to be subsidized by the developer; and 
i.  An explanation of the timing and method of transfer of control of the association to the homeowners where there is a mandatory membership in the homeowner's association governing the residential subdivision. 
(3)  With respect to the first phase and subsequent phases of a multiphase residential development, the applicant must also submit the following information: 
a.  An estimated date of completion of each phase of a multiphase residential development and estimated date of completion of all phases of the development; 
b.  A statement of the average size of homes to be constructed in the future phases of the development, any specified type of architecture, landscaping, the type of construction materials to be used (i.e., brick, stone, stucco, pressboard, etc.), and the average size of lots; 
c.  A statement of any community amenities to be built within the development currently or in the future, including, but not limited to, a clubhouse, tennis courts or swimming pools the applicant is committed to constructing in future phases; and 
d.  A statement of the general terms and conditions at which the applicant proposes to dispose of the lots and/or homes in the future phases of the development. 
(4)  If the applicant intends to make no representations or commitments to potential purchasers concerning each of the representations set forth in this subsection, the applicant must note the same in the disclosure statement filed with the community development director which statement must be made available by the community development director to the public. 
(5)  After the required disclosure statement has been submitted, the community development director must examine the information provided and determine whether the information submitted is consistent with the final plat and if the information is consistent, the community development director must approve the disclosure statement in writing within 35 days of submission of the statement. 
(6)  If it appears to the community development director that a disclosure statement is incomplete or fraudulent, the community development director must disapprove the disclosure statement and notify the applicant for the final plat in writing within 14 days after the initial submission of the statement. Such notification suspends the review of the final plat by any city employee or official until the applicant files such additional information, as the community development director requires. No final plat may be certified by the community development director until such time as the community development director approves the applicant's disclosure statement. 
(7)  If at any time after approval of the disclosure statement the community development director becomes aware that the disclosure statement contains false or misleading information, or that the applicant is developing in a manner inconsistent with the approved disclosure statement, the community development director must disapprove the disclosure statement and notify the applicant in writing that the disclosure statement has been disapproved. 
(8)  Subsequent to the recording of the final plat for a residential subdivision and for each phase of a multiphase residential development, the approved disclosure statement on file with the city must be provided by any seller to potential purchasers at the execution of the purchase and sales contract or, if no such contract is executed, ten days prior to the real estate closing on any property governed by this section. 
(p)  Violations. It is unlawful for any person to sell property in a residential subdivision or a multiphase residential development without providing a potential purchaser with a copy of an approved disclosure statement as required by subsection (o). It is unlawful for any person to provide the community development director with false or misleading information in an approved disclosure statement as required by subsection (o). It is unlawful for any person to develop in a manner inconsistent with the approved disclosure statement. Any person convicted of violating this section is subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-01-01, § V, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 16-203. - Revised final plat. 
(1)  The original recorded plat must be used for all revisions. 
a.  When it becomes necessary to revise an original recorded final plat due to some error, required adjustment or desired adjustment, the applicant must confer with the community development director to determine if the revision is a minor or major revision. The applicant's surveyor must make the necessary corrections on the original final plat or prepare a new tracing of that portion of the subdivision involved. The subdivision name, date and book and page number of the original recording must be noted on the new plat. If the original final plat is not available, then any proposed revision to the final plat must be considered a major change. 
b.  Major. Changes to an approved or recorded subdivision plat that would significantly alter the layout of any public street, alley, or road shown on such plat, or area reserved thereon for public use, or if it would affect any map, plan, or plat legally recorded before adoption of any subdivision regulations, such amendment shall be approved by the same procedure, rules, and regulations required for a new subdivision. 
c.  Minor. Changes to an approved or recorded subdivision plat, including but not limited to, adjusting lots and lot lines, utility easements, streets, shifting of open space and common areas, and other changes considered by the director of community development to be minor in nature and that do not create any additional lots may be approved administratively by staff as a final plat, so long as open space and amenities are not reduced or made less effective, and the overall result is not a substantially new design. The submission of official plats for signing, recording, and for the department record shall be followed as required in this chapter. 
d.  If the community development director determines the change is major, the revised plat must proceed through the approval process for major or minor subdivisions described in this Code, depending on the applicability provisions. 
(2)  If the original final plat is not available, the applicant must prepare a new Mylar or other durable, stable, and reproducible drafting medium approved by the department of community development, in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Revisions and a notation explaining the revisions must be shown in black ink on the revised plat. 
(4)  A blank space consisting of not less than 50 square inches must be provided on the revised plat to accommodate required certifications. 
(5)  Revised plats must be prepared at a scale of not less than 50 feet to one inch. 
(6)  The revised plat must comply with the regulations of the city zoning ordinance, including all conditions of zoning, which are to be shown in the upper right hand corner of the revised plat. 
(7)  The revised plat must show the following wording in black ink: 
"This revised plat has been submitted to the Community Development Director of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia, and has been approved as required by state law and municipal codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the county superior court. This plat is hereby approved subject to any protective covenants shown hereon. 
Dated this _______ day of _____,_____ _____ _____ _____ 
Community Development Director City of Dunwoody, Georgia" 
(8)  All revisions to original plats must be bound by the protective covenants on the original final plat and a statement to that effect must be noted in black ink on the revised plat unless noted otherwise. 
(9)  Other data which may be required in support of a revised final plat are: a final engineering design report on proposed revisions and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as may be required by city officials in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-01-01, § VI, 1-28-2019) 
Secs. 16-204—16-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, redesignated former art. I, div. 2, "Required Public Improvements," §§ 16-26—16-31, as a new art. IV, §§ 16-216, 16-217, 16-219—16-222 to read as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 16-216. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Establish the city's authority to require an applicant for a building permit or development permit to make reasonable public street improvements and/or obtain approval to defer such improvements through an agreement process and/or pay a fee in lieu of such improvements; 
(2)  Establish procedures to determine when applicants for building permits or development permits are required to provide public improvements; 
(3)  Establish criteria to be used in determining the nature, extent and location of required public improvements; and 
(4)  Promote development of the city's transportation infrastructure in conformance with the city's comprehensive plan and transportation plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-2.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-217. - Applicability. 
Applicants for any building permit or development permit must construct or otherwise provide for public right-of-way improvements as set forth in this article if issuance of the permit would result in any of the following: 
(1)  Creation of a new access point to a public street; 
(2)  Addition of eight or more motor vehicle parking stalls on the subject lot; 
(3)  Structural improvements to existing buildings that exceed 25 percent of the county tax assessor's 100 percent assessed value of the existing improvements on the subject property, based on the value of all structural improvements over the previous 12-month period; 
(4)  New buildings or building additions that result in an increase in existing building floor area on the subject property by more than ten percent, based on the total floor area added over the previous 12-month period; or 
(5)  A change in use or method of operation that results in a 20 percent or greater increase in traffic generation potential, based on average daily and peak-hour traffic generation data published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). 
(6)  Any subdivision that results in a net increase in the number of single family lots or is for a commercial/industrial zoned property shall provide off-site improvements per this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-2.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-218. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Additions and accessory structures to existing single-family residential dwellings; 
(2)  Minor subdivisions in single-family residential districts where no additional lots are created; and 
(3)  New and/or replacement homes on existing lots where a single-family residential dwelling will be demolished and replaced and there is no net increase in the number of dwelling units. This includes the construction of a new single family home on an existing vacant lot. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-219. - Requirements. 
The community development director is authorized to determine, in consultation with other affected city departments and service providers, whether one or more of the following public right-of-way improvements abutting the subject property are deficient and must be brought up to current standards to mitigate the impacts of a permitted action set forth in this article. Construction or provision of those improvements in the manner specified by the community development director must be a condition of granting the applicable permit: 
(1)  Dedication of public right-of-way on the same side of the street as the subject property; 
(2)  Paved roadway, including bike lanes, on the same side of the street as the subject property; 
(3)  Sidewalks on the same side of the street as the subject property; 
(4)  Concrete curbs and gutters on the same side of the street as the subject property; 
(5)  Storm drainage systems; 
(6)  Street landscaping and streetscape appurtenances on the same side of the street as the subject property; and 
(7)  Traffic control and other safety devices including, but not limited to, provisions for channelization, pavement markings, signage, pedestrian safety and traffic calming. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-2.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-220. - Construction. 
At the discretion of the community development director, a deferral and/or fee in lieu of improvements may be granted in accordance with this article, otherwise, applicants for a building permits or development permits must construct required improvements in conformance with all applicable city requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-2.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-221. - Deferral and fee in lieu of improvements. 
(a)  The community development director may grant a deferral and/or allow payment of a fee in lieu of improvements for some or all of the improvements required pursuant to this division, provided that dedication of necessary right-of-way may not be deferred or satisfied through payment of a fee in lieu. The community development director's decision regarding deferral or payment of a fee in lieu must take into account the best interest of the city and, among other considerations, the following criteria: 
(1)  Proximity to similar improvements or lack thereof, within the roadway corridor; 
(2)  Continuity of infrastructure improvements within the public right-of-way; 
(3)  Pending projects programmed within the corridor that may impact the street frontage of the subject property; 
(4)  Safety considerations; 
(5)  Traffic volumes and travel patterns; 
(6)  Storm drainage needs; 
(7)  Any input received from city departments and service providers. 
(b)  For those improvements either deferred or for which a fee in lieu is paid, the city must require that the applicant do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Execute and record an agreement to defer completion of the required improvements by the applicant until such time as the city determines the improvements are needed; or 
(2)  Pay a fee in lieu of improvements based on the city's estimated costs to complete the required improvements; or 
(3)  Execute a combination of a deferral and payment of a fee in lieu of improvements, provided that the applicant's combined obligation does not exceed the extent of the total requirements for such improvements. 
(c)  For those improvements that are deferred, the design and construction standards in effect at the time of improvements will apply. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-2.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-222. - Appeals. 
Decisions by the community development director made pursuant to this division may be appealed to the city council by filing a request with the community development director within 30 days of the community development director's decision. Decisions will be posted on the city's web page and in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The 30-day appeal period shall start to run upon the earlier of said postings. Appeal shall be in accordance with procedures and conditions in chapter 16, section 16-33. If no appeal is made within the 30-day period, the decision of the community development director is final. If an appeal is made to the city council, the city council must set a hearing date for the appeal within 30 days of the appeal being requested and the decision of the city council is final. The city council decision may be appealed only by a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-2.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-223—16-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, amended and renumbered former div. 4, "Subdivision Design," §§ 16-221—16-228 as a new div. 2, §§ 16-236—16-243 to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 16-236. - General. 
(a)  Adequate public facilities. The applicant must submit sufficient information and data with the application on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate compliance with the following: 
(1)  Comprehensive plan consistency. Proposed public improvements must conform to and be properly related to the city comprehensive plan and all applicable capital improvement plans. 
(2)  Water. All habitable buildings and buildable lots must be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
(3)  Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots must be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
(4)  Stormwater management. Drainage improvements must accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and must be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding as required under article II, division 5 of this chapter. Stormwater quality management facilities must be adequate as required by article II, division 5 of this chapter. The city may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and or the construction of offsite drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
(5)  Streets. Proposed streets must provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for all lawful modes of transportation, must be properly related to the comprehensive plan, and must be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. The community development director is authorized to require submittal of traffic impact study at the time of application for any development that will generate additional motor vehicle trips to or from the subject site during a 24-hour period or during the peak traffic hour, based on trip generation rates obtained from the most recent editions of Trip Generation and Trip Generation Handbook, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). Only "new" vehicle trips will be counted; no pass-by or internal trip capture will be used in calculating "added vehicle trips." Traffic impact studies must be prepared by a professional transportation planner or traffic engineer. 
(6)  Extension policies. All public improvements and required easements must be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, and telecommunications lines must be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. 
(7)  Common areas. Where present, common areas, such as stormwater detention and open spaces, shall be dedicated to a required home owners association for maintenance and ownership responsibilities. Common areas are not subject to the requirements for lots. 
(b)  Natural resources. 
(1)  To better implement the policies and purposes of this chapter, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and to minimize the negative environmental effects of development, subdivisions must be designed and developed to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity. The following land areas must be preserved in their natural state and not subjected to any development or land-disturbance activity, and may not be part of the buildable area: 
a.  Wetlands; and 
b.  Special flood hazard areas. 
(2)  Subdivisions must be also laid out to: 
a.  Avoid adversely affecting watercourses, ground water, and aquifer recharge; 
b.  Minimize cut and fill; 
c.  Minimize impervious cover and the environmental impacts of roads and access points; 
d.  Minimize flooding; and 
e.  Minimize adverse effects of noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring properties. 
(3)  The community development director may not recommend approval for a sketch plat or parts thereof if the community development director determines that: 
a.  The areas listed [in] subsection (b)(1) have not been set aside and protected from development; 
b.  The proposed subdivision does not comply with the requirements of subsection (b)(2); or 
c.  If the proposed subdivision is not in the best interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-237. - Streets. 
(a)  Arrangement. 
(1)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all subdivision streets must conform to the provisions of this chapter and to the comprehensive transportation plan. New streets must be designed and located with consideration of their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets. 
(2)  Where not shown in the comprehensive transportation plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision must either: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or 
b.  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the city council to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(3)  Local residential streets must be designed to discourage speeding and provide a safe environment for nonmotorized transportation. 
(4)  Within historic districts, the platting of lots and streets must be compatible with the historic patterns that exist within the historic district except for numbered state or federal routes. 
(b)  Comprehensive transportation plan review. The community development director and the public works director must review changes in the patterns of traffic, land development, and subdivisions, and prepare a report to the city council with recommendations concerning appropriate revisions to the comprehensive transportation plan. Such review must: 
(1)  Ensure safe and efficient access between neighborhoods and local services; 
(2)  Ensure the continuity and adequacy of local streets, collector streets and arterial streets to form a coherent and continuous system of routes; 
(3)  Identify applications of appropriate traffic calming and traffic management strategies to discourage unnecessary traffic and travel speeds in neighborhoods; and 
(4)  Ensure a coherent and continuous system for nonmotorized travel. 
(c)  Subdivisions bordering major streets or railroad rights-of-way. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an arterial or collector street, a railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way, the community development director may impose reasonable limits or conditions on the number, type, location and design of driveway access points, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Rear service alleys to facilitate traffic flow, safety and public services; 
(2)  Provision of one or a pair of smaller marginal access streets approximately parallel to and on each side of this right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as park or open space and to provide for multipurpose trails. These distances must also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations; or 
(3)  In the case of limited-access highways only, reverse frontage lots may be created with landscape buffers and a non-access reserve strip along the rear property line. 
(d)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips that separate developed or undeveloped land from necessary access to streets are prohibited except when such access is controlled by the city. 
(e)  Intersections. 
(1)  Spacing. Street intersections with nearest edge of pavement offsets of less than 125 feet are prohibited. 
(2)  General design. Street intersections in subdivisions must be as nearly at right angles as practicable. No interior angle may be less than 75 degrees. Intersections of more than two streets must be designed in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(3)  Radius. Right-of-way lines at intersections must be rounded by a tangential arc that is concentric with the paved radii lines. At each street intersection in a subdivision the property line at each block corner must either be mitered or rounded. A mitered property line must be located on the interior chord of a convex curve or located 15 feet inside the tangent of a concave curve. A rounded property line must be established with a curve of radius R varying with the interior angle as specified in the following table, unless sufficient data is presented to show that strict adherence to this requirement is impractical due to topographical or engineering considerations. 

 
(4)  Grade at intersections must have tangent of no greater than two percent. 
(f)  Street frontage. Each building must be located on a lot or parcel that abuts a public street or private street. 
(g)  Private streets. 
(1)  Private streets are allowed only if the development seeking to have a private streets is ten acres or larger in area. The zoning board of appeals is authorized to waive this minimum acreage requirement if all real property owners that abut the proposed private street agree to such waiver. 
(2)  Where this chapter measures minimum building setback lines and frontages, or imposes development standards in connection with, or with reference to public streets, such measurements or standards set forth in the district regulations and supplemental regulations of the city zoning ordinance, in this chapter or elsewhere in this Code apply similarly for property abutting a private street where such private street has been approved by the zoning board of appeals. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize any kind of development on a private street that would not be authorized where there was public right-of-way. 
(3)  Private streets within any zoning district may not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this Code. Private streets within any district must be assigned names and locations. The names of these streets must be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in this chapter, chapter 8, and the city zoning ordinance. The city geographic information services department must approve all private street names and addresses to avoid conflicting names and addresses. 
(4)  Where sanitary or storm sewer lines are constructed underneath a private street, the developer is required to grant an easement to the applicable utility authority for their installation, maintenance and repair. In the case of private streets, the city is authorized to assign responsibility for maintenance of storm sewers to a property owners association. 
(5)  Private streets are not eligible for participation in the city's residential sidewalk district program as provided for in this Code. 
(6)  Developers and property owners' associations must ensure access to all private streets by emergency and law enforcement vehicles and must ensure that private streets are constructed to allow access by all emergency vehicles and law enforcement vehicles. 
(7)  The use of private streets may not result in an increase in permitted density above that which would otherwise be permitted by the applicable district regulations. Density calculations must be made based on a public street system and the preliminary plat that provides for a private street must be density neutral. 
(8)  Private streets must comply with requirements for public streets found in this chapter and all other applicable sections of this Code. Private streets must be surfaced with the same type of materials that are used by the city's department of public works for the surfacing and resurfacing of public streets or with materials that are as protective as those used by the city to surface and resurface streets so long as such alternative materials are approved by the director of public works. 
(9)  The zoning board of appeals may authorize a private street where the department of community development has certified that the applicant has submitted all required documentation as set forth herein and where the zoning board of appeals finds that: 
a.  The location of the proposed private street will not adversely impact use of any existing surrounding public street; 
b.  The location of the proposed private street will not adversely impact adjacent existing communities or neighborhoods; 
c.  The applicant has shown that there is the requisite legal mechanism for the maintenance of the proposed private street; and 
d.  The applicant has provided written evidence that the proposed private street system is acceptable to the city departments or divisions responsible for law enforcement, sanitation, transportation and fire and rescue. 
(10)  Private street rights-of-way must be owned by the mandatory homeowners' association as required by subsection (h)(11). Street rights-of-way must comply with all the requirements set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in this chapter and in the city zoning ordinance. An access easement and a utility easement must entirely overlay the rights-of-way and must be dedicated to the city for public use. All applicable setbacks, lot widths and lot areas must be measured from the homeowner's association right-of-way. 
(11)  Each developer that chooses to include private streets within a condominium, as that term is defined by state law, or any other residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or office development, must organize and establish a property owners' association prior to recording of the final plat. Membership in the property owners' association must be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit within the development. The property owners' association must be organized so that it has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private streets and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. The declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association must be recorded with the clerk of the county superior court and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association must provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. The streets must be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the city. The recorded declaration of covenants and articles of association must specifically require the property owners' association repair and maintain each private street in the same manner as similar public streets are maintained by the city and such maintenance and repair must be performed in compliance with all city standards and all applicable provisions of law. 
(12)  Prior to any final plat approval, the developer must submit articles of incorporation, declarations of covenants and bylaws for the property owners' association to the department of community development. Those documents must thereafter be reviewed and approved by the community development director. 
(13)  The declaration of covenants and articles of association must provide for a street maintenance fund the proceeds of which may be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the streets, whether for resurfacing or a similar purpose. For the purposes of providing further assurance that city funds may not be used for maintenance of private streets, the developer must submit proof of deposit of 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or his designee, in an interest bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(14)  At the end of the 12-month maintenance period provided for in this subsection, a developer must provide a maintenance bond or letter of credit, renewable annually to cover the cost of maintenance and repair for any private streets within a subdivision. The bond must be for an amount equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or his designee. The developer may avoid securing a maintenance bond if they submit proof to the department of community development that 100 percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director, has been deposited in an interest-bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. If the developer chooses this alternative, the declarations of covenants and articles of association must specifically require the property owners' association to continuously maintain 100 percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs of the private streets in this maintenance fund. 
(15)  The property owners' association must be empowered to levy assessments against owners within the development for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and other items set forth in this subsection. At least 15 percent of all fees or assessments paid must be set aside in the maintenance fund. Any unpaid assessments will constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building or unit of the owner. 
(16)  Within nine months following approval of the final plat, the city's community development director or his designee must inspect the private streets to ensure compliance with all city standards and all applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in law for public streets, curbs, sidewalks, signage and street lighting. The developer must be notified of any deficiencies in writing and such deficiencies must be corrected within 60 days of the written notice of deficiencies unless the city agrees to extension of that period in writing. 
(17)  Failure to correct the complete list of deficiencies constitutes a violation of this section and will subject the developer to prosecution for a code violation in the city municipal court. Any person found to have violated this section is subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 for each violation. Each day that the violation exists is a separate and distinct offense. 
(18)  The community development director or his designee must deny the issuance of certificates of occupancy until all deficiencies have been corrected. 
(h)  Street abandonment. 
(1)  Any abandonment of a public street by the city pursuant to this section must comply with the applicable requirements set forth in state law and this Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 32-7-2(b) and 32-7-4 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
(2)  A property owner may petition the city council to abandon an existing public street that abuts the owner's property. The petition must include documents that comply with all of the requirements set forth in this section. 
(3)  The petition must contain evidence that each abutting landowner to the public street seeks to have the street abandoned. 
(4)  The petition must contain evidence that once abandoned pursuant to the requirements of state law, all property owners that abut the street agree that ownership of the street must be placed in a property owners' association. The petition must include evidence that 100 percent of all property owners in the property owners' association have agreed that the street at issue may become private and have agreed to maintain and exercise control over the private street as required by this section. 
(5)  The petition must contain evidence that the property owners' association has the financial ability to maintain the street and associated improvements in perpetuity. 
(6)  The petition must include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association or other legal instruments creating the property owners' association provide or have been amended to provide that membership in the property owners' association is mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit on the street. 
(7)  The petition must include evidence that the property owners' association must be organized so that it has absolute legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private streets and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. 
(8)  The petition must include evidence that the declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association must be recorded with the clerk of the county superior court and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association must provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. The streets must be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the city. 
(9)  The petition must include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association must provide for a maintenance fund, the proceeds of which may be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the streets, whether for resurfacing or similar purpose. For the purposes of providing further assurances that city funds will not be required or used for maintenance of private streets, the property owners' association must submit proof of a maintenance fund equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or his designee, in an interest bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(10)  The petition must include evidence that the property owners have a maintenance bond renewable annually in an amount equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or his designee. 
(11)  The petition must include evidence that the property owners' association is empowered to levy assessments against owners on the streets for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses and evidence that any unpaid assessments constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building, or unit of the owner. At least 15 percent of all fees or assessments paid must be set aside in the maintenance fund. 
(12)  The city council may not consider a petition for abandonment unless it: 
a.  Contains all of the evidence and documents required by this section; 
b.  Is supported by an analysis by the department of public works that shows that the street is no longer used by the public to the extent that it serves no substantial public purpose and that the public at large will benefit from its closure since the public will no longer be responsible for any costs to maintain and repair the street; and 
c.  Is supported by an analysis by the department of community development that shows that the abandonment of the street does not negatively impact adjacent neighboring communities and the public at large. 
(i)  Street cross-sections. Except as expressly stated in a city-adopted plan (e.g., Dunwoody Village) or within the city's standards and specifications, all streets must be designed and constructed in substantial compliance with the regulations of the table below. Modifications of this table may be approved by the community development director based on contextual constraints. 

 
[1] Shoulder width includes minimum six-foot tree planting strip, minimum five-foot sidewalk and space for underground utilities (cable TV, water, telephone, electric and natural gas). 
Figure 14-1: Street Cross-section (typical), Principal Arterial  
Figure 14-2: Street Cross-section (typical), Collector and Minor Arterial  
Figure 14-3: Street Cross-section (typical), Local Street  
(j)  Right-of-way and street improvements. 
(1)  All proposed new streets must be designed and built in accordance with the standards listed in this article and the city's standards and specifications. 
(2)  Streets must have a minimum right-of-way width that complies with the comprehensive transportation plan and that will safely accommodate motorized and nonmotorized transportation improvements and street cross-sections needed to provide appropriate, safe and adequate access to the subject property, in accordance with the city's standards and specifications. Where a proposed subdivision or project requiring a land development permit has frontage on an existing public street, right-of-way must be dedicated to meet the requirements of this section. The right-of-way must be improved wherever required as further provided in this section. For existing streets on which a proposed subdivision or project requiring a land development permit has frontage, the applicant must: 
a.  Dedicate a minimum of 50 percent of the required right-of-way width as measured from the centerline of the existing street right-of-way; 
b.  Install all required sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, and place utilities in accordance with the standards in this article; and 
c.  Provide a minimum of 50 percent of the roadway pavement required in this article and install it to the right-of-way centerline. 
(3)  Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements on the city zoning ordinance where the land is to be dedicated to the public in fee simple or an easement associated with the road is granted to the city. 
(4)  Right-of-way dedication and road widening must extend for the full length of road frontage of the property under development and must conform to the standards in these regulations. Flares at pavement ends may be required to extend beyond property under development. 
(5)  The city council, after considering all related factors, may authorize deviations from this section as follows: 
a.  Right-of-way dedication may be waived or modified if existing government plans for the roadway indicate lesser right-of-way would be required for dedication. 
b.  Road improvements may be waived or modified if: 
1.  Existing use of property not to be substantially changed (i.e., traffic generation and ingress/egress would remain the same); 
2.  Governmental construction plans for the road indicate a pavement width less than city standards (only the planned pavement width is required); 
3.  Widening would create a hazard to motorized or nonmotorized traffic. 
c.  The applicant may, with written concurrence of the community development director, provide payment to the city in lieu of road improvements when: 
1.  Road improvements by state or local action are scheduled within 24 months; 
2.  Existing utility companies' improvements are situated so as to require their removal or relocation before road improvements should be accomplished; 
3.  Improvements would cause unreasonable land development hardships because of topography, soils, bridges, grades, etc., and delay of improvements would not adversely impact the city's road system; and 
4.  Payment for road improvements must be in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation's Item Mean Summary cost information or other documentation of construction and improvement costs approved by the public works director. 
(k)  Half streets. Half streets are prohibited. The applicant is required to pave the full standard width of any existing unpaved public right-of-way or any proposed public street on which the proposed subdivision has frontage and access. 
(l)  Temporary dead-end streets. Temporary dead-end streets may be platted, if recommended by the community development director and approved by the city manager, where the proposed subdivision adjoins property not yet subdivided or property that may be redeveloped. A temporary dead end street must end in a temporary turn-around. The right-of-way of any temporary dead end street must be carried to the boundary of the properties being subdivided. Street signs must be posted stating: "No Exit—Temporary dead-end street." 
(m)  Permanent dead-end streets. 
(1)  Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently must be provided with a cul-de-sac at the closed end and may not exceed 1,200 feet. 
(2)  The outside radius of a cul-de-sac on a public street must be at least 40 feet, measured to the inside face of the outside curb. Each cul-de-sac must provide a landscaped island at the center, and the clear width of the paved roadway measured from the outside of the landscaped island to the inside face of the outside curb may not be less than 24 feet. The radius of the right-of-way for the cul-de-sac may not be less than 50 feet. 
(n)  Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys are required wherever topography or the presence of arterials or other features makes vehicular access from the front of the lot impractical or unsafe. Where the alley serves as the primary means of vehicular access to the lot, it must be dedicated as a public right-of-way and built to the standards required in this chapter. 
(2)  Alleys may be permitted as private streets providing secondary or service access and where the principal buildings have adequate access for emergency vehicles from a public street on their frontage. Private alleys may end in a turn-around. All alleys dedicated to the public must provide a continuous connection between one or more public streets. Alleys must be paved and constructed to the same standards as the connecting public streets except that: 
a.  Alleys constructed with flush curbs must have a minimum paved width of 12 feet; 
b.  Alleys constructed without flush curbs must have a minimum paved width of 16 feet; 
c.  Buildings must be set back at least ten feet from the back of curb of an alley. 
(o)  Street grades. 
(1)  Subdivision street grades may not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 

 
(2)  A 16-percent grade on local streets may be approved by the community development director where AASHTO sight distance is maintained. An as-built street profile may be required. 
(3)  No street grade may be less than one percent and no one percent grade may be longer than 300 feet. 
(p)  Horizontal curves. Subdivision streets with design speeds of 20 miles per hour may not have a minimum centerline horizontal curve radius less than 90 feet. No other subdivision street may have a horizontal curve radius less than 150 feet. Radius must be measured from the centerline of the right-of-way. 
(q)  Sight distance. All subdivision streets must comply with AASHTO sight distance standards. 
(r)  Intersection design. Subdivision intersections may not be designed in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. Sight distance must be provided at all intersections in accordance with AASHTO standards and criteria. If, due to other restrictions, this minimum sight distance cannot be maintained, the applicant must, at the applicant's expense, provide adequate traffic-control devices or other physical improvements subject to the approval and installation by the city. 
(s)  Access management. The following standards apply to all subdivisions and all projects requiring a land development permit where the primary access is from a state or federal highway or an arterial or collector street. These standards apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the state department of transportation: 
(1)  Commercial or office properties may be required, based on site conditions as determined by the community development director, to provide cross-access to allow motorized and nonmotorized circulation between sites. Motorized cross-access is not required between nonresidential uses and single-family uses. 
(2)  Joint driveways, cross-access easements and nonmotorized transportation access must be established wherever feasible along an arterial or collector street. The building site must incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous service drives or cross-access corridors extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation of at least 1,000 feet of linear street frontage. 
b.  A design speed of ten miles per hour and a two-way travel aisle width of 24 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles. 
c.  Stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross-access via a service drive. 
(3)  The community development director may reduce the required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Joint access driveways and cross-access easements are provided in accordance with this section. 
b.  The site plan incorporates a unified motorized and nonmotorized transportation access and circulation system in accordance with this section. 
c.  The property owner must enter into a written agreement with the city, recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site that do not meet the requirements of this section will be closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint use driveway. 
(4)  All developments must have access to a public right-of-way. The number of access points must be as follows: 

 
(5)  The separation of access points on an arterial or collector street must be determined by the speed limit of the road with the following minimum spacing requirements: 

 
a.  The distance between access points must be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or public street to the centerline of the nearest existing adjacent driveway or public street. 
b.  Driveway spacing at intersections and corners must provide adequate sight distance, response time, and permit adequate queuing space. 
c.  No driveways, except residential access drives, are allowed within 100 feet of the centerline of an intersecting arterial or collector street. 
d.  No nonresidential access except right-in/right-out channelized access is allowed within 100 feet of the centerline of any other arterial. 
e.  The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
(6)  Where arterials or collector streets include medians, directional median openings must be separated by a minimum of 330 feet and full median openings must be separated by a minimum of 660 feet. 
(7)  All street design and other development activities, including landscaping, must be arranged on-site so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles. 
(8)  Along arterials or collector streets, a deceleration lane, a turn lane, larger or reduced turning radius, traffic islands or other devices or designs, including traffic calming devices and designs, may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards which would otherwise be created by the proposed driveway location. 
(9)  Deceleration lanes and left turn lanes must be provided in accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control (Driveway Manual). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-238. - Street trees. 
(a)  General. These street tree planting requirements apply in all districts. 
(b)  Tree planting requirements. 
(1)  A street tree planting plan must be submitted to and approved by the city arborist prior to issuance of a development permit. The plan must be prepared and sealed by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist or registered forester. All proposed trees must be individually identified on the plan with an included tree species list. 
(2)  Street trees must be planted in the right-of-way. Trees must be planted at intervals or no more than 50 feet and no closer than 25 feet to street intersections. Street trees are not required abutting each individual lot where spacing distances are inadequate. Street trees are required on both sides of the street. The city arborist may approve alternate spacing when the 50-foot spacing requirement cannot be met due to driveways and other improvements. 
(3)  Street tree species shall be selected in accordance with appendix B and the approved general street list and street trees as defined in section 16-116, subject to approval by the city arborist. No more than 35 percent of any one species may be used throughout the development. 
(4)  Street trees must have a minimum caliper of three inches. They must be single-stemmed with a single, straight leader. 
(5)  The builder/developer must install the street trees specified on the street tree planting plan prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. However, street tree plantings may be delayed from May 1 through October 1, provided that the builder enters into a performance surety agreement with the city guaranteeing tree planting by October 15. The performance surety agreement must be executed before the issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
(6)  Street trees count towards the minimum individual lot tree density requirements set forth in article II, division 6. 
(c)  Installation and maintenance. 
(1)  Installation. 
a.  All trees must be installed in a sound workmanlike manner and according to accepted good planting procedures. No certificate of occupancy or similar authorization may be issued unless the requirements of this section have been met. 
b.  Impermeable rigid tree root barriers must be installed in a linear method in all tree planting areas. The barriers must be a minimum of 24 inches deep and include ribs to direct root growth downward. The root barriers must be installed in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
c.  Expandable plastic tree trunk protectors must be installed on each tree. 
(2)  Staking and guying. Newly planted trees may not be staked or guyed unless approved by the city arborist. 
(3)  Maintenance. Street trees must be maintained by the property owner who owns the abutting lot or by the property owners' association. Maintenance must include watering, pruning, tree replacement and removal of leaves and litter from the sidewalks and street, as necessary. A maintenance responsibility statement must be provided on the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2018-07-13, § II, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 16-239. - Easements. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to easements for or in subdivisions. 
(b)  Dedication permission. The applicant must obtain permission from the community development director for the dedication of utility easements prior to the submission of the dedication. 
(c)  On-site floodplain easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream, or floodplain, a floodplain easement must be dedicated to the city. The easement must conform to the requirements of this chapter and must conform substantially to the limits of such stream or floodplain plus additional width outside the floodplain limits, up to five feet, as necessary to accommodate future access. 
(d)  Off-site drainage easements. Where drainage system improvements are required on private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured by the applicant and indicated on the plat. 
(e)  Nonmotorized transportation easements and paths. Nonmotorized transportation easements and paths are required in subdivisions or projects requiring a land development permit to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, libraries, shopping centers, transportation centers and other community facilities. Such easements must have a width of 15 feet. Such paths must be surfaced and constructed in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-240. - Blocks. 
(a)  Length, width and shape determination. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks in subdivisions must be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated or for the conservation of open space or existing historic features; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient nonmotorized transportation access to public transit, nearby schools, or commercial districts, vehicular circulation at safe speeds and adequate access for emergency vehicles; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography to minimize land-disturbance and erosion. 
(b)  Maximum and minimum lengths. The dimensions of blocks must be designed to promote safe and efficient motorized and nonmotorized transportation access. The maximum block length in a low-density residential subdivision (four or fewer dwelling units per acre) is 1,200 feet. The maximum block length in other contexts is 600 feet. Shorter maximum block length requirements may be imposed by the city in walkable, mixed-use environments. 
(c)  Midblock easements and paths. In blocks of 600 feet or more, the community development director may require the reservation of a ten-foot easement and durable, all-weather surfaced path with a minimum width of five feet through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or nonmotorized travel. Such paths must be constructed in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-241. - Lots. 
(a)  Dimension, size, and shape orientation. The lot area, frontage, width, depth, shape and orientation in subdivisions must be in accordance with requirements of the city zoning and land development ordinances. 
(b)  Frontage. Each subdivision lot must front upon an existing paved private or public street. 
(c)  Through lots and reverse frontage lots. Through lots and reverse frontage lots are discouraged in subdivisions except along limited access highways, such as interstate highways. Where it is necessary to provide separation of residential development from arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, lots fronting such features may be platted in greater depth so that dwellings may be set back an additional distance from the arterial or other feature. Such lots may obtain vehicular access from a rear alley. Lots having access from an alley do not constitute prohibited through lots. A landscape reservation of at least ten feet in width, and across which there is no right of vehicular access, may be required along the lot lines of lots abutting any disadvantageous feature, including a busy roadway, or land use where access should be restricted in the public interest. 
(d)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines in subdivisions must be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines as they extend from the front lot line to the front building line. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots must have an extra width of not less than 15 feet more for each street frontage than required for interior lots for the zoning district within which they are located. 
(f)  Buildable area. Lot shall contain adequate buildable area that is suitable for the intended use. 
(g)  Spite strips. The creation of spite strips is prohibited. 
(h)  Flag lots. The creation of flag lots is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-242. - Common open space. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  All residential subdivisions of five acres or greater or consisting of more than 36 dwelling units are required to provide common open space, in order to achieve the following public purposes: 
a.  To conserve open land, including those areas containing historic or cultural resources, or sensitive natural features and wildlife habitats; 
b.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land-disturbance; and 
c.  To preserve and develop an adequate tree cover. 
(2)  When required, common open space must constitute a minimum of 20 percent of the land area in new subdivision developments. 
(3)  Common open space required by this section may be used in a variety of ways, including natural areas for wildlife and ecological functions, parks, gardens, landscaped medians, squares, village greens, courtyards, recreational space, or recreational facilities, provided the use is consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Restrictions. No more than 20 percent of the required common open space area may be covered with paved trails, bike paths or multi-use paths, buildings, plazas, swimming pools, or athletic courts. Sidewalks along public rights-of-way or parking lots, streets, or other areas for motorized vehicular use may not be counted as common open space area. 
(c)  Dedications. Parks, open space, multi-use trails, recreation areas and conservation easements may be offered for dedication to the city by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-243. - Public and civic sites. 
(a)  Reservations. A developer may reserve and offer property within a subdivision as a site for a civic use, including, but not limited to, public schools, fire stations, police stations, or recreation centers. The developer must allow a minimum period of one year from the date of submittal of the preliminary plat during which time the proper authorities may authorize acquisition of the property for its intended civic purposes. If the reserved site has not been authorized for acquisition by the proper authorities within one year, the reservation will terminate unless extended by the developer. If not extended, development of the formerly reserved site must follow the standard plat approval process. An amended final plat for the entire subdivision must then be processed in the required manner when submitted by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-14.80), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-244—16-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPROVEMENTS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, amended and renumbered former div. 5, "Subdivision Improvements," §§ 16-241—16-245, as new div. 3, §§ 16-256—16-260 to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 16-256. - Utilities. 
(a)  Location of required utilities in public rights-of-way. All required utilities within city rights-of-way must be located as shown in the city's standards and specifications and as stated in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-15.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, changed the title of former § 16-241 from "General" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-257. - Water. 
(a)  Certification of final plat. Compliance with the improvement standards of this section must be certified by an authorized representative of the services provider. 
(b)  Water mains. 
(1)  The city, or its designated water service provider, has the right and privilege to design water mains and appurtenances of the right size and materials in subdivisions. The design will include necessary improvements to the water system, including extensions along the entire roadway frontage of the development. 
(2)  Sizes of water mains in subdivisions will be determined by the city to ensure adequate domestic supply and fire protection for the subdivision. 
(3)  All materials for water mains in subdivisions will conform to specifications of the American Water Works Association. 
(4)  Water mains will be laid a minimum distance of four feet back of the curb line. 
(c)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants must be installed in subdivisions so that all residential property will comply with the requirements of the applicable fire prevention code. The location of fire hydrants must be reviewed and approved by the public works director. Additional fire hydrant locations may be required to ensure water quality and air release standards. 
(d)  Water valves. Water valves must be installed in subdivisions to affect a minimum cutoff of mains in case of shutdowns. 
(e)  Stub-out services. Stub-out services must be installed when the city determines them necessary to avoid cutting of pavement or sidewalks. Stub-out services must be placed on lots as specified by the city. 
(f)  Water service data. 
(1)  The applicant must furnish data on the final subdivision plat in digitized form, as required by the community development director. 
(2)  The city is authorized to determine the location and size of all pipe, valves, fire hydrants, fittings and stubs to lots, consistent with design regulations promulgated by the community development director in conjunction with the city's water services provider. The city must furnish to the owner/applicant copies of the final plat with a list of materials that will include the total linear feet of main to be extended. 
(3)  With this information the applicant will take bids from contractors and when the contract is awarded, furnish the city with a copy of the contract. 
(g)  Certification. The applicant's engineer or surveyor must furnish the city with an engineer's certificate. 
(h)  Prerequisites to materials delivery to contractor. 
(1)  No materials to be used for subdivision water improvements will be delivered to the job site until the requirements of subsections (f) and (g) have been met. 
(2)  No work will commence on the water improvements until the water services provider has inspected and approved all materials on the site for compliance with the materials specifications as published by the water services provider. 
(3)  Any water line material or appurtenances found not to meet specifications must be removed from the job site by the contractor prior to commencement of any water line construction activity. 
(i)  Final inspection. Upon completion of the job of installing water improvements in a subdivision, the owner/applicant's engineer and the city's water services provider will measure the work done showing station numbers to all valves, fire hydrants and other pertinent fittings including stub locations. The owner/applicant must furnish the city a copy of this report showing the work done. The owner/applicant must furnish the city with a final cost of the labor to install the materials. 
(j)  Material storage. It is the contractor's responsibility to acquire, properly handle, store and protect all materials. The city may not be held responsible for loss or damage to any materials. No damaged material must be utilized in the water line construction. 
(k)  Excavation. 
(1)  Depth. Trenches must be excavated to a depth sufficient to provide a minimum of three feet of cover over subdivision water mains, and two and one-half feet over subdivision water service lines. In rock cuts, the excavation must be of sufficient depth and width to provide a minimum of six inches' earth cushion below and along the sides of the mains. 
(2)  Sheeting. The contractor must install sheeting and bracing where necessary to prevent caving, to protect new work and to protect adjacent utility lines, and public and private property. 
(3)  Blasting. Blasting is permitted only with the written approval of the city for each location. The contractor must provide adequate protection, such as mats, and permit only qualified, experienced personnel to supervise blasting. Approval by the city in no way relieves the contractor from any liability for any damages whatsoever resulting from the blasting operations. 
(l)  Pipe-laying. Pipe-laying must conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the community development department in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the community development department. The community development director is authorized to promulgate specifications and regulations to govern and implement this provision. 
(m)  Backfilling. 
(1)  All backfilling in subdivisions must be done with material free from roots, stumps and other foreign material. No rock will be permitted within a distance of six inches from the pipe or ground surface. Rock larger than 12 inches in greatest dimension will not be allowed in any part of the trench. All rock larger than 12 inches must be disposed of by the contractor. 
(2)  The placing and compaction of all backfill material must comply with all applicable standards and specifications of the service provider/governing authority. 
(3)  The contractor must restore to the original condition as at the start of the job, all shrubbery, grass, sod, fences, etc., disturbed during the contractor's operations. 
(n)  Pavement replacement. Cuts in existing street pavement and driveways will be patched by the applicant/owner. The applicant/owner must maintain the cuts in good condition until a permanent patch is made. When necessary to abate dust, mud or potholing, the contractor must furnish and install crushed rock or cold patch asphaltic concrete to the surface of the trench. Appropriate utility permits must be obtained from the public works director prior to work being initiated. 
(o)  Barricades and lights. The contractor must furnish and place sufficient barricades and lights to adequately protect the work on subdivision water improvements, and to protect all motorized and nonmotorized traffic. No street may be completely blocked, without the permission of the public works department. 
(p)  Testing. Testing of required improvements must be conducted in accordance with standards and specifications of the service provider/governing authority. 
(q)  Sterilization of mains. The contractor will furnish all chemicals, feeding equipment and manpower for the sterilization of water mains. The contractor is responsible for the disposal of dose water in accordance with environmental protection division regulations. The contractor must employ a hydric meter to record the quantity of water used and reimburse the city's water services provider for the appropriate amount. 
(r)  Cleanup. A thorough cleanup must be made before final acceptance of subdivision water improvements. All excess rock must be removed; private and public property must be restored to original condition, and all excess water line materials removed from the job site. 
(s)  Service laterals. The contractor must submit an as-built drawing showing the location, lot number and street address for each service lateral installed in a subdivision. 
(t)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The owner/applicant must maintain all water mains, appurtenances, trenches and other disturbed surfaces for a period of 12 months after approval and acceptance by the city. 
(2)  The contractor is responsible for repairs to any leaking pipe, fittings, etc. Should any trench settle, the contractor must promptly furnish and place fill to original grade. If any leak or trench settlement occurs under any pavement, the contractor will be held responsible for the cost of replacing the pavement. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-15.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-258. - Sewer. 
(a)  Installation. 
(1)  Sanitary sewers must be laid in all streets, service connections installed to property lines, and connections made to trunk line sewers in all subdivisions, including subdivisions with private disposal systems. 
(2)  The developer of a property adjacent to undeveloped and unserved land lying upgradient from the subject property, must extend the sewer main to the outside boundary of the property being developed in order to allow for the future provision of sewer service to such unserved adjacent property unless waived by the community development director. 
(3)  In all developments with private disposal systems, lines must be laid and temporarily plugged or capped at the points of service connections to the proposed trunk sewer line and individual lot lines in accordance with county requirements and specifications. 
(4)  Corresponding service connections must be installed and temporarily plugged or capped from each principal structure in such a manner that a proper service connection can be made when permanent sewer service is available. This requirements may be waived by the community development director based upon service feasibility to the principal structure as determined by the elevation of the structure with reference to the elevation of the proposed sewer line. 
(b)  Design. Design of the proposed sewer system within a development must conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the department of community development in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the department of community development. 
(c)  Filing of plans. Filing of plans must conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the department of community development in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the department of community development. The lowest minimum finished floor elevation must be noted for each lot. 
(d)  Materials. Materials must conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the department of community development in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the department of community development. 
(e)  Construction. Construction must conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the department of community development in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the department of community development. 
(f)  Comments on plat. Upon receiving the preliminary plat, the community development director must compare the proposed subdivision in relation to existing and proposed sewer systems. Comments, recommendations and changes deemed advisable will be marked on the preliminary plat and returned to the community development director. 
(g)  Certification on plat. The community development director must place certification upon the final plat after the applicant has complied with the sewer system requirements of the county. Such certification is required prior to final approval by the city manager. 
(h)  Acceptance. The city or its designated wastewater services provider may not accept the subdivision sewer project until the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements of the city and the county. 
(i)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The owner/applicant must maintain all sewer lines, appurtenances, trenches and other disturbed surfaces for a period of 12 months after approval and acceptance by the city manager and/or the city's wastewater services provider. 
(2)  The owner/applicant must be responsible for repairs to sewer system. Should any trenches settle, the owner/applicant must promptly furnish and place fill to original grade. Should any leaks or trench settlement occur under any pavement, the contractor will be held responsible for the cost of replacing pavement. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-15.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-259. - Streets. 
(a)  Standards. 
(1)  Generally. Street improvements must be provided in each subdivision in accordance with the city's standards and specifications and the regulations of this chapter. 
(2)  Grading. The construction limits must be cleared of all trees, stumps, brush and rubbish before grading operations are begun. No trees, stumps, brush or rubbish must be placed in fill sections within the construction limits. Such debris must be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the community development director. Fill sections must be placed in six-inch layers with each layer thoroughly compacted with a sheep foot roller or by other approved methods before the next layer is placed, compaction to be not less than 95 percent as determined by ASTM D 698 Streets must be graded to the width required to accommodate street, curb and sidewalk improvements. 
(3)  Curbing. Header curbs or standard curb and gutter is required on all streets and must be furnished and installed by the applicant unless grassed swales are used for water quality control and approved by the community development director. The minimum classes and types of curbing permitted will be as follows: 
a.  Granite curbing, class D or better. 
b.  Other as approved by the community development director. All curbing must be placed in firm, well-compacted subgrade, and curbing displaced prior to acceptance for maintenance by the city must be reset or replaced. Specifications for the granite curbing are available from the city department of community development. 
(4)  Base and paving. All roadways must be paved in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(5)  As-built drawings. As-built drawings for all new streets must be submitted to the department of community development depicting a street profile based on the centerline and 50-foot stations. 
(6)  Third-party inspections. Before acceptance by the city, street improvements must be inspected by a qualified third party for compliance with all applicable city standards and specifications. 
(b)  Street signs. 
(1)  Traffic control devices. Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided by the developer at no cost to the city. All devices shall be installed prior to the approval of a final plat, or where no final plat is required, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Signing. 
a.  All signing and pavement marking must be designed and installed in conformance with the latest edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices." 
b.  All signposts to be placed within concrete area must have six-inch wide diameter space through substructure. 
c.  The signs shall be new die cut anodized aluminum (at least .080 inches thick) with a corner radius no smaller than one and one-half inches and installed on a single square post with standard hardware. This post should be installed to break-away standards with a slip base. Should the applicant wish to use decorative poles, a custom permit will need to be applied for in the public works department. 
d.  As part of the land disturbance permit process, the developer shall identify the type, number and location of signs. 
e.  The applicant will be responsible for maintaining the signs from installation to final inspection. The city reserves the right to replace stop or yield signs if they have been down for more than 12 hours, to replace any regulatory signs if they have been down for more than seven days, and to replace any other signs if they have been down for more than 14 days. The developer will be responsible for any costs incurred. 
f.  The sign inspection shall be done by the department of community development prior to acceptance of the final plat or as established by the director of community development. The signs shall be included in the right-of-way surety at the same time as the pavement. If the city needs to replace any signs at the time of the final inspection, the value would be forfeited. 
g.  The street name sign should be two-sided and constructed on flat, not extruded, blades. 
(c)  Road hazards. Subdivision signs, planter boxes, and other similar permanent structures may not be located on street rights-of-way and may not be constructed in a manner which, in the opinion of the city, obstructs driveway sight distance or creates a traffic hazard; detailed plans for these structures must be submitted to the community development director. 
(d)  Surface drainage. 
(1)  The size, length and location of all surface drainage pipes or structures must be shown on the final subdivision plats and subject to the approval of the public works department. All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property between or through lots must be extended to at least 30 feet behind the rear of the house. Stormwater must be released into a channel without causing scouring, erosion or resulting sedimentation to the receiving channel. When necessary, the outlet channel must include structural and vegetative measures to ensure non-erosion velocities. This requirement for pipe extension only applies to the discharge ends of piped systems. 
a.  An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be made for pipes 54 inches and larger where the house site is proposed to be more than 30 feet from the center of the drainageway. 
b.  An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the city when soil conditions prohibit erosion. 
c.  An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the city where lots are at least one acre in size, open channels are provided, and neither ponding nor erosion control will result. 
(2)  Installation, backfilling and compaction must be in accordance with state transportation department specifications, sections 106 and 520. All pipes must have a minimum cover of one foot and headwalls or inlet basins constructed at the end of each pipe. 
(3)  The design of drainage structures must be based on recognized hydrological formulas as outlined in the Stormwater Management Manual. 
(4)  A contour map with an interval of two feet must be submitted as part of preliminary plats. As determined by the community development director, any lots within the subdivision which are undesirable for building due to bad drainage conditions must be excluded, and no building is permitted thereon until these conditions have been corrected as specified by the community development director. 
(e)  Plans and profiles. Three copies and one electronic/digital copy of the complete plans and profiles for subdivision street improvements must be submitted for review and recommendation of approval or denial by the public works department prior to approval of the final plat. 
(f)  Financial guarantees. 
(1)  If, at the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the construction of the street improvements has not been accomplished, then the final plat must be disapproved. No performance bonds may be allowed or authorized except the community development director may require a performance bond to be filed with the city to ensure that all final road improvements required by this Code are made by the owner or applicant. The city may not accept a road until such time as all road improvements required by the city are made. 
(2)  After the work has been completed in accordance with the city specifications and duly inspected by the city, then a maintenance bond is required, equal to ten percent of the estimated construction cost. The proposed maintenance bond must be reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney prior to acceptance by the city. The maintenance bond must cover the street improvements, drainage system, water system and sewer system. Funds may be placed in escrow with the city in lieu of maintenance bonds. 
(3)  The applicant must sign a maintenance agreement with the city, by which the applicant must agree to maintain the streets, drainage, water quality BMPs, water and sewer systems, and rights-of-way for a period of 12 months. During the applicant maintenance period, the city must make inspections and instruct the applicant by letter as to what correction must be made. 
(4)  In case of emergency repairs, which must be made immediately, or required corrections, which are not made within 30 days of notice, the city must have the authority to make these corrections and recover costs from the applicant. In cases where funds are being held in escrow by the city, the cost of making these corrections must be deducted from these funds, and the applicant charged with any costs above the amount of escrow funds. 
(5)  At the end of the 12-month applicant maintenance period, the city must make a final inspection and notify the applicant and the bonding company of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable, the community development director must recommend to the city attorney that all remaining escrow funds be released; provided, however, in the discretion of the community development director, based upon: 
a.  Weather conditions; 
b.  Labor market; 
c.  Material market; or 
d.  Circumstances beyond the control of the applicant or the city unforeseen by either party. 
(6)  The maintenance period may be extended for a definite period of time sufficient to make the necessary corrections by an agreement in writing executed by the city, the applicant and his surety. Provided, further, that the applicant is responsible for any damages done to work already completed by him to the time of the extension agreement whether or not the city had accepted it. 
(7)  Maintenance bonds and acceptance by the city of any dedicated improvements must be as one package upon completion of all improvements, even though the final plat may have been approved prior to completion. 
(g)  Standard plans and specifications. Standard city plans and specifications referred to in this part are on file and may be obtained from the community development department. 
(h)  Sidewalks and bicycle lanes. 
(1)  Sidewalks are required on all sides of all new street frontages and on the subject side of all improved streets in all subdivisions and as set forth in subsection 16-223(j), unless the community development director determines that a deferral or fee in lieu is approved in accordance with section 16-221. 
(2)  At a minimum continuous sidewalks are required on at least one side of all new and improved local residential streets. No other variances or exceptions are allowed. 
(3)  The community development director may require that sidewalks be extended to the nearest arterial or collector street. 
(4)  A grassed, planted or landscaped strip, as set forth in this article, must separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs, bridges excepted. The community development director may approve a variable sidewalk location and landscape strip width based on site conditions and future road expansions. Where sidewalks currently exist, new sidewalk construction or reconstruction must be continuous with existing sidewalks. 
(5)  Sidewalks must be installed at the same time as the building construction, unless an alternative method is approved by the community development director. Sidewalks must be completed prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy for property on which the sidewalk fronts. The sidewalk plan must be recorded on the final plat and all sidewalks completely installed prior to approval of the final plat. 
(6)  Sidewalks may not be cut, removed or closed temporarily without a permit from the public works department. Such permit may not be issued unless safe, adequate, and convenient provision is made for nonmotorized travel through the area that is disrupted. Damage to sidewalks caused during construction or development activity must be repaired at no cost to the city within 30 days or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier. 
(7)  All sidewalk construction and repairs must provide for wheelchair ramps to and from sidewalks at the intersection of each street corner and crosswalk. Access ramps must be constructed pursuant to standards approved by the public works department. 
a.  All driveways with sidewalks and sidewalk crosswalk installations are required to be constructed in accordance with the accessible sidewalk standards published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, in FHWA-SA-03-01 as amended. 
(8)  Sidewalks may not be constructed on any street in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the public works department. Any person constructing a sidewalk on a street, without first obtaining a permit, is in violation of this Code, and the public works department is authorized to condemn the sidewalk and have it removed and replaced at no cost to the city. 
(9)  Bicycle lanes are required on new or substantially improved arterials or collector streets where the posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or greater. Bicycle lanes may also be required by the community development director where necessary to provide connections to bikeways identified on the comprehensive transportation plan or other adopted plan. Bicycle lanes must be constructed as follows: 
a.  Bicycle lanes, where required, must be at least four feet wide and placed in the outside lane of a roadway, adjacent to the curb and gutter or shoulder. Curb and gutter areas may not be counted in calculating the width of a bicycle lane. When on-street parking is permitted, bicycle lanes must be at least four feet in width and located between the parking lane and the outer travel lane. Bicycle pavement widths are in addition to the minimum pavement width required for the road. 
b.  Bicycle lanes must be delineated with signs and striping consistent with the latest edition of the manual for uniform traffic control devices, and approved by the community development director. 
c.  Bikeways and bicycle lanes must be constructed in accordance with the most recent specifications set forth in American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines. 
d.  The design, striping and sign system for bicycle lanes must be coordinated with that of the vehicular road system to provide a safe and continuous route for bicycles. Deceleration lanes must be striped so that bicycles can safely remain in a lane marked between the deceleration lane and the through traffic lane. 
(10)  No wall, fence, sign or other structure may obstruct passage along a sidewalk or bicycle lane. 
(i)  Parking on right-of-way. 
(1)  For residential projects constructed under the provisions of the zoning ordinance as single-family attached residential projects, wherein title to the single-family unit is held by fee simple ownership, the city may assume maintenance responsibility one year after the release of the subdivision bonds for parking constructed on public rights-of-way, in accordance with minimum city standards. A special parking maintenance district, as authorized by Georgia Constitution article IX, § II, ¶ VI, comprised of all property within such single-family attached residential subdivision, may be established by resolution of city council for the maintenance of such parking constructed on the public right-of-way at the time the subdivision plat is finally recorded, provided the plat is so noted. 
(2)  Final subdivision plats for single-family attached residential projects must have the following notation when a special district is to be established for city maintenance of parking within the public right-of-way: 
"All single-family residential lots on this plat are included in a special taxing district for funding the maintenance of parking provided in the development." 
(3)  If the city creates a special parking district, as authorized by Georgia Constitution article IX, § II, ¶ VI, revenue to fund city parking maintenance will be obtained by an ad valorem tax levied on all properties within such parking district. Such ad valorem millage will be set annually by the city council when other ad valorem millage rates are set. No assessment will be made in a special parking district in the calendar year in which it is established. 
(j)  Underground utilities. All utilities are required to be placed underground unless the community development director determines that underground utilities are infeasible due to shallow rock, high water table, or other similar geologic or hydrologic conditions. 
(k)  Streetlights. Streetlights consistent with Georgia Power specifications are required in all new subdivisions of two or more lots except where no utility improvements are required by this chapter. Streetlights must be provided on the same side of the street as sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-15.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-260. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Preliminary plat. At the time of submittal of the preliminary subdivision plat and application to the community development director, the applicant must submit to the county board of health the following information when public sewers are not available to the proposed subdivision: 
(1)  Four copies of a sewer feasibility report; 
(2)  Four copies of soil data records on forms provided by the board of health; and 
(3)  Four copies of the subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the board of health. 
(b)  Contour intervals. Topographic data submitted to the city pursuant to the provisions of this division must show contour intervals of two feet. 
(c)  Soils. Soil analysis must be conducted in accordance with the health regulations of the DeKalb County Code. 
(d)  Review and analysis. 
(1)  Upon receiving the preliminary plat from the department of community development and data required in subsections (a) through (d) from the applicant, the county board of health personnel must make an overall analysis of the subdivision and must indicate in writing on the preliminary plat the results of this analysis. The plat must then be returned to the department of community development. 
(2)  Regarding the preliminary analysis, each lot must have sufficient area and topographic features to accommodate the installation of an individual sewage disposal system in accordance with regulations applicable to these installations. 
(3)  Any condition in the area to be subdivided found to be in violation of any health regulation is sufficient grounds for disapproval of the preliminary plat. 
(e)  Inspections. 
(1)  Upon receiving the final plat from the city and when streets have been cut and individual lots are staked and identified, the board of health personnel will inspect each lot for adaptability to individual sewage disposal systems. 
(2)  After inspection has been completed, the board of health must render a written report to the community development director that must include changes or recommendations or deletions. The final plat must be signed by the authorized representative of the board of health, written report attached, and returned to the city. 
(f)  Issuance of septic tank permits. No septic tank permits may be issued until four copies of the approved final plat, signed by the city manager, have been submitted to the board of health. The four copies of the approved plat must be provided by the city. 
(g)  Drainage between lots. Where drainage between subdivision lots is involved and pipe is required, a watertight pipe must be used and must extend for a sufficient depth of the lot and not terminate at some point just behind the building line causing pools to be formed or flooding of septic tank drain fields. 
(h)  Discharge into public waters. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources is authorized by the Georgia Water Quality Control Act to review plans and specifications of all sewage treatment facilities discharging into any waters of the state. 
(i)  Board of health recommendation. The board of health may reject any or all domestic sewage disposal systems and may recommend in lieu thereof the extension of the public sewerage system or the installation of any approved temporary community sewerage system conforming to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. 
(j)  Impoundment permit. Where ponds one-tenth of an acre or larger are located in a subdivision or adjoin a subdivision, an impoundment permit must be obtained in compliance with the impounded water regulations of the Georgia Board of Natural Resources. 
(k)  Compliance with board of health requirements. All septic tank systems must conform to the requirements of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-15.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-261—16-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCES[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, added a new art. V, and redesignated former div. 6, "Subdivision Variances," § 16-256 as new div. 1, § 16-271 to read as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 16-271. - Authority. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals is authorized to hear and decide applications for variances from the strict application of articles III or IV, where strict application of any of the regulations of this articles III or IV would result in exceptional and undue hardship to the owner of such property. These regulations provide the minimum necessary requirements; thus, variances from the requirements of articles III or IV may be authorized only upon the zoning board of appeals making all of the following findings: 
(1)  By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of articles III or IV would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other similarly situated property owners in the same zoning district; 
(2)  By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for development under any design configuration allowed by these subdivision regulations unless a variance is granted; 
(3)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute the grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other property owners in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
(4)  The requested variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; and 
(5)  The requested variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the city zoning ordinance, the city comprehensive plan or the zoning map of the city. 
(b)  No variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals to: 
(1)  Allow any variance which conflicts with or changes any requirement enacted as a condition of zoning or of a special land use permit by the city council; 
(2)  Increase the density allowed on the property; or 
(3)  Vary the requirements set forth [in] section 16-241. 
(c)  Applications for variances must be submitted in writing to the community development director along with the application for sketch plat approval or if a variance becomes necessary after the approval of the sketch plat, within 30 days of discovery of the conditions requiring such a variance from the preliminary plat. Applications must contain all those materials and documents required by the community development director that are necessary to demonstrate the necessity for the variance and compliance with the requirements of this Code. At a minimum, the variance application must contain a full explanation of the reasons for the variance and must include a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed without the variance and a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed with the variance. 
(d)  When the variance application is first considered by the zoning board of appeals, the community development director must provide the zoning board of appeals with written findings of fact and a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the variance. 
(e)  Applications for variances that accompany the application for sketch plat approval must be heard by the zoning board of appeals prior to the approval of a sketch plat. 
(f).  After the filing of a complete application for a preliminary plat variance, the application must be placed on the next available meeting agenda of the zoning board of appeals. All land development activity associated with a proposed variance from a preliminary plat must cease until a final decision on the variance is made by the zoning board of appeals. Land development activity that is not related to the proposed variance may continue unabated. 
(g)  All decisions by the zoning board of appeals approving or disapproving a variance must be issued in writing and must provide the grounds for the decision of the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals must issue a final decision on a variance submitted with the application for a sketch plat at the same time that it issues the final decision approving or disapproving the sketch plat. The zoning board of appeals must issue a final decision on a variance from the preliminary plat within 50 days after the first meeting at which the zoning board of appeals considers the variance. If a final decision is not made on a subdivision plat variance in accordance with the time constraints set forth in this section, the variance will be deemed approved. 
(h)  Any person or entity (i.e., an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor or a neighbor whose property line is within 1,500 feet of the nearest property line of the proposed subdivision) aggrieved by a variance decision of the zoning board of appeals affecting a preliminary plat, may appeal such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-16.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-272—16-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MEASUREMENTS, LANGUAGE, AND DEFINITIONS[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-04, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, redesignated former art. IV, "Terminology," §§ 16-266—16-275, as a new art. VI, §§ 16-281—16-290, to read as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - RULES OF LANGUAGE AND INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 16-281. - Meanings and intent. 
The language of these land development regulations must be read literally. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words and terms expressly defined in these land development regulations have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined in these land development regulations have the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-282. - Tenses and usage. 
(a)  Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true. 
(b)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true. 
(c)  The words "must," "will," "shall" and "may not" are mandatory. 
(d)  The word "may" is permissive, and "should" is advisory, not mandatory or required. 
(e)  When used with numbers, "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum of x" all include "x." 
(f)  The word "lot" includes the word "plot." 
(g)  The word "used" is deemed to also include "designed, intended or arranged to be used." 
(h)  The word "erected" is deemed to also include "constructed," "reconstructed," "altered," "placed," "relocated" or "removed." 
(i)  The terms "land use" and "use of land" are deemed to also include "building use" and "use of building." 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-283. - Conjunctions. 
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, conjunctions have the following meanings: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or in combination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-284. - Computation of time. 
(a)  References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly stated. References to "business days" are references to regular city government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by the city. 
(b)  The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city, that day is excluded. 
(c)  A day concludes at the close of business of city hall, and any materials received after that time will be considered to have been received the following day. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-285. - Headings and illustrations. 
Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of these land development regulations. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of these land development regulations and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration, the text governs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-286. - References to other regulations. 
All references in these land development regulations to other city, state or federal regulations are for informational purposes only, and do not constitute a complete list of such regulations. These references do not imply any responsibility by the city for enforcement of state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-287. - Current versions and citations. 
All references to other city, state or federal regulations in these land development regulations refer to the most current version and citation for those regulations, unless otherwise expressly indicated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-288. - Lists and examples. 
Lists of items or examples that use "including," "such as" or similar terms are intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.80), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-289. - Delegation of authority. 
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, that department head, officer or employee is authorized to delegate the assigned responsibility to other individuals over whom they have authority. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.90), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 16-290. - Public officials and agencies. 
All employees, public officials, bodies and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Dunwoody unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-17.100), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 16-291—16-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 16-301. - Terms defined. 
The words and terms expressly defined in this division have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined have the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. 
(a)  Terms beginning with "A." 
Accessory structure means a structure, the use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building of the same lot, such as a detached garage, toolshed or gazebo. 
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the principal building or to the principal use of the premises. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected to a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is considered new construction. 
Adjacent to the future-conditions floodplains means those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Aggrieved person means a person whose property is the subject of the action appealed from or a person who has a substantial interest in the action appealed from, who is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
Agricultural operations means those practices involving the establishment, cultivation or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land and farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings. 
Alley means a minor way that is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise fronting on a street. 
Applicant means any person who acts in the person's own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. See "special flood hazard area." 
Arterial (street) means a street, road or highway shown as an arterial in the City of Dunwoody Comprehensive Transportation Plan. 
As-built drawings means amended site plans specifying the location, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of public improvements, including water, sewer, road and drainage structures and stormwater management facilities as they have been constructed. 
(b)  Terms beginning with "B." 
Bank (stream bank) means as measured horizontally from that point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action. 
Base flood means a flood that has a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood). 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor below ground level on three or more sides. 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Bicycle lane means that part of a street or highway adjacent to the roadway, designated by official signs or markings for use by persons riding bicycles. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the community development director may delineate the outline of the block. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting system. 
Buffer area means that portion of a lot set aside for open space and/or visual screening purposes, pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code and all conditions of zoning, to separate different use districts or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. 
Buffer, stream, means the portion of a lot and/or area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of streams as regulated by the land development regulations of this Code. 
Buffer zone, state, means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation that facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buildable area means the area of a lot remaining after all applicable zoning and land development regulations have been met (i.e., that portion of a lot where a building may be located). 
Builder means a person who constructs a structure or dwelling for residential occupancy by humans. 
Building. See "structure". 
Building, elevated. See "elevated building." 
Building permit means required written permission issued by the community development director or a building inspector for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure. 
Building setback line means the minimum horizontal distance required between the public right-of-way or the utility easement abutting a private street and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof, except projections that are authorized exceptions to building setback line requirements in the city zoning ordinance and any zoning conditions approved by the city council pursuant thereto. The size of the utility easement for a private street is equal to the required size of the public right-of-way and may not be any smaller in width or length than what would be required for a public right-of-way. 
(c)  Terms beginning with "C." 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree trunk, taken six inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Certified arborist means an individual who has been certified as an arborist by the International Society of Arboriculture and maintains the certification in good standing. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Channel protection means the protection of stream channels, in accord with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, from bank and bed erosion and degradation by preserving or restoring the applicable stream buffer, by providing extended detention and by integrating erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
City arborist means the community development director or the community development director's designee having primary administration and enforcement responsibilities for landscaping and tree regulations. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Dunwoody. 
City of Dunwoody Stormwater Management Manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Collector street means a street or road designated as a collector street in the City of Dunwoody Comprehensive Transportation Plan. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan adopted by the city council, as it may be amended from time to time, that divides the city into land use categories and that constitutes the official policy of the city regarding long-term planning and use of land. 
Conservation easement means a restriction or limitation on the use of real property that is expressly recited in any deed or other instrument of grant or conveyance executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein and whose purpose is to preserve land or water areas predominantly in their natural scenic landscape or open condition or in an agricultural farming, forest or open space use and includes conservation easements authorized by state law. 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development or changed use, including particularly any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure. 
Construction waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, asbestos-containing waste, wood, tree stumps, tree tops, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, glass, wire, plastics and other typical construction waste products and refuse. 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Critical root zone means a circular region measured outward from a tree trunk representing the essential area of roots that must be maintained or protected for the tree's survival. The critical root zone encompasses one foot of radial distance for every one inch of the tree's DBH, with a minimum radius of eight feet. 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended exclusively for pedestrians and nonmotorized transportation and that is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots. 
Crown reduction pruning means a method of pruning to reduce the height or spread of a tree by performing appropriate pruning cuts. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation or the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
(d)  Terms beginning with "D." 
DBH (diameter at breast height) means the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Density factor means a unit of measurement used to calculate the required tree coverage on a site. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Detached means being separated from a principal structure by a minimum of three feet. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge of the stormwater, as that term is defined by state law, the City of Dunwoody Stormwater Management Manual or this chapter. 
Detention facility means a facility that provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Developer means any person who acts in the person's own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development means all activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include, but are not limited to, land-disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of vegetation and stumps and grading) and the construction of improvements such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways or parking area, water sewer mains, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed in or on the property. Where appropriate to the context, development also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project that is a single entity or intended to be constructed as interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. For the purposes of interpreting and administering the flood damage prevention regulations of article II, division 8, "development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving or any other installation of impervious cover, excavating or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Development permit means a permit issued by the City of Dunwoody that authorizes the commencement of development on a specific parcel of land. 
District means the DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
DNR means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage means the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area, either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owners of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards that specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including, but not limited to, both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature and the manmade element that includes culverts, ditches, channels and detention facilities that comprise the storm drainage system. 
(e)  Terms beginning with "E." 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers or shear walls that are adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain that may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
EPD means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protection at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section IV.C.[16-59(c)] of this division. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before October 14, 2009 the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 14, 2009, the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community as a basis for community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years. 
(f)  Terms beginning with "F." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the special flood hazard areas as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodplain coordinator means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the flood protection regulations of article II, division 8. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain that is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot; sometimes referred to as the "regulatory floodway." 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement (i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction). The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Frontage, lot means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purposes unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill and excavation. 
(g)  Terms beginning with "G." 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and includes the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
(h)  Terms beginning with "H." 
Hardwood tree means a tree that does not bear either needles or cones. The term hardwood is based on the colloquialism and does not reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
(i)  Terms beginning with "I." 
Impervious surface or impervious cover means any surface that is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, surfaces such as concrete or asphalt as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and other similar structures. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the soil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement executed by an owner in a form approved by the community development director that will provide the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project that, when properly recorded in the deed records, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
(j)  Terms beginning with "J." 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
(k)  Terms beginning with "K." 
RESERVED 
(l)  Terms beginning with "L." 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 16-58. 
Landscape plan means a plan that identifies areas of tree preservation and methods of tree protection within the protected zone, as well as all areas or replanting. Within replanting areas, the common and botanical names of the proposed species, the number of plants of each species, the size of all plants, the proposed location of all plants and any unique features of the plants. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes or surveyor markings indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Live detention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of the city that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. §12-7-8(a). 
Local street means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties in residential, industrial or other developments. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed or built upon. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Lot, double-frontage, means a lot that abuts two parallel streets or that abuts two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. A double-frontage lot may also be referred to as a through lot. 
Lot, flag, means a lot that sits behind lots which face directly onto a street with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor, whether providing the minimum amount of street frontage and width or not. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of these land development regulations. 
(m)  Terms beginning with "M." 
Maintenance of detention facility means preserving the enclosed walls or impounding embankments of the detention facility in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from excessive sediment; removing obstructions affecting operation of outlet device; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of these regulations, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Multiphase residential development means any development undertaken by a single developer or a group of developers acting in concert to develop lots for sale in a residential subdivision where such land is developed pursuant to multiple preliminary or final plats and such land is contiguous or is known, designated or advertised as a common unit or by a common name. 
Multi-use trail means a recreation corridor intended for the use of nonmotorized forms of transportation such as, but not limited to, walking, wheelchairs, running, bicycles and inline skates, as identified in the Parks, Recreation and Greenspace Master Plan, the Comprehensive Transportation Plan or other plan adopted by the city council. 
(n)  Terms beginning with "N." 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New construction means any structure for which the permitted date of construction commenced after adoption of this chapter, October 14, 2009. For the purposes of interpreting and administering the flood damage prevention regulations of article II, division 8, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community as a basis for community participation in the NFIP. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 14, 2009, the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component and practice of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and green space areas, overland flow filtration areas, vegetated channels and natural depressions. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), as corrected in 1988, means a vertical datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
(o)  Terms beginning with "O." 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
100-year floodplain means land in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Open space means that portion of a lot, including yards, established pursuant to the requirements of this chapter as open space that is open and unobstructed from ground level to the sky, with the exception of natural foliage or accessory recreational facilities or walkways, that is accessible to all persons occupying a building on the lot and is not a part of the roof of any portion of any building. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Ornamental trees means small growing trees, attaining a mature height of less than 40 feet, grown primarily for aesthetic purposes, i.e., flowers, fruit, etc. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain) and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Overstory tree means those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property or the proprietor. This term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under the lease for maintenance of the property and any agent of the owner or tenant, including a developer. 
(p)  Terms beginning with "P." 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
Post-development refers to the time period or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Potential purchaser means a person purchasing property in a residential subdivision or a multiphase residential development from a developer and/or builder for occupancy as a residence or as a residence to be rented or leased to others. 
Pre-development refers to conditions of a site before any development activity occurred or before a development permit was issued. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Protected zone means all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, including all areas required as yard or setback areas, buffer areas, stream buffers, state buffer zones or landscaped areas in accordance with provisions of the city zoning ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval. 
Public facilities means the roads, water, sewer, schools, traffic control devices and electrical service. 
(q)  Terms beginning with "Q." 
RESERVED 
(r)  Terms beginning with "R." 
Reach means a longitudinal segment of a stream or river measured along specified points on the stream or river. 
Reasonable access means a 15-foot wide access easement from the public right-of-way to the stormwater management facility and a drainage and maintenance easement encompassing the stormwater management facility and extending ten feet outside the pond's 100-year water ponding elevation. 
Recreation areas mean those portions of open space designed and intended for active recreational use, such as sports fields and other play areas. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas and exterior changes or improvements that do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Residential has the same meaning as given in the city zoning ordinance except that it does not include apartments. 
Revegetation means replacement of trees and landscape plant materials into the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the zoning ordinance, conditions of zoning approval or applicable tree preservation or protection regulations. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rock outcropping means a single, contiguous piece of exposed rock that has a horizontal surface area equal to or greater than 200 square feet. 
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land that reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
(s)  Terms beginning with "S." 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sediment basin means a detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process that may be constructed as part of or separately from a detention facility. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Seller means a builder or developer. 
Significant tree means any existing, healthy, living tree eight inches DBH or greater in size. 
Site plan means that plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit that shows the means by which the applicant will comply with applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
Softwood tree means any coniferous (cone-bearing) tree. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes areas shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AE, AO, AH or AR; all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation; and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 16-136. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater must have the special flood hazard area delineated. 
Special tree means any tree that qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type, and condition. 
Specimen tree means any tree that has been determined by the city arborist to be of high value because of its type, size, age, and/or of historical significance, or other professional criteria, and has been so designated in administrative standards established by the city. This is usually a plant with desirable form, foliage, fruit or flower that can be emphasized although isolated. 
Spite strip means a piece of land used to separate a street or road rights-of-way from adjoining property and whose primary purpose is to preclude access to such rights-of-way. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent cover for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resulting transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Standards and specifications means construction and technical requirements that govern construction and installation of streets and other public improvements in the City of Dunwoody. 
Start of construction means the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading or excavating activities or other construction activities. The term "construction activities" means the disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating, filling of land or other similar activities that may result in soil erosion. For the purposes of interpreting and administering the flood damage prevention regulations of article II, division 8, "start of construction" means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab for footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation of accessory buildings or structures appurtenant to the principal structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system general permit for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state that are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Stormwater better site design means a nonstructural site design approach and technique that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. The term "stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. Examples of stormwater hotspots include, but are not limited to, gas/fueling stations, vehicle maintenance areas, vehicle washing/steam cleaning facilities, auto recycling facilities, outdoor material storage areas, loading and transfer areas, landfills, construction sites, industrial sites and industrial rooftops. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facilities means those structures and facilities that are designed for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff into and through the drainage system. 
Stormwater management manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stream means natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. Field verification must be performed to make a final determination as to the existence of a stream where a dispute exists. Such field verification must be performed under the direction of the community development director. 
Streambank means a sloping land that contains a stream channel in the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Stream, ephemeral (stormwater), means a feature that carries only stormwater in direct response to precipitation with water flowing only during and shortly after large precipitation events. An ephemeral stream may or may not have a well-defined channel, the aquatic bed is defined always above the water table, and stormwater runoff is the primary source of water. An ephemeral stream typically lacks the biological, hydrological and physical characteristics commonly associated with the continuous or intermittent conveyance of water. 
Stream, intermittent, means a well-defined channel that contains water for only part of the year, typically during winter and spring when the aquatic bed is below the seasonally high water table. The flow may be heavily supplemented by stormwater runoff. An intermittent stream often lacks the biological and hydrological characteristics commonly associated with the conveyance of water. 
Stream, perennial, means a well-defined channel that contains water year round during a year of normal rainfall with the aquatic bed located below the water table for most of the year. Groundwater is the primary source of water for a perennial stream, but it also carries stormwater runoff. A perennial stream exhibits the typical biological, hydrological and physical characteristics commonly associated with the continuous conveyance of water. 
Street, private, means an access way similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one property but held in private ownership. Private streets, when authorized, must be developed in accordance with the specifications for public streets established in this chapter. 
Street, public, means any right-of-way set aside for public travel dedicated to the city and any right-of-way that has been accepted for maintenance as a street by the city. 
Street right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading. Such measures can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing and future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. Where appropriate to context, subdivision may also be used to reference the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of division. 
Substantial building permit means a nonresidential building permit issued by the city with a total value in excess of 50 percent of the county tax assessor's 100 percent assessed value of the existing improvements only. The aggregate value of all building permits issued to the property over the previous 12 months must be included in this calculation (see appendix E). 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is deemed to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by code enforcement officials, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
(t)  Terms beginning with "T." 
Tree means any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant that has a trunk caliper of two inches or more measured at a point six inches above the ground and that normally attains a height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree harvesting means the felling, loading, and transporting of timber products done pursuant to a special exception issued by the zoning board of appeals. 
Tree replacement means the replacement of trees and landscape plant materials in the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the zoning regulations or the tree protection ordinance. 
Tree save area means the boundaries of the area surrounding trees wherein it is essential that they remain undisturbed in order to prevent damage and loss of trees that are to be retained on-site during the development and building process. 
Tree topping means the removal of tree limbs, branches, or stems by cutting at the internodes and resulting in the failure of the tree to assume apical dominance. 
(u)  Terms beginning with "U." 
Understory tree means those trees that grow beneath the overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet. 
Used for includes the terms "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
(v)  Terms beginning with "V." 
Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
Vegetative erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
(w)  Terms beginning with "W." 
Water quality protection means the requirement that all developments must improve the quality of storm runoff from the development site. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and that has a definite channel, bed and banks and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Width, lot, means the distance between the side lot lines, measured along a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance from the front lot line equal to the minimum street yard setback. For lots with curvilinear frontage and setback lines (e.g.: cul-de-sac lots), the width shall be measured as a straight line through the points that intersect the side lot lines at a distance from the front lot line equal to the minimum street yard setback. 
(x)  Terms beginning with "X." 
RESERVED 
(y)  Terms beginning with "Y." 
RESERVED 
(z)  Terms beginning with "Z." 
RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, 1(Exh. A § 16-18.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-03-06, § 2, 3-27-2017; Ord. No. 2018-10-16, § I, 10-8-2018) 
APPENDIX A - TREE REPLACEMENT DENSITY FACTOR CALCULATIONS 
The following abbreviations are used in the examples below: 
TDF—Tree Density Factor 
RTF—Remaining Tree Factor 
RRD—Required Replacement Density 
Step 1. Calculate the tree density factor (TDF) for the site multiplying the number of site acres by 20. 
EXAMPLE: A 2.2 acre site has a TDF OF 2.2 × 20 = 44. 
Step 2. Calculate the existing trees, which will remain, or the Remaining Tree Factor (RTF). These will remain on-site and be protected during construction. The RTF is determined by converting the DBH of individual existing trees to density factor units, using table .) These units are then totaled to determine the RTF for the site. 
EXAMPLE: A total of 15 trees will remain on the 2.2 acres site in step 1. These trees include: 
7, 12″ pines  3, 14″ pines  3, 18″ oaks  1, 20″ hickory  1, 30″ oak 
When converted to density factor units using step 1, we arrive at the following values: 

 
The sum total of units, 21.4, is the RTF. 
Step 3. Calculate the required replacement density (RRD) by subtracting RTF (step 2) from TDF (step 1). 
RRD = TDF - RTF  EXAMPLE: RRD = 44 - 21.4  RRD = 22.6 
Step 4. The RRD can be converted back to caliper inches using table 3. Any combination of transplantable trees can be used so long as their total density factor units will equal or exceed the RRD. 
EXAMPLE: On the 2.2-acre site the following number and size of trees will be planted: 

 
23.0 is greater than the RRD of 22.6. Thus, the minimum requirements have been met. 
TABLE 1. SAMPLE TREE DENSITY CALCULATION 
Required TDF  2.2 acres × 20 units/acre = 44 units required  RTF (remaining tree factor) 

 
RRD (Required Replacement Density) 

 
RTF + RRD > or = TDF 
29.0 + 45.0 = 74.0. Thus, the tree density requirement is satisfied. 
TABLE 2.EXISTING TREES TO REMAIN. Conversion from DBH to density factor units for RTF, or remaining tree factor. 

 
TABLE (3) REPLACEMENT TREES. Conversion from caliper to density factor units for replacement trees. (1, 2) 

 

 

 
Tree relocation: Replacement units will be granted to trees relocated on-site. Tree relocation is subject to city arborist and/or zoning enforcement officer approval. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, App. A, 10-14-2013) 
APPENDIX B - TREE SELECTION 
(1)  Trees selected for planting must meet minimum requirements as provided below and in the American Standard of Nursery Stock. 
(2)  Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, or nutritional disorders. 
(3)  Trees selected for planting must be of good vigor. The determination of vigor is a subjective evaluation, and dependent upon species variability. The following criteria is generally used for the determination of vigor: 
(4)  Foliage should have a green or dark green color. Vigorous trees will have large leaves and dense foliage when compared to trees with poor vigor. 
(5)  Shoot growth for most vigorous trees will be at least one foot per year. At least one-half of the branches should arise from the top one-third and one-half from the center one-third. 
(6)  Bark texture can denote vigor. Smooth or shiny bark on the trunk and branches of a young tree usually signifies good vigor, conversely, rough and full bark could indicate poor vigor. 
(7)  Trunk taper. The trunks of vigorous trees will generally have an increase in diameter with a decrease in height. Trees with reverse tapers or no taper should be avoided. 
(8)  Root color. Young roots of most trees will be light in color. 
(9)  Trees selected for planting must be free of root defects. Two types of root defects generally occur: 
(10)  Kinked roots, in which taproots, major branch roots, or both are bent more than 90 degrees with less than 20 percent of the root system originating above the kink. A tree with such roots will probably bend at the soil line when released from a supporting stake. 
(11)  Circling or girdling roots which circle 80 percent or more of the root system by 360 degrees or more. A tree with such roots would ultimately have less than 20 percent of its system available for support. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, App. B, 10-14-2013) 
APPENDIX C - TREE TRANSPLANTING 
The transplanting of new trees can result in major injury to their root system. If proper transplanting techniques are employed, conditions will be more favorable for tree recovery, and the rate of attrition for newly planted trees will be reduced. Transplanting procedures must follow standards established by the International Society of Arboriculture in the Trees and Shrub Transplanting Manual, and the booklet by the Georgia Extension Service entitled "Plant Trees Right!" The following is a summary several of the more important considerations provided in the manual and booklet. 
Preplanting considerations: 
(1)  Only healthy trees with a well-developed root system and a well-formed top, characteristic of the species should be planted. 
(2)  Trees selected for planting must be compatible with the specific site conditions. 
(3)  The ability of a species to regenerate a new root system and to become reestablished should be considered. Generally, deciduous trees should be planted in the fall after leaf drop, or in early spring before bud break. There are indications that bare root trees will reestablish more readily if planted in early spring just prior to bud break. 
Planting procedures: 
(1)  Planting holes should be at least three times the diameter of the root ball. 
(2)  Trees should not be planted deeper than they were in their former location or container. 
(3)  Spade compacted bottom and sides of the planting hole should be roughed or scarified to allow the penetration of developing roots. 
(4)  Good water drainage from the bottom of the planting hole is essential for root regeneration. 
(5)  Once the transplanted tree is set, the hole should be backfilled with soil of good texture and structure. Traditionally, backfill material is comprised of a mix of negative soil, organic matter such as peat, and inorganic material such as perlite or vermiculite in a 1:1:1 ratio. There are indications that a backfill with native soil alone may be adequate. 
(6)  The addition of fertilizer to backfill soil can cause root injury, and is therefore not recommended. If fertilizer must be added, a low rate should be used. Approximately 1.5 pounds of nitrogen per cubic yard of backfill is recommended for bare root plants, and 2.5 pounds of nitrogen per cubic yard of backfill for balled and burlapped trees. 
(7)  The backfill should be gently tamped (but not compacted), and soaked for settling. 
(8)  The soil should be slightly mounded to allow for settling; a ridge or dike around the perimeter of the hole can facilitate watering. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, App. C, 10-14-2013) 
APPENDIX D - PLANTING STANDARDS 
(1)  After selecting a suitable location, mark out a planting area that is five times the diameter of the planting ball. Use a rototiller or shovel to loosen and mix the soil in this entire area to a depth of about 12 inches. 
(2)  In the center of the prepared area, dig a shallow hole to set the tree or shrub. The hold should allow the root ball to sit on solid ground rather than loose soil. Once the ball is set the hole, its upper surface should be level with the existing soil. 
(3)  After the tree is properly situated, cut and remove the rope or wires holding the burlap in place and securing any part of the tree. 
(4)  Backfill around the root area, and gently firm the soil to prevent major air pockets. Do not pack the soil. Water can be used to help the soil settle and prevent overpacking. Rake the soil even over the entire area, and cover it with two to four inches of mulch. Maintaining the mulch layer carefully will improve tree growth substantially. 
(5)  Water berms or dikes are not recommended as they encourage abnormal root growth. 
(6)  It is best not to stake the tree, but if wind is a problem or the tree starts to lean, support it with a flexible stake so the trunk will sway in the wind. The movement is necessary for building the trunk's strength. Remove the stake and wire after one growing season since leaving wire or string around the tree can cause death. 
(7)  Do not wrap the trunk with "protective" tape. It will slow the tree's ability to adapt to the site and provide a home for insects. Tree bark needs air and sunlight in order to build a healthy protective sheath. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, App. D, 10-14-2013) 
APPENDIX E - SUBSTANTIAL BUILDING PERMITS 

 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-14, App. E, 10-14-2013) 
Chapter 18 - NOISE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED NOISES 

Sec. 18-19. - Loud or disturbing noises. 
(a)  Noises deemed nuisance. Noises considered loud or disturbing to health are deemed a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise, or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in the city. 
(b)  Acts declared violations. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device; the sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs and similar devices. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with a volume louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of the person who is in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays when the audibility of the prohibited noise is measured from property line of adjacent properties or the public right-of-way of the property shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading and opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repair. 
a.  Construction of any type, including, but not limited to, the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, stream or electric hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment attended by loud or unusual noise, shall be prohibited during the following times: 
1.  Before 7:30 a.m. or after 8:30 p.m. on weekdays; 
2.  Before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:30 p.m. on Saturdays; and 
3.  At any time on Sundays and/or the following legal holidays: 
(i)  New Year's Day (observed); 
(ii)  Memorial Day (observed); 
(iii)  Independence Day (observed); 
(iv)  Labor Day (observed); 
(v)  Thanksgiving Day; and 
(vi)  Christmas Day (observed). 
b.  Landscape contractors using any type of motorized mower or mechanical blower and other equipment which creates loud and excessive noise shall be prohibited, during the following times: 
1.  Before 7:30 a.m. or after 8:30 p.m. on weekdays; 
2.  Before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:30 p.m. on Saturdays; and 
3.  At any time on Sundays and/or the following legal holidays: 
(i)  New Years Day (observed); 
(ii)  Memorial Day (observed); 
(iii)  Independence Day (observed); 
(iv)  Labor Day (observed); 
(v)  Thanksgiving Day; and 
(vi)  Christmas Day (observed). 
(11)  Schools, courts, places of worship and hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of worship, or court, while in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital, or court street. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale. 
(14)  Transportation of metal rails, similar materials. The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel, or other material over and along streets and other public places so as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of those streets or other public places. 
(15)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from the blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden the noise. 
(16)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes; the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during hours and in places and with volume as would constitute this use as a public nuisance, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
a.  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business; 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Emergency repair work as determined by the City of Dunwoody is exempt from this section. 
(2)  Utility and/or road work and repairs done under the approval or authority of the City of Dunwoody, DeKalb County, or State of Georgia are exempt from this section. 
(d)  Exceptions for commercial, office, institutional, and industrial construction-related activities. An application for a noise ordinance exception may be submitted to the City of Dunwoody Community Development Director or his/her designee, and the chief of police, on a form and according to a schedule determined by the city. Within ten days of receipt, applications shall be either (1) approved or conditionally approved in part or whole or (2) denied. 
(1)  Such application shall state the following: 
a.  The reason that an exception from the provisions of this section are needed; 
b.  The impact that a denial would have on the applicant's project; 
c.  How the exception may reduce the impact on the public health, safety or welfare; 
d.  How the exception is critical to ongoing construction needs and how it would be impractical or unreasonable to perform this work during normal prescribed days/times; 
e.  What measures are being incorporated or offered to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
f.  What notice will be provided to surrounding property owners regarding potential noise; 
g.  The time during which the proposed activity will occur; 
h.  The duration of the proposed activity; and 
i.  Incomplete applications will not be accepted. 
(2)  The review of the application shall, at a minimum, consider the following factors: 
a.  The entirety of the application and information provided therewith; 
b.  The impact that denial would have on the project and property in the general vicinity; 
c.  Whether compliance with the prescribed construction noise regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship on the applicant; 
d.  Whether compliance would create a hardship on the general public, including public roads and infrastructure, that would be alleviated by the exception; 
e.  Whether noise levels generated from the proposed activity will constitute a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
f.  Any inconvenience, imposition, and impact on surrounding residences and the duration of said impact weighed against the hardship compliance would create; 
g.  The ability of the applicant to apply best management practices for controlling noise; 
h.  The location of the activity and the nature of the surrounding area; and 
i.  The time/duration of the activity being requested. 
(3)  Reasonable conditions may be imposed by the reviewing authority to minimize the public impact, whether by duration, sound proofing, construction methods, hours of operation, sound levels, alternative access routes or equipment, or other appropriate measures. 
(4)  Any approved construction noise exception may be revoked by the director of community development and the chief of police if the terms of the authorization are violated. 
a.  An exception may be revoked if there is a: 
1.  Violation of one or more conditions of the approval; 
2.  Material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
3.  Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon in granting the approval. 
(5)  Due to unforeseen and changing circumstances an approved exception may be rescheduled by the city approving authority. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 12; Ord. No. 2017-02-04, §§ 1, 2, 2-27-2017) 
Chapter 20 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, adopted October 25, 2010, amended chapter 20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 20, articles I—III, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 21, art. I, §§ 1, 2; art. II, §§ 1—8; art. III, §§ 1, 3—12, 14—20, and Ord. No. 2009-11-48, § 1, adopted November 9, 2009. 
State Law reference— Control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; placement of posters, signs and advertisements on public or private property; permission and limitations, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; limitations on signs identifying or advertising sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; restrictions on certain signs providing information in the interest of the traveling public and multiple message signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The city council finds that signs provide an important medium through which persons may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, the number, size, design characteristics, and locations of signs in the city can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard, a detriment to property values and to the city's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. The city further finds that signs have become excessive, and that many signs are distracting and dangerous to motorists and pedestrians, and substantially detract from the beauty and appearance of the city. The city finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. 
(b)  The city further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The Mayor and council finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying markings on utility poles, public utility signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
(c)  The city finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signs by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to those persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Signs at the entrances to subdivisions or major developments favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls or where O.C.G.A. § 10-1-155 authorizes the department of agriculture to regulate the display of retail fuel station pricing and for the best interest of the public to advertise said prices. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter are unrelated to the content of speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(d)  The purpose and intent of the governing authority of the city in enacting this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Dunwoody, and to implement the policies and objectives of a comprehensive development plan of the city through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing signs in the city; 
(2)  To regulate the erection and placement of signs within the city in order to provide safe operating conditions for pedestrian and vehicular traffic without unnecessary and unsafe distractions to drivers or pedestrians; 
(3)  To preserve the value of property on which signs are located and from which signs may be viewed; 
(4)  To maintain an aesthetically attractive city in which signs are compatible with the use patterns of established zoning districts; 
(5)  To maintain for the city's residents, workers and visitors a safe and aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the city; 
(6)  To establish comprehensive sign regulations that effectively balance legitimate business and development needs with a safe and aesthetically attractive environment for residents, workers, and visitors to the city; 
(7)  To provide fair and reasonable opportunities for businesses which are located within the city, and to provide for the identification of the availability of products, goods or services so as to promote the economic vitality of businesses that are located within the city; 
(8)  To ensure the protection of free speech rights under the State of Georgia and United States Constitutions within the city; 
(9)  To establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent and aesthetic characteristics of those districts; 
(10)  To allow certain signs that are small, safe, unobtrusive on lots, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter but without a requirement for permits; 
(11)  To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances; 
(12)  To place reasonable controls on nonconforming signs that are by definition contrary to the public health, safety and welfare while protecting the constitutional rights of the owners of said nonconforming signs; and 
(13)  To provide for the maintenance of signs, and to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  All properties located within the Dunwoody Village Overlay are additionally subject to section 27-97. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-2. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all signs erected within the corporate limits of the city that are directed to be viewed from any outdoor space(s). All erection, construction, enlargement, moving, altering or converting of signs in the city shall be performed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-3. - Definitions. 
NOTE: Images appear below the definition to which they refer. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The inclusion of a definition in this list below should not be interpreted as a representation that a sign is permitted: 
Abandoned or dilapidated sign shall mean any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, holes on or in the sign structure, broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illumination or mechanical devices or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, unkempt, or which is located on a property or business without an occupational tax certificate 
Aggregate sign area shall mean the sum total of the sign area of any and all signs for a given lot. Subdivision signs, flags and banners are excluded from any determination of aggregate sign area in residentially zoned districts. Street numbers assigned or used by the United States Postal Service shall not be considered in calculating the aggregate sign area. 

Image 1: Aggregate sign area 
Animated sign shall mean a sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves mechanically, and/or as a result of human activity, and/or as a result of air/wind-driven inputs, or uses movement or a change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. This includes signs that flash, blink, scroll, fade or rotate/revolve to display a message in more than one direction, and tri-vision signs, but does not include flags, banners, or canopies. 

Image 2: Animated sign 
Area of a sign/sign area shall mean the area upon which a message is displayed on any sign consisting of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, or circle, which encompasses the entire sign message, and excluding the base, apron, supports, border, trim and other structural members. For double-faced signs, the side of the sign with the largest sign area shall be used in computing the sign area. 

Image 3: Area of sign 
Awning/canopy shall mean an architectural element that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame, protruding from the building façade with the purpose of protecting pedestrians from the elements. Awnings or canopies may extend over a sidewalk, walkway, or vehicle access area. 

Image 4: Awning/Canopy 
Awning/canopy sign shall mean a sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on an awning/canopy or in which graphics and symbols are painted, sewn, or otherwise adhered to the awning material as an integrated part of the awning itself. Awning/canopy signs are considered building signs and are further regulated by section 20-57. 

Image 5: Awning/Canopy sign 
Banner shall mean a sign other than a flag with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, flexible plastic, vinyl or fabric, including canvas, that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. Standard informational signs are excluded from the definition of a banner. Banners are considered temporary signs and are further regulated by section 20-67. 

Image 6: Banner 
Beacon sign/search light shall mean any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source, also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. Beacon signs/search lights are prohibited. 
Building sign shall mean any wall, canopy, awning, or projecting sign affixed to a building. Building signs are further regulated by section 20-57. 
Business day shall mean any day during which city government offices are open for public business. For purposes of this chapter, a "business day" shall not include any day during which city government offices are closed due to a holiday, emergency, inclement weather, or the like. 
Changeable copy sign/reader board shall mean a sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. Changeable copy signs are prohibited, except as allowed by section 20-53 and section 20-55. 
Changeable copy sign, electronic shall mean a sign whose message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control, including the device known as a trivision sign, LCD sign or LED sign. 
City shall mean the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
Direct lighting/illumination shall mean a specific style of illumination where the source of light is internal and integral to the sign structure, and where the resultant illumination radiates out in the direction of the viewer. Illumination is further regulated by section 20-62. 

Image 7: Direct lighting/illumination 
Directional sign shall mean any sign containing directional information to manage vehicular and pedestrian traffic on a property and to minimize and avoid vehicular and pedestrian conflicts. Directional signs are further regulated by section 20-59. 

Image 8: Directional sign 
Director shall mean the director of the community development department, or his/her designee. 
Double-faced sign shall mean a sign structure which has two display areas placed back to back, parallel to each other, where one sign face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Electronic sign shall mean a sign whose message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control, including the device known as a trivision sign, LCD sign or LED sign. Electronic signs are prohibited, except as allowed by section 20-55. 
Entrance sign shall mean any ground sign placed at the intersection of a public street and a private entrance into an apartment, office, condominium, church or industrial complex or some other building with multiple residential or commercial units. 

Image 9: Entrance sign 
Façade, primary shall mean the façade of the building which contains the primary building entrance. 
Façade, secondary shall mean any façade that is not the primary building facade. 
Flag shall mean any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols attached to a flagpole. Flags are further regulated by section 20-66. 
Flagpole shall mean a freestanding structure or a structure attached to a building or to the roof of a building on a parcel of record and used for the sole purpose of displaying flags. Flagpole height shall be measured from average grade. Flagpoles are further regulated by section 20-66. 

Image 10: Flag/Flagpole 
Ground sign shall mean a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support with a base of a width not less than the width of the sign face. The base of the sign face shall be flush with the supporting base, and the supporting base shall be flush with the ground and extend the full width of the sign. All ground signs shall be monument signs unless explicitly noted otherwise. Ground signs are further regulated by section 20-58. 

Image 11: Ground sign 
"Halo" lighting (and similar lighting styles) shall mean a specific style of illumination where the sign face and returns are mounted on standoffs away from the wall which project illumination to the wall surface giving the sign a halo effect. Illumination is further regulated by section 20-59. 


Image 12: Halo lighting 
Hanging sign shall mean a permanent sign that projects outward from a fixed column, typically at a 90-degree angle, and hangs downward from a bracket or support. The column must be made of brick, stone, or decorative concrete block. Exposed poles are prohibited. Hanging signs are permitted as subdivision/entrance signs only as defined in section 20-53. 

Image 13: Hanging sign 
Illegal sign shall mean any sign that was erected in violation of the laws as they existed at the time the sign was established, including signs built without a permit and/or signs that were not built in conformance with an issued permit. 
Illuminated sign shall mean a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed toward such sign. Such lighting may be transmitted via direct lighting, indirect lighting, routed push through, halo lighting, or other acceptable methods. Illumination is further regulated by section 20-62. 
Indirect lighting shall mean a specific style of illumination where the source of light is external to, and independent of, the sign structure, and the illumination radiates toward the message area away from the viewer. Illumination is further regulated by section 20-62. 

Image 14: Indirect lighting 
Institutional use , for the purposes of this chapter, means both the land use category and activities which include the following uses: aquariums, cemeteries, child daycare centers, college or university, convents and monasteries, elementary, middle and high school, both public and private, fire and rescue services, hospital, house of worship, jails and prisons, library, museum, parks and outdoor recreation, including arboretums, wildlife sanctuaries, public forests, public areas for hiking, nature centers, and other passive recreation-oriented parks, post offices, public and/or government buildings, public indoor recreation centers such as government-run natatoriums, solid waste collection sites, wastewater treatment plant, and zoos. 
LCD sign shall mean an electronically controlled sign utilizing liquid crystal diodes to form some or all of the sign message. LCD signs are prohibited, except as allowed by section 20-55. 
LED sign shall mean an electronically controlled sign utilizing light-emitting diodes to form some or all of the sign message. LED signs are prohibited, except as allowed by section 20-55. 
Lot shall mean a designed parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. In addition, a lot shall be a parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot area, coverage, and use and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning standards. 
Menu sign/ordering kiosk shall mean a sign/kiosk that may contain a microphone, ordering screen, and speaker for the purpose of ordering services and products sold on the premises. Menu signs/ordering kiosks are further regulated by section 20-49(11) and section 20-55(3). 
Multi-faced sign shall mean a sign structure with more than two faces situated so that each sign face is facing a different direction, facing more than two directions, or two directions not back-to-back, whether or not all faces contain some message. Multi-faced signs are prohibited. 
Neon sign shall mean a sign composed of exposed, visible neon tubing. Neon sign shall also include signs similar in appearance but illuminated via other gases or liquids similar to neon. 
Nonconforming sign shall mean any sign which was lawfully permitted by the jurisdiction of record, and was legal at the time of establishment, but does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming signs are further regulated by section 20-61. 
Permanent sign shall mean any sign that is not temporary. 
Permit shall mean a sign permit reviewed, approved and issued by the community development department. 
Permittee shall mean the person and/or entity owning or leasing the land on which the sign is erected or for which an application has been submitted. 
Person shall mean a natural or legal person, including a firm, organization, partnership, trust and corporation. 
Planned commercial center means any commercial, office, industrial or mixed-use development that contains multiple offices, residences, retail or industrial uses, or combination of such uses, with a common entry from a public street and is managed as a whole and in accordance with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Pole sign shall mean a permanent sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent from any building or other structure. Pole signs are prohibited. 

Image 15: Pole sign 
Portable sign shall mean any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure; or sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; balloons used as signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles while visible from the public right-of-way, except as provided herein. For the purposes of this chapter, sandwich board signs, banners and pole banners as prescribed herein are not considered portable signs. Portable signs are prohibited, except as allowed by section 20-51(15). 

Image 16: Portable sign 
Projecting sign shall mean any sign which projects outward from a building or other structure and extends more than 24 inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. The signage area must not be parallel to the building. Projecting signs are considered building signs and are further regulated by section 20-57. 

Image 17: Projecting sign 
Pump-island sign shall mean a sign located under a canopy and on top of the pump islands of a service station or convenience store with gas pumps. Pump island signs are further regulated by section 20-55. 
Road, accessible shall mean any road or street, public or private, that provides a means of ingress and egress to the lot. The term "private road" shall not include drive isles in parking lots. 
Roof sign shall mean a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building, or a sign that extends into and/or above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building irrespective of attachment point, or a sign that wholly or partially encroaches upon any roof line of a building, or a sign attached to, encroaching into or extending above the sloping phase of a mansard roof or faux mansard roof, or any combination thereof. Roof signs are prohibited. 

Image 18: Roof sign 
Rotating sign. See animated sign. 
Routed push-through shall mean illumination that displays information on the sign face with the letters/logo routed-out and an acrylic panel placed behind it, to allow light to penetrate through the sides of the letters/logos only. Faces of signs must be opaque, and letters/logos may extend no more than one-quarter-inch from the sign. Illumination is further regulated by section 20-62. 

Image 19: Routed push-through 
Sandwich board sign shall be a single or double-faced, hinged or un-hinged, temporary sign designed to be used on a sidewalk or pedestrian way. Sandwich boards are further regulated by section 20-67. 

Image 20: Sandwich board sign 
Shingle/suspended sign shall mean a sign that projects less than 24 inches outward from a building, typically at a 90-degree angle, and hangs downward from a bracket or support. Shingle/suspended signs may extend over a sidewalk, walkway, or vehicle access area. No shingle/suspended sign shall be maintained less than eight feet above the ground level when erected over pedestrian walkways or driveways and no less than 14 feet above vehicle access. Shingle/suspended signs are further regulated by section 20-66. 

Image 21: Shingle/suspended sign 
Sign shall mean a device, fixture, placard, structure or representation that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others and is directed to be viewed from any outdoor space. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" shall include the structure upon which a sign face is located. Flags and banners shall be included within this definition only as provided elsewhere herein. 
Sign face shall mean that part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Standard informational sign shall mean a sign with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or attachments that are not rectangular in proportion and which is mounted on a post, stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than three and one-half inches, and which is no greater than nine square feet in area. Banners and directional signs are not included in the definition of a standard informational signs. Banners are considered temporary signs. Standard informational signs are further regulated by section 20-60. 

Image 22: Standard informational sign 
Store front shall mean the exterior wall of a single, undivided unit located within a planned commercial center or business park. 
Street frontage shall mean the lot line that is coincident with any road or street, public or private, that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
String lights shall mean signs consisting in whole or in part of a series, line, or row of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within 150 feet of a street and visible therefrom. String lights are prohibited, except as allowed by subsection 20-49(8). 
Subdivision sign shall mean a sign placed at the intersection of two roads, at least one of which is a public road, with the other road being the main thoroughfare into and out of a commercial or residential development and consisting of either a ground sign or a wall sign as permitted otherwise in this ordinance. Subdivision signs are further regulated by section 20-53. 
Temporary signs shall mean any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or other permanent structure or foundation and designed to be displayed for a limited time. Temporary signs are further regulated by section 20-67. 
Tri-vision sign shall mean a sign designed with a series of triangular slats or columns that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. Tri-vision signs are prohibited. 
Wall sign shall mean any sign attached parallel/flat to a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. No wall sign shall extend more than eight inches from any wall, building, or structure. Wall signs are considered building signs and are further regulated by section 20-57. 
Window sign shall mean any sign that is placed on, in or intrudes over a window opening or upon the window panes of glass, either inside or outside the building, and is oriented to be viewed from the exterior of the structure. Customary displays of merchandise behind a store window are not considered window signs. Window signs are further regulated by section 20-49(1) and section 20-51(2). 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-10, § I, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 2019-01-02, § I, 1-28-2019) 
_____
Secs. 20-4—20-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-23. - Permits required. 
Except for those signs which may be erected without obtaining a permit, consistent with the terms in section 20-49, every person desiring to erect a sign shall first obtain a sign permit and all other permits required for the desired structure in accordance with city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-24. - Application information. 
(a)  Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the director or his/her designee. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign; 
(2)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located; 
(3)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign; 
(4)  Name, address, phone number and occupational tax certificate number of the sign contractor; 
(5)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, how the sign is to be illuminated (if at all) and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected on a scaled drawing; 
(6)  The dimensions of the wall on which the sign is to be placed with appropriate drawings and photographs; 
(7)  The payment in full of the applicable application fee; and 
(8)  Application for ground signs shall include a site plan drawn to scale, including a closed boundary survey of the property, gross acreage, the proposed location of subject sign, location of all existing ground signs on the property, entrance driveways from public streets, streetrights-of-way, public or private easements, building locations, sidewalks, utilities, gross area of buildings and floor area occupied by subject owner or tenants. 
(9)  The director may require other such information required to determine the sign complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The director shall develop such forms as may be necessary to facilitate the permit application process. 
(c)  The applicant shall apply for all other permits or licenses required by city ordinances and state laws and regulations. No sign permit shall be valid unless other required permits or licenses have been issued by the authority responsible thereof. 
(d)  Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and save and hold the city harmless from all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. Each applicant shall present to the department, upon request, a certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-25. - Time for consideration and issuance. 
The director shall issue permits for all applications meeting the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances regulating signs within the 15 business day review period provided by this section. Signs not meeting the requirements shall be denied pursuant to the procedure outlined in section 20-26. The director shall give notice in writing to the applicant of his/her decision hand-delivered, mailed by certified mail, e-mailed or faxed to the address on the permit application, and post-marked on or before the 15th business day after the director's receipt of the application. If the director fails to act within the 15-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. A sticker or other device bearing the sign permit number shall be affixed to the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-26. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. Permits shall be denied where the applications for signs do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, are incomplete, and where the applications contain any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter and any other applicable state laws or city ordinances governing signs will be grounds for revoking a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the director of community development shall revoke the permit. Should the director deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and hand delivered, mailed by certified mail, emailed, or faxed to the address on the permit application, on or before the 15th business day after the director's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked except for due cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this chapter, other applicable ordinances, state or federal law, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in the denial or revocation of a sign permit under this chapter. All such appeals shall be heard and decided following the notice requirements of subsection (c) of this section and pursuant to the following criteria and procedural requirements: 
(1)  Appeal of decision by administrative officials. A denial pursuant to this chapter shall be appealable by filing an application for appeal on the forms provided by the community development department specifying the grounds thereof, within 15 days after the action appealed from was taken. The application fee for an appeal under this section shall be the same as that established by the city council for an appeal under chapter 27. 
(2)  Decision of the zoning board of appeals. Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the board shall make a determination on each appeal. An appeal shall be sustained only upon an expressed finding by the board that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(3)  Time for final decision. A final decision will be rendered by the board within 45 days from date an appeal is filed. If a final decision is not rendered within the 45-day period, the decision sought to be appealed shall be reversed. 
(c)  Notice of public hearings. Notice of public hearing before the board on any application for appeal, variance, or special exception shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Written notice of the nature of the proposed application, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the board shall be mailed by first class mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as measured by use of the official zoning maps, and as such property owners are listed on the tax records of the city, at least 30 days before the public hearing before the board; 
(2)  Signs of no less than 12 square feet, in a color designated by the community development director or his designee, shall be posted within the public right-of-way or on the subject property at least 30 days before the hearing before the board. One sign shall be posted for each 500 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof along each street on which the subject property has frontage. Signs shall be double-faced and posted so that the face of the sign is at a right angle to the street in order that said signs can be read by the traveling public in both directions. The lettering on the signs shall be printed and at least one inch in size and the sign shall state the nature of the proposed application and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the board; and 
(3)  Notice of the nature of the proposed application and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the board shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the city in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing before the board and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing before the board. 
(4)  The cost of all signs posted, published advertisement and notice mailings sent, pursuant to this section shall be specifically paid by the applicant in addition to all other applicable application costs. 
(5)  Applications may be withdrawn by the applicant or applicant's representative in writing without prejudice at any time before the vote of the zoning board of appeals on the application. All fees submitted shall be forfeited in any case where the application is withdrawn after it has been advertised for a public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(d)  Certiorari. In the event a person whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the zoning board of appeals, a person may petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 2, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-27. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and fully installed within six months after the date of issuance. A 60-day extension may be granted to the six-month limit to alleviate hardship upon proof of hardship beyond the ability of the owner to rectify. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If an individual later desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-28. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The director or his/her designee may issue a citation for violation of this chapter by any person, including if applicable, the owner, manager or tenant of the space upon which a sign is located, for a sign erected, altered, maintained, converted, or used in violation of this chapter or in violation of any other applicable ordinance, including, but not limited to, the building and electrical codes. 
(b)  The director and/or his/her designee shall have the same duties, authority, and obligations regarding access to private property and inspections, including the procurement of inspection warrants provided in article VI of the city zoning ordinance with regard to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be subject to the general penalty provided in chapter 1. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation, and each day of a continued violation for each sign shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalties authorized in this Code. 
(d)  The city may seek affirmative equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal or repair of any sign in violation of this chapter or other city ordinances. 
(e)  The director or designee may remove any sign or structure illegally placed upon a public right-of-way without any notice and may dispose of said sign or structure. Such removal and disposal of illegally placed signs shall not preclude the prosecution of any person for illegally placing such signs in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-29. - City occupation tax certificate; public liability insurance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the city unless and until such entity shall have obtained an occupation tax certificate in the state and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim, and public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death to one person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier shall notify the city 30 days in advance of any termination and/or restriction of the coverage, including nonrenewal, cancellation, and nonpayment of any premium. If the business has comparable insurance from another city or county in Georgia, the installer's insurance provider shall provide a current certificate of insurance to the city, prior to the installation of signage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-30. - Fees. 
The cost of a sign permit shall be established by resolution of the city council and collected by the director or designee. A copy of the fee schedule shall be kept with the records of the city clerk. The latest iteration of the duly approved fee schedule for the city is also available for review in the offices of the community development department, as well as on the official website for the city, http://www.dunwoodyga.gov. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 20-31—20-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 20-49. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 20-23; provided, however, that such signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Window signs not to exceed 30 percent of the area of an individual window frame. Multiple window signs shall not total more than 30 percent of the entire window area; 
(2)  Door signs not to exceed one square foot in size and not more than one sign per door; 
(3)  Directional signs meeting the standards of this chapter; 
(4)  Address numerals no taller than four inches in residential districts and ten inches in non-residential districts erected for the sole purpose of displaying street numbers as may be required by other ordinances and other signs required by law; 
(5)  Flags as provided in section 20-66; 
(6)  Non-governmental traffic control and directional devices located entirely on private property and are consistent with those found in the manual of uniform traffic control devices in or adjacent to parking areas, and driveways and warning signs located at railroad crossings; 
(7)  Standard informational signs meeting the standards of this chapter; 
(8)  Non-LED string lights used in courtyards and outdoor dining areas so long as they do not constitute an animated sign; 
(9)  Government mandated signs in compliance with the manual of uniform traffic control devices that comply with the requirements of state law for such signs placed or required to be placed by a government entity; 
(10)  Sandwich boards as prescribed herein; 
(11)  Menu signs/ordering kiosks placed adjacent to a commercial drive thru, with a maximum of four such signs per property, so long as any ground-mounted menu sign does not exceed 18 square feet and any wall-mounted menu-sign does not exceed nine square feet, as well as drive-thru menu sign accessory panel exchanges. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 3, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-50. - Display of property numbering. 
Consistent with the provisions spelled out in the International Fire Code, Section 505, and International Property Maintenance Code, Section 304, all structures throughout the city shall display the street number assigned by the issuing authority, in the size indicated in subsection 20-49(4), on the building facade, mailbox, curb and/or door so that it is discernable from the street. If multiple residences, offices of stores are located in one building, the inclusive numbers shall be displayed on the building facade, mailbox and/or exterior door, and individual numbers displayed on or over the entry door to each residence, office or store. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-51. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs, and signs pertaining to railroad crossings; 
(2)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the area of an individual window frame or multiple window signs that exceed 30 percent of the total window area; 
(3)  Signs that contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, as amended; 
(4)  Signs that visually simulate an official traffic control device, warning sign, or regulatory sign or which hide from view any traffic control device, signal or public service sign, except as allowed by section 20-49(6); 
(5)  Signs that emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing abilities; 
(6)  Signs that interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic or which otherwise pose a hazard to traffic due to structural deficiencies in the structure of such signs; 
(7)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, curb, utility pole, natural feature, fence, street sign, or other structure with the exception of signs on fences and walls as permitted herein; 
(8)  Signs that obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or shall prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, as well as signs attached to any fire escape; 
(9)  Signs that do not conform to city building and electrical codes; 
(10)  Signs for which a permit is required that do not display the sign permit number and the name and address of the person responsible for erecting and maintaining the sign; 
(11)  Roof signs; 
(12)  Multi-faced signs; 
(13)  Signs that are in violation of the rules and regulations of any zoning overlay district; 
(14)  Any sign constructed of non-durable material including, but not limited to, paper, canvas, vinyl, cardboard or flexible plastic that has been displayed for more than 60 days. Nothing herein shall prohibit such a sign from being replaced. This provision does not apply to awnings (as defined in section 20-3), flags and banners which are governed by sections 20-66 and 20-67, respectively; 
(15)  Portable signs. Excluded from this prohibition are signs mounted, wrapped or painted on a vehicle, so long as the vehicle is currently being utilized for a properly-licensed business and, whenever parked and not utilized for said business, are parked at a designated service/loading and unloading area or at the furthest-available parking space from a right-of-way. Alternatively, such a vehicle may be parked behind the business to which it relates if to do so minimizes the view of the portable sign by the general public; 
(16)  Abandoned or dilapidated signs; 
(17)  Any sign that is structurally unsound, or is a hazard to traffic or pedestrians; 
(18)  Animated signs, including balloons, streamers, air or gas filled figures, except in single-family residences and fee simple multi-family residences for non-commercial use; 
(19)  Electronic signs except those permitted by section 20-55; 
(20)  Beacon sign/search light; 
(21)  LCD signs and similar type technologies, except those permitted by section 20-55; 
(22)  LED signs and similar type technologies, except those permitted by section 20-55; 
(23)  Changeable copy sign/reader board, except for service stations as prescribed in section 20-55, and institutional uses as prescribed in section 20-53; 
(24)  Pole signs; 
(25)  Neon window signs larger than three square feet; 
(26)  Reserved; 
(27)  Tri-vision sign; and 
(28)  Any sign that changes color(s), flashes, blinks, oscillates, or intimates movement through lighting effect(s). 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 8, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01-02, § II, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 20-52. - Owner's consent required. 
No sign may be permitted or posted on property without the consent of the property's owner or authorized agent. Should it be determined that a sign was erected on a lot pursuant to an alleged agent's incorrect representation that the record owner of the lot in fact gave permission for the erection of a sign, the permit for such sign shall be revoked as provided in section 20-26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-53. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts and multifamily land use in O-I districts. 
The following regulations shall pertain to lots located in residential zoning districts: 
(1)  Lots used for residential purposes other than for institutional, multi-family apartments, multi-family condominium, mobile home, or townhouse developments shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than 12 square feet per lot, with no individual sign area exceeding six square feet. Flags and banners shall not be included in the calculation of aggregate sign area. Subdivision and entrance signs shall not be included in the calculation of aggregate sign area; 
(2)  Lots used for institutional, multi-family apartments, multi-family condominiums, mobile homes, or townhouse developments shall not have a sign area exceeding six square feet per dwelling unit, and/or not to exceed an aggregate of 100 square feet for the lot; 
(3)  Residential zoning districts, other than lots used for institutional purposes, shall not display more than two standard informational signs unless otherwise allowed by section 20-56 with each sign not to exceed six square feet; 
(4)  Lots used for institutional purposes shall have a maximum aggregate for standard informational signage of 32 square feet, with no one sign having an area greater than 16 square feet; 
(5)  Ground signs and standard informational signs having a height of greater than six feet above the grade level of the adjacent street to which the lot on which the sign is located as measured from the top of the sign, pole or support included, or three feet above ground level, as measured from the top of the sign, pole, or support structure to ground level, whichever is greater, are prohibited, with the exception of subdivision signs and entrance signs; 
(6)  All ground signs shall be monument signs. The use of exposed poles in ground signs is prohibited; 
(7)  Multifamily developments. For apartment developments of more than 250 units, ground signs not greater than five feet in height and ten feet in width may be placed on either side of the primary entrance designated as such by the property owner or its designee, and one ground sign no greater than five feet in height and five feet in width for each secondary entrance. For apartment developments of less than 250 units, ground signs shall not exceed five feet in height or five feet in width and are limited to no more than two signs at the designated primary entrance and no more than one sign at the secondary entrance, if any; 
(8)  No sign in any residentially zoned district may be illuminated, except for institutional, subdivision and entrance signs, subject to the provisions of section 20-62 herein. No institutional, subdivision, or entrance sign may be directly illuminated; 
(9)  Subdivision and entrance signs shall not exceed 32 square feet of sign area, excluding the base, and shall not exceed eight feet in height; 
(10)  Subdivision signs may exist as a ground sign, hanging sign, or as a sign affixed to a retaining wall or decorative wall established for the entrance; 
(11)  There shall be a maximum of two subdivision/entrance signs per public or private entrance into any residential subdivision or real estate development in a residential district; and 
(12)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, changeable copy signs are allowable for institutional uses as follows: 
a.  Changeable copy signs must conform to the standards of ground signs as prescribed herein. 
b.  Changeable copy signs will be permitted to have interchangeable poster panels, designed to be manually changed; 
c.  The total changeable copy sign(s) area shall not exceed a total of 12 square feet per sign face; 
d.  Text information shall be a fixed, non-electrical, non-intermittent, static message with no wipes, fades, flashes or similar effects. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01-02, § III, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 20-54. - Height and setback requirements. 
(a)  Except for those signs permitted or required to be placed in the right-of-way, such as traffic control devices, all signs shall be setback as follows: 
(1)  Ten feet from the curb line of each street adjacent to the lot upon which the sign is situated where an authorized curb cut exists (applicable to all zoning districts); 
(2)  If the right-of-way is more than ten feet from the curb line as described in subsection (1), the sign, including its footing or foundations, shall be setback at least one foot from the right-of-way (applicable to all zoning districts); 
(3)  In a residential zoning district, if the distance between the right-of-way to the front of the principal structure is less than 15 feet, signs shall be setback two-thirds of the distance between the curbline and the front of the principal structure on the lot on which the sign is located; 
(4)  Along all lot lines which are not adjacent to a road with an authorized curb cut, any and all signs shall be within the buildable area of the lot. All signs shall be so located and shall provide such vertical clearance as to provide for safe, convenient and unobstructed passage for pedestrians and vehicles. 
(b)  No sign or sign structure above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign support structure not more than ten inches in diameter may be located within the required corner visibility area if all other requirements of this chapter are met and the lowest elevation of the sign surface is at least 12 feet above the ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-55. - Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands. 
In addition to the signs otherwise allowed in this chapter, convenience stores and service stations with pump islands may have signage subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Within the limits of the canopy covering the pump islands, one sign per canopy face per public street frontage with a maximum of six square feet. 
(2)  Within the limits of the canopy covering the pump islands, pump-island signs shall be limited to no more than two signs per island, not to exceed four square feet per sign. However, total square footage of all pump island signs shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(3)  Accessory car wash, if a separate drive-through car wash building is on site, one additional wall sign, not to exceed five square feet per sign, may be permitted. In addition, one menu sign/ordering kiosk is permitted. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, changeable copy signs are allowable when accessory to service station, as permitted by state law, as follows: fuel pricing information shall be a fixed, non-intermittent, static message with no wipes, fades, flashes or similar effects. LED, LCD, and/or electronic lighting is permissible for fuel pricing only. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-56. - Non-commercial messages. 
Any sign provided for in any zoning district may contain non-commercial messages. In addition, during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each residentially zoned lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs as defined in section 20-3. Signs shall not be placed in the right-of-way, and permission from the property owner must be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-57. - Building signs. 
(a)  Wall, canopy, awning, or projecting signs shall be securely fastened to the building surface. 
(b)  No canopy or projecting sign shall be maintained less than eight feet above the ground level when erected over pedestrian walkways or driveways and no less than 14 feet above vehicle access. 
(c)  Projecting signs shall have a maximum height of 20 feet and a maximum area of 40 square feet, and may project up to 42 inches from the building. 
(d)  Wall signs may project from the building up to two feet. 
(e)  No wall, canopy, awning, or projecting sign shall extend above the parapet wall or any roofline. 
(f)  Wall, canopy, awning, or projecting signs are prohibited in residential districts. 
(g)  Wall, canopy, awning, or projecting signs must be located on or attached to the facade(s) of a building. 
(h)  Wall, canopy, awning, or projecting signs shall be located only on the facade(s) which are immediately external to the use being advertised. 
(i)  The size and number of building signs allowed is dependent upon the size of the space to which they relate as follows: 

 
* For the purpose of this section, tenant space shall mean an area within a building directly accessible by an exterior entrance. 
(j)  For buildings which provide access via vestibules and other common areas, with no direct access to any tenant space, the size and number of wall signs allowed is dependent upon the total floor area of the building to which they relate as follows: 

 
(k)  For purposes of this chapter, the existing shingle signs in Dunwoody Village will be considered lawful projecting signs, and may be repaired or replaced as tenants change; provided the same size and style are followed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01-02, § IV, 1-28-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, adopted July 24, 2017, changed the title of § 20-57 from "Wall, canopy, or projecting signs" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 20-58. - Ground signs. 
(a)  The height of all ground signs shall be measured from finished grade, which shall not be raised so as to create additional sign height. However, when the finished ground level is lower than the level of the adjoining street pavement, then a sign may be raised so as to be no more than the maximum height above the center line of street. Ground signs shall be measured from the ground level base of the sign structure (deemed to include any skirting) to the highest point of the sign. 
(b)  All ground signs shall be monument signs. The use of exposed poles in ground signs is prohibited. 
(c)  The height of ground signs for non-residential uses shall depend upon the nature of the uses to which the sign relates, as follows: 
(1)  Lots which contain a single-use building which one story in height may have ground signs no greater than seven feet in height and eight feet in width. Sign area is not to exceed 45 square feet; 
(2)  Multi-story office buildings with two or more stories but less than ten stories may have ground signs no greater than ten feet in height and five feet in width. Sign area is not to exceed 60 square feet; 
(3)  Multi-story office buildings with ten or more stories may have ground signs no greater than 20 feet in height and ten feet in width. Sign area is not to exceed 100 square feet; and 
(4)  Ground sign for a lot with multiple retail tenants or planned commercial centers shall be as follows: 

 
(d)  There shall be no more than one ground sign per street frontage per lot. 
(e)  For purposes of this chapter, the existing hanging signs in Dunwoody Village will be considered legal nonconforming ground signs, and may be repaired or replaced as tenants change; provided the same size and style are followed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 4, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01-02, § V, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 20-59. - Directional signs. 
(a)  The height of any directional sign shall not exceed three feet above the ground and shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
(b)  Two directional signs are allowed per authorized curb cut. Additionally, two directional signs are allowed internal to the lot. 
(c)  Directional signs must meet the illumination standards of section 20-62. 
(d)  Additional internal directional signs. 
(1)  The director may administratively approve additional directional signs for the purposes of safety, traffic control, or wayfinding, provided they are internal to the lot and not visible from public right-of-way. 
(2)  Applicants must submit to the director: 
a.  Project narrative, explaining need for and scope of additional directional signs; 
b.  Site plan, showing proposed locations for additional directional signs; 
c.  Elevations of proposed additional directional signs; and 
d.  Other items as requested by the director. 
(3)  The director shall issue a decision within the 15 business day review period provided by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-60. - Standard informational signs. 
(a)  Standard informational signs shall not exceed six feet in height or nine square feet of sign area. 
(b)  The maximum aggregate area of standard informational signage on a lot is 18 square feet unless otherwise allowed by section 20-56. 
(c)  There may be no more than four standard informational signs per lot. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-10, § III, 5-21-2018) 
Sec. 20-61. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Maintenance. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. Panel replacements shall have an opaque background with only the actual letters and logo of the signage area illuminated. All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good repair. 
(b)  Repairs; material change. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. Structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted as long as the changes do not expand the nonconforming nature of the sign. A nonconforming sign damaged or destroyed by act of God or by other circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the sign may be repaired or replaced as long as the repairs do not exceed 50 percent of total replacement cost. 
(c)  Grandfathering. Subject to the restrictions of this paragraph, a nonconforming sign may be used, but not expanded nor improved unless the sign is made conforming. Nonconforming signs are subject to the maintenance requirements of this chapter and may be subject to removal for violations of maintenance standards. No structural repairs or change in shape or size of a nonconforming sign as long as the changes do not expand the nonconforming nature of the sign. A nonconforming sign damaged or destroyed by act of God or by other circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the sign by more than 50 percent may not be repaired or replaced. 
(d)  Right-of-way. A nonconforming sign may be relocated for the purposes of road or sidewalk construction, purchases of right-of-way, or other public works or transportation project initiated by the City of Dunwoody or other public agency. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-62. - Illumination. 
(a)  Illuminated signs are limited to halo, routed push through, and indirect lighting and shall not exceed 20 footcandles of light at a distance of ten feet from such structure. White light only shall be allowed. All exterior light fixtures shall be ground-mounted or affixed directly and immediately above the sign face (e.g. gooseneck mounts) without obscuring the sign. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, direct (also known as "internal") lighting may be used, but shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  Directly lit channel letters, numbers and logos may be used on building facades on buildings with three or more stories, provided these raceway signs are located 50 feet or higher from ground level. 
(2)  Animated signs as permitted in subsection 20-51(18). 
(3)  All other directly lit cabinet lighting is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-63. - Building code. 
To the extent that it is not inconsistent with this chapter, the present edition of the Standard Building Code, National Electric Code and other building and construction codes as adopted and modified by the city and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs are incorporated as a part of this chapter as if fully restated herein for the same purposes stated in section 20-1 hereof and for the same purposes for which the International Building Code was promulgated and enacted, which purposes are expressly incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-64. - Conflicts with zoning ordinance overlay districts. 
To the extent that any regulations governing any zoning overlay district now existing or later enacted conflict with this article, the provisions of the overlay district shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 5, 7-11-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 5, adopted July 11, 2011, changed the title of section 20-64 from "Zoning ordinance" to "Conflicts with zoning ordinance overlay districts." 
Sec. 20-65. - Variances. 
(a)  An application for a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter may be initiated by application to the zoning board of appeals on the form provided by the community development department. 
(b)  Variances from the regulations of this chapter shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Where the proximity of existing signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible, due to spacing requirements, for a sign of the type sought; or 
(2)  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the proposed street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
a.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; 
b.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
c.  The variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(c)  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. No variance shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the property. 
(d)  The staff or community development department shall conduct a site inspection of and shall prepare an analysis of each application for variance applying the criteria and standards set forth in this section. Said staff shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the board at least seven days prior to the public hearing thereon. 
(e)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this chapter by use of variances granted by the board shall be granted only upon a finding of hardship as previously defined. Hearing on such variances shall be noticed and a final decision rendered by the board using the same time frames and notice requirements as for appeals under this chapter. 
(f)  In the event of dissatisfaction with the decision of the zoning board of appeals, a person may petition for a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 6, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 20-66. - Flags. 
(a)  All flags shall be displayed on a flagpole or according to recognized flag etiquette. In non-residential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the maximum building height applicable for the zoning district, or 60 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(b)  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole when ground-mounted. 
(c)  In addition, flags are subject to the following limitations in addition to the maximum building height of the applicable zoning district: 

 
(d)  Each lot shall be allowed a maximum of three flagpoles. 
(e)  A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flagpole. 
(f)  A vertical flagpole must be set back from all property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
(g)  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
(h)  On officially designated or recognized city, county, state, or federal holidays, or election days when polling places are open in the City of Dunwoody, flags may be displayed seven days prior through seven days after these dates and there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations on display. 
(i)  This section shall not be construed to restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2014-09-14, § 1, 9-22-2014; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-67. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  General regulations. 
(1)  Each temporary sign shall not exceed 24 square feet; 
(2)  Each temporary sign must be individually attached to poles, mast arms, fences, building facade or other similar structures; 
(3)  No more than two temporary signs shall be displayed on any lot at one time; and 
(4)  All temporary signs must be maintained in good condition as provided for flags in section 20-66. 
(5)  No temporary sign shall be displayed for more than 14 consecutive days, with no more than six such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. 
(6)  Pole banners are regulated by section 26-279 and are not subject to the standards of this chapter. 
(b)  Sandwich boards. 
(1)  Each sandwich board shall not exceed three feet wide by five feet tall. 
(2)  Each board must be located within ten feet of a pedestrian entrance of the sponsor of the board; 
(3)  Such a board may be utilized only during the hours of operation of the store or entity using it and shall be removed during the hours it is closed. 
(4)  Sandwich boards are limited to one per tenant space. 
(c)  For any institutional use, 12 temporary signs during any calendar year provided said signs do not have any balloons, streamers, pennants or similar items attached; are not illuminated; shall be placed no closer than ten feet from the back of any curb or outside of public right-of-way, whichever is greater; shall not exceed a size of five feet by six feet (including supports); and shall be erected for no more than 30 days, which must be consecutive. 
(d)  Under no circumstances shall any temporary sign be located so as to block the view of permanent sign or so as to create a safety hazard. 
(e)  Under no circumstances shall a temporary sign exceed the size of any permanent sign relating to the same user. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10-39, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-10, § IV, 5-21-2018) 
Sec. 20-68. - Shingle/suspended signs. 
(a)  One shingle or suspended sign per tenant of a multi-tenant building may be permitted. 
(b)  No shingle or suspended sign may exceed six square feet in area. 
(c)  Shingle and suspended signs are not exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 20-69. - Severability. 
Should any article, section, clause, or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the city council of that each article, section, clause, and provision hereof be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07-22, § 7, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, 7-24-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-07-18, § I, adopted July 24, 2017, renumbered former § 20-68 as § 20-69. 
Chapter 22 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 22-19. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the city limits there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state, and that public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist, rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists, constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 22-20. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and city council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 3, § 2) 
Sec. 22-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; and 
(3)  Any minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq., provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within the State of Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority office, or any office who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 3, § 3) 
Sec. 22-22. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint or designate the city code enforcement officer, city fire marshal, city fire chief, city police chief, building inspector, and their designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more that 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations, cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 41, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(h)  Process for administering, collecting or waiving lien. 
(1)  The lien provided for in subsection (g) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of Superior Court in DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of Superior Court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of DeKalb County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of Superior Court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem tax, including specifically O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-1—48-4-81; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(i)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(j)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(k)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
Sec. 22-23. - Determination by public officer that dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards, which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 3, § 5) 
Sec. 22-24. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided; however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officer, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
Sec. 22-25. - Service of complaints and other filings. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
(2)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided above on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 3, § 6) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Causing, provoking or engaging in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Assembling or congregating with another or others for the purpose of gaming; 
(5)  Being in or about any place, alone or with others, with the purpose or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing, or to aid or abet any person doing so; 
(6)  Being in or about any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcohol; 
(7)  Directing fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(8)  Interfering, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)  Congregating with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and failing to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)  Standing or remaining in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass, or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and failing to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(11)  Disrupting by actions which tend to cause an immediate breach of the peace the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital, or home for the elderly; or 
(12)  Throwing bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Offenses against public morals. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of distributing obscene material when he sells, lends, rents, leases, gives, advertises, publishes, exhibits, or otherwise disseminates to any person any obscene material of any description, knowing the obscene nature thereof, or offers to do so, or possesses such material with the intent to do so, provided that the word "knowing," as used in this section, shall be deemed to be either actual or constructive knowledge of the obscene contents of the subject matter; and a person has constructive knowledge of the obscene contents if he has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice as to the suspect nature of the material; provided, however, that the character and reputation of the individual charged with an offense under this law, and, if a commercial dissemination of obscene material is involved, the character and reputation of the business establishment involved may be placed in evidence by the defendant on the question of intent to violate this law. Undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and the like shall be deemed obscene notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make the obscenity patent or to disseminate it. 
(b)  Material is obscene if: 
(1)  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; 
(2)  The material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; and 
(3)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as: 
a.  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
b.  Acts of masturbation; 
c.  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
d.  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
e.  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
(c)  Material not otherwise obscene may be obscene under this section if the distribution thereof, the offer to do so, or the possession with the intent to do so is a commercial exploitation of erotica solely for the sake of their prurient appeal. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense under this section that selling, lending, renting, leasing, giving, advertising, publishing, exhibiting, or otherwise disseminating the material was restricted to: 
(1)  A person associated with an institution of higher learning, either as a member of the faculty or a matriculated student, teaching or pursuing a course of study related to such material; or 
(2)  A person whose receipt of such material was authorized in writing by a licensed medical practitioner or psychiatrist. 
(e)  A person who commits the offense of distributing obscene material shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature, and shall face such penalties as are provided for in section 1-6. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Prostitution and related offenses. 
(a)  House of ill fame. 
(1)  A person having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance within the city which would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when such person knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution. 
(2)  Those places or conveyances which have been adjudged to be places of prostitution, as provided in this chapter, may be abated as also provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Solicitation for an illicit sexual act. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public to offer or consent to perform any illicit sexual act for money or any other thing of value. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person, while in a place open to the public, to attempt to induce, entice, solicit, pander, purchase or procure another to commit any illicit sexual act for money or other things of value. An illicit sexual act is defined as one or more of the following: 
a.  Prostitution; 
b.  Sodomy for hire; 
c.  Masturbation for hire. 
(2)  For purposes of subsection (b)(1) of this section, the term "any person" shall include solicitors of illicit sexual acts or panderers who solicit, procure or purchase another to perform any illicit sexual act in exchange for money or other things of value, and who are commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks." 
(c)  Any person engaging in violation of this section shall be guilty of the offense of idling and loitering for the purposes of committing an illicit sexual act. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 4; Ord. No. 2011-05-14, § 1, 5-23-2011) 
Sec. 24-4. - Public indecency. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  Simulated acts of sexual intercourse; 
(2)  An exposure of one's genitals, or of one's breasts, if female, except in a place designed for same. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall hinder the right of a woman from nursing a child in a public place. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 24-5. - Vandalism. 
(a)  Public property. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any public property or park in the city. 
(2)  No person shall spit on the floors, walls, or other parts of any public building in the city. 
(b)  Private property. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any private property without the consent of the owner. 
(2)  This subsection shall not be construed as affecting any remedy the private property owner may have at law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 6) 
Sec. 24-6. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Graffiti promotes blight in the neighborhoods in which it occurs and encourages similar acts of vandalism. Without prompt removal of graffiti, other properties become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to live and work. 
(2)  The councilmembers of the city, in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, further find and declare that to be truly effective in the deterrence, eradication, and removal of graffiti, it is necessary to implement a comprehensive antigraffiti ordinance. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Graffiti means the defacing, altering, modifying, changing, drawing, damaging, or destroying by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye, or any other similar substances on public and/or private buildings, structures, and places, an inscription, slogan, drawing, or modification. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, alter, modify, change, draw, damage, or destroy by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye, or any other similar substance on public and/or private buildings, structures and places, an inscription, slogan, drawing, or modification, or otherwise damage private or public property in contradiction of other city ordinances, by or through the application of graffiti as defined herein. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise being in control of any real property within the city to maintain, permit, or allow any graffiti to be placed upon any structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property after notice, in writing, has been given to such person in control of said property. 
(d)  Notice of removal. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or utility owner, or any manager, tenant, or agent for the owner of the property, to permit the application of or fail to remove graffiti within ten business days after written notice is given. 
(e)  Notice procedure. 
(1)  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti or other unsightly conditions on any property, including structures or improvements within the city, a police officer or code enforcement officer shall give or cause to be given written notice to the property owner and/or owner's agent, tenant, or manager to remove such graffiti or other unsightly condition therefrom. 
(2)  The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners: 
a.  By personal service or registered or certified mail addressed to the owner or the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. Such notice shall allow ten days from the date of notice for removal of identified graffiti. 
b.  In the event that the city has attempted to notify the proper person under subsection (e)(2)a of this section and is unable to do so, then the city is authorized to post the notice on the main entrance of the building. 
(3)  For the purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property. In addition, the owner may notify the city that the tenant, pursuant to a written lease, has control of the property or has control of that portion of the building which is the subject matter of this subsection and, in the event the city receives such notice, the city shall notify the tenant of the notice of removal as provided in this section and proceed against the tenant and not the owner; provided, however, as to any violation of this section in existence on or before January 1, 2009, any notice of removal shall give 60 days for the removal thereof. 
(f)  Accepted graffiti removal products. 
(1)  The planning and zoning department shall maintain a list of substances designated as acceptable products to remove specific types of graffiti from specific surfaces (unpainted brick, concrete, stone, etc.). This list shall include detailed information on the appropriate use of such designated substances. Appropriate use of said substances by property owners shall constitute compliance with the requirement to remove graffiti contained therein. 
(2)  Uses of any of these items or any other items are at the risk of the user. The city does not recommend the products. Use may discolor or damage the finish of the surface the products are used on. 
(g)  City cost declared lien. If the person, agent, firm, manager, or owner of the property fails to remove the graffiti by the end of the ten-day notification period, the city manager may cause the graffiti to be removed and charge to the property owner the expenses incurred. Upon the completion of removal by the city, the city shall provide the proper party written notice consistent with subsections (d) and (e) of this section of the total cost of removal and shall give the property party 30 days to pay the total cost incurred by the city. If the expenses of the removal remain unpaid for a period of 60 days, the city may place a lien against the property upon which said nuisance existed and from which the graffiti was removed. 
(h)  Penalty. Any person who is convicted of violating this or the previous section shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-6. The municipal court may suspend or probate a portion or all of its sentence upon such conditions to include but not be limited to the restoring of the property so defaced, damaged, or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 7) 
Sec. 24-7. - Tampering with utilities. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb, tamper with, or remove any guy wires from any electric power pole, utility pole, or telephone pole located within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 8) 
Sec. 24-8. - Loitering and prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 9) 
Sec. 24-9. - Shoplifting. 
The city municipal court is authorized to prosecute and dispose of shoplifting cases in accordance with the state law. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction over cases in which a person is charged with a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting when the offense is a misdemeanor under state law and the offense occurs within the city limits. Any person charged in municipal court shall be entitled to have the case transferred to the State Court of DeKalb County upon request. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 10) 
Sec. 24-10. - Marijuana possession. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or have under his control within the city one ounce or less of marijuana. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "marijuana" means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, and shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil, or cake, or the completely sterilized samples of seeds of the plant which are incapable of germination. 
(c)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall be entitled, upon request, to have the case against him transferred to the State Court of DeKalb County, to be prosecuted and tried as a misdemeanor in that court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 11) 
Sec. 24-11. - Fines and punishment. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-6. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 1, § 12) 
Secs. 24-12—24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - URBAN CAMPING PROHIBITED 

Sec. 24-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Camping means residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any substantial prolonged period of time; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Public park means and includes all municipal parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
Public street means and includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 5, § 1) 
Sec. 24-42. - Public parks. 
It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park, as defined in section 24-41, owned by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 5, § 2) 
Sec. 24-43. - Public streets. 
It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public street, as defined in section 24-41. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 5, § 3) 
Sec. 24-44. - Other public property, blocking ingress and egress. 
It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 5, § 4) 
Sec. 24-45. - Warning. 
No person may be arrested for violating this article until he has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he is subject to arrest for urban camping. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 5, § 5) 
Sec. 24-46. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons in wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 5, § 6) 
Secs. 24-47—24-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 

Sec. 24-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Child care facility means any institution, society, agency, or facility, whether incorporated or not, which either primarily or incidentally provides fulltime care for children under 17 years of age outside of their own homes, subject to such exceptions as may be provided in rules and regulations of the state board of human resources, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3, as amended. 
Dining area means an interior or exterior (such as porch, patio or courtyard) area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means any person who employs the services of an individual person. 
Enclosed means closed in by a roof and at least three sides, with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. It includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies when they are in an area that is enclosed as defined herein. 
Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term "establishment" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Automobile dealerships, furniture showrooms or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; 
(2)  Grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; 
(3)  Service stations, stores or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; 
(4)  Barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; 
(5)  Video arcade, pool hall and other amusement centers; 
(6)  Offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, and architectural services; 
(7)  Banks, savings and loan offices and other financial establishments; 
(8)  Hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public; and 
(9)  Restaurants and cafeterias. 
Freestanding bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and cabarets. 
Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1(2), as amended. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home means any longterm custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
Personal care home. 
(1)  The term "personal care home" means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, nonrelated persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication and provision of transient medical care. Personal care homes shall also mean residential care facilities for the elderly. 
(2)  The term "personal care home" does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care facility, an adult day care facility or a health care facility. The dining area of a restaurant shall be treated as a place of employment under this article. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, public transit, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, elevators, service lines, service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational facilities, recreational facilities, health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, arenas, meeting rooms, repair shops, automobile dealerships, convention halls, bowling facilities, polling places and bingo games. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall be considered a public place. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care facility, an adult day care facility or a health care facility. 
Restaurant. 
(1)  The term "restaurant" means any establishment or area which is primarily devoted to the serving of food to the public or guests and which contains a dining area. The term shall include any dining area located within a health care, educational or child care facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as restaurants under this article. 
(2)  The term "restaurant" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a freestanding bar area as defined in this section. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 3) 
Sec. 24-67. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $75.00 for a second violation within one year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 12) 
Sec. 24-68. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts the findings of the county that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and public and private places of employment; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 24-69. - Other applicable laws; disclaimer. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the city, its officers nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this article caused injury. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 13) 
Sec. 24-70. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places and places of employment within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 4) 
Sec. 24-71. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to city property. 
This article shall apply to all enclosed facilities including buildings and vehicles owned or operated by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 5) 
Sec. 24-72. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking may occur outdoors but no less than 20 feet from any entrance to any public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 6) 
Sec. 24-73. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Freestanding bar areas; 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets and adult motion picture theaters, as defined by this Code; 
(4)  Private residences, including private residences which may serve as an office workplace, except if used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility; 
(5)  Any property owned or leased by counties, the state or the federal government; 
(6)  Designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels rented by guests, provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent; and 
(7)  Outdoor areas of places of employment, except where an owner or employer declares that the outdoor area is a smokefree environment, as provided in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this article may declare that the entire establishment is a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 7) 
Sec. 24-74. - Employer's responsibility. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places and places of employment, but employers are not required to make expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. 
(b)  Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the city is encouraged to adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this article. 
(c)  The written smoking policy should be provided to all employees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 8) 
Sec. 24-75. - Posting of signs and notification. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance into a public place and place of employment a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 9) 
Sec. 24-76. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any police officer, as defined by state law, or city code enforcement officer may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the chief of police or designee or the city code enforcement. 
(c)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons whom they witness violate this article of the appropriate provisions, and request compliance. In the event persons violating this article refuse to comply with this article after being informed by such owner, operator or manager, the person smoking, and not the owner, operator or manager, shall be subject to an action for violation of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 10) 
Sec. 24-77. - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or customer because such employee, applicant or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment as afforded by this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 6, § 11) 
Secs. 24-78—24-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 24-98. - Unauthorized persons entering school buildings. 
No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session, or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions, who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and been identified to the principal or the principal's agent and received written permission to remain on the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 1) 
Sec. 24-99. - Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings when requested to leave. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school or on surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or designated agent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 2) 
Sec. 24-100. - Creating a disturbance at schools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds lawfully used for school activities while such recreational areas are in use or other activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 3) 
Sec. 24-101. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person or upon the property in his immediate possession. 
Ask, beg or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage or the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner set forth in subsections (d)(1) or (2) of this section or in any of the locations set forth in subsections (c)(1) through (8) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)  Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property, if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any persons who are waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(d)  Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  By accosting another; or 
(2)  By forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(e)  Who may press charges. Persons who may press charges under this section include not only the victim of the prohibited solicitation, but also any person who witnesses such conduct, including, but not limited to, police officers, security officers, hotel personnel and bystanders. Evidence to support conviction for violation of this section may include, but is not limited to, the testimony of such witnesses, videotape evidence of the violation and/or other admissible evidence. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 4) 
Sec. 24-102. - Treasure hunts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Treasure hunts means advertising campaigns conducted for the purpose of promoting the sale of any merchandise, commodity or service of any business or profession conducted for private or corporate gain, whereby some article, thing or token is hidden within the corporate limits of the city and clues as to the location of such article, thing or token is given by any form of advertising, whether by newspaper, radio or television or in any other manner, but shall not include private social parties involving no element of commerce or gain. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or aid and abet in the conducting of any treasure hunt, as defined in this section, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 5) 
Sec. 24-103. - Moving household goods at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or transport household goods and furnishings from one place of residence to another between the hours of sunset and sunrise without first having obtained a permit to do so from the police chief. All applications for permits shall be filed more than 24 hours prior to the time of actual moving. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 6) 
Sec. 24-104. - False representations to police or any city department. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or in behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file orally or in writing any false representations of fact to any police officer of the city or to any department of the city government. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 7) 
Sec. 24-105. - Public urination or defecation. 
It shall be unlawful to defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 8) 
Sec. 24-106. - Residential picketing. 
(a)  The term "picket" or "picketing" shall refer to the following types of activity: 
(1)  Patrolling or stationing oneself at a residence, bearing some insignia or sign designed to persuade or protest; 
(2)  Staging a public or private protest of any kind; 
(3)  Obstructing passage to or from a residence; or 
(4)  Promoting a strike or a boycott at an individual residence. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to picket or engage in picketing upon, before or about the private residence or home of any individual. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 9) 
Sec. 24-107. - Restrictions on outdoor water use. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The mayor and council of the city have determined that as situations arise which require conservation of outdoor water use, as mandated by rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division as well as state law, the city shall preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through enforcement of this section. 
(b)  State mandated requirement. 
(1)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  Paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not create any limitation, unless otherwise provided in subsection (c), upon the following outdoor water uses: 
a.  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
b.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city regulations and state guidelines; 
c.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable DeKalb County Board of Health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
d.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
e.  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
f.  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
g.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
h.  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
i.  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
j.  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
k.  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
l.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
m.  Hydroseeding. 
(c)  Adoption of additional restrictions. The city hereby adopts by reference the outdoor water use rules mandated by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division (EPD) from time to time, as the same are modified by the county water system (the EPD/DeKalb County Restrictions). A copy of the current EPD/DeKalb County Restrictions is incorporated herein, and a current copy of the same as modified shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any violation of the EPD/DeKalb County Restrictions in effect from time to time shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. Every city police officer, firefighter and code enforcement officer shall be authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this section through the issuance of noncriminal or criminal citations. Such officers shall have the authority to enter property for the purpose of inspection for compliance. A record of each citation shall be maintained. If personal contact is made with the violator, the officer shall require immediate compliance. 
(e)  Civil penalties and fines. With the exception of any violation of subsection (b), any person or entity accused of violating any provision of this section shall, with respect to the first violation, be provided with a written warning. Any person accused of violating any provision of this section for a second time shall be issued a noncriminal citation requiring the payment of a civil penalty to the city in the amount of $250.00. For a third violation of this section, a violator shall be issued a noncriminal citation requiring a payment of a civil penalty of $500.00 to the city. All penalties are due and payable on or before ten days following the date of the citation. 
(f)  Appeals. Any alleged violator may appeal a civil citation to the city manager within the ten-day period for the payment of the penalty. All such appeals shall be in writing and shall state the basis for the appeal. If a timely appeal is filed, the penalty shall be stayed until a determination is made by the city manager. If the city manager determines that a violation has not occurred or that a reasonable hardship exists justifying the waiver or reduction of the penalty, the city manager may reduce or waive the penalty. If any penalty is not paid or appealed within ten days of the date of the citation, or paid within three days after the denial of an appeal by the city manager, the violator shall be issued a criminal citation requiring an appearance in municipal court. 
(g)  Criminal penalties and fines. A criminal violation of this section shall constitute an ordinance violation, and shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-6. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 10; Ord. No. 2010-10-40, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 24-108. - Hospitals and doctors to make certain reports to police. 
All hospitals, doctors and pharmacists in the city shall immediately report to the police department the name and nature of the case of any person brought under its or his care who is suffering from wounds of any description inflicted by a firearm, knife or other weapon or instrument; any unidentified person; and any person who is the victim of an accident or who might come under its or his care and whose case is of a suspicious nature. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 11) 
Sec. 24-109. - Fortunetelling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other kindred practices, businesses or professions where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services. This section does not apply to astrology. 
Sec. 24-110. - Restrictions on audible equipment in meetings of the city council and at sessions of the municipal court. 
(a)  The use of cellular phones, pagers and beepers during any meeting of the city council or any committee thereof is prohibited. All persons attending any such meeting shall cause any pager, beeper, cellular phone or any other type of communicating device or other noise-emitting equipment to be turned off or to the silent or vibrating mode before entering the meeting. 
(b)  The use of cellular phones, pagers and beepers during any session of the city municipal court is prohibited. All persons attending any such court session shall cause any pager, beeper, cellular phone or any other type of communicating device or other noise-emitting equipment to be turned off or to the silent or vibrating mode before entering the courtroom. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 7, § 13) 
Secs. 24-111—24-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC TRANSIT 

Sec. 24-134. - Smoking and drinking prohibited; evasion of payment of fare prohibited. 
(a)  Smoking and drinking prohibited on MARTA buses, trains, rail cars and paid areas. It shall be unlawful for occupants of Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) buses, trains or rail cars to smoke tobacco or consume alcoholic beverages while such buses, trains or rail cars are transporting passengers within the corporate limits of the city or within paid areas adjacent thereto. Charter bus service is excluded from these restrictions. 
(b)  Evading payment of fare. It shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the city for any person to evade or attempt to evade payment of the fare for transportation service upon the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) rapid rail system or public transit bus. As used in this section, the term "evasion of payment of fare" shall include the following acts, activities or conduct: 
(1)  Entry into a paid area or upon a rapid rail car of public transit bus without payment of the fare charged for transportation service; 
(2)  Misuse of a transfer, Breeze Card, pass, ticket, token or other evidence of payment or prepayment of a fare issued by the MARTA with the intent to avoid or to assist another in avoiding payment of the fare charged for transportation service; 
(3)  Use or attempted use of a signed MARTA Breeze Card for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service by a person who is not the person whose signature appears on the Breeze Card. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 8, § 1) 
Sec. 24-135. - Sale or possession of goods containing or using the unauthorized name or seal of other persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the name or seal of any other person incidental to the sale, display or use of goods which has not been authorized by the lawful owner thereof for the purpose of deceiving the public who knows, or should have known, that such use is unauthorized. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 8, § 2) 
Sec. 24-136. - Certain acts prohibited in transit. 
(a)  A person who commits or attempts to commit any of the following acts in a public transit bus, a rapid rail car, or a rapid rail station or intermodal bus station shall be guilty of an offense: 
(1)  Spits, defecates or urinates; 
(2)  Discards litter, except into receptacles designated for that purpose; 
(3)  Smokes tobacco in any form; 
(4)  Consumes food or beverage or possesses any open food or beverage container, provided that this subsection shall not apply to an operator of a public transit bus at an authorized layover point or to a person providing food or beverage to any child under age five; 
(5)  Plays any radio, cassette, cartridge or tape player or similar device unless such device is connected to an earphone that limits the sound to the hearing of the individual user; 
(6)  Carries or possesses any explosives, acids, other dangerous articles or live animal, except for the following: 
a.  A guide dog or service dog as described in O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1, provided that such guide dog or service dog is accompanied by a physically disabled person, blind person, person with visual disabilities, deaf person or a person who is responsible for training a guide dog or service dog; and 
b.  Small pets confined to rigid pet carriers with locks or latches; 
(7)  Obstructs, hinders, interferes with or otherwise disrupts or disturbs the operation, operator or passengers of a public transit bus or rapid rail car; pushes other persons; uses loud or profane language; or otherwise disturbs any other person on such public transit facilities; 
(8)  Boards any public transit bus through the rear exit door, unless so directed by an employee or agent of the carrier; 
(9)  Remains aboard any public transit bus or rapid rail car after such vehicle has completed its scheduled route and passengers have been advised to exit the vehicle, or remains aboard any public transit bus or rapid rail car after been warned and after such vehicle has entered a garage or other restricted area not open to the public; 
(10)  Enters, exits or passes through any emergency door of any rapid rail car or public transit bus in the absence of a bona fide emergency; or 
(11)  Enters the operator's cab or driver's seat of any rapid rail car or public transit bus in the absence of a bona fide emergency. 
(b)  Employees of a public transportation authority or carrier while at work performing the duties of their employment shall be exempted from the restriction of subsections (a)(8) through (11) of this section. 
(c)  A person convicted of a first offense of violating subsection (a) or this section, or any portion thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00 for the first offense and a jail sentence of not more than ten days. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, a person shall be punished by a fine or not less than $100.00 and not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 8, § 3) 
Sec. 24-137. - Fare evasion. 
A person who commits or attempts to commit any of the following acts shall be guilty of an offense: 
(1)  Sells, makes, or possesses any coin, note, token, transfer, transaction card or similar article which has been altered from its original condition contrary to its intended use to enter or gain entry into or on any bus, rail vehicle or station; 
(2)  Sells or exchanges any token, transfer, transaction card, ticket, fare medium or similar article used or to be used as payment for entry into or on any bus, rail vehicle or terminal without the express consent of the public transit agency owning or operating such vehicles or stations; 
(3)  Offers entry or provides entry into or on any bus, rapid rail car or station to any person without the payment of the proper fare to the public transit agency owning or operating such vehicles or stations; 
(4)  Gains entry into or on any bus, rapid rail car or station without payment of the proper fare to the public transit agency owning or operating such vehicles or stations; or 
(5)  Gains entry into or on any bus, rapid rail car or station through the use of a Breeze Card, transaction card or other similar fare media which is the property of another person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 8, § 4) 
Sec. 24-138. - Parking on public transit property. 
(a)  In all parking lots, parking decks and other such facilities owned or operated by any public transit authority or established for the exclusive purpose of providing parking for passengers of rapid rail or public transit buses, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle other than in marked spaces designed for that purpose; 
(2)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle on any yellow curb; 
(3)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle in any location which results in impeding ingress and egress to and from said facility or which results in impeding the free passage of any other vehicle; 
(4)  Leave any vehicle unattended in areas designated as "kiss-ride" or designated as "attended vehicles only"; 
(5)  Stop, stand or park any taxicab or other vehicle for hire, whether attended or unattended, in any area not specifically designated for such vehicles; 
(6)  Stop, stand or park any vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, except in areas specifically designated for that use, such as "kiss-ride" or "passenger dropoff" areas; 
(7)  Stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period in excess of 24 hours unless such parking area is designated "overnight" or "longterm" parking; 
(8)  Stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose other than to board the rapid rail car or public transit bus serving such parking lot; or 
(9)  Create or maintain any fire or flame, including fires or flames for cooking or grilling, or to fail to extinguish said fire or flame and to remove from such public transit parking facility all debris and residue associated with the creation and maintenance of said fire or flame. 
(b)  Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $250.00. Such offense may be cited by the issuance of a written citation which shall be left on the violator's vehicle and which shall contain, at a minimum: 
(1)  The nature of the violation; 
(2)  The amount of the fine which will be levied for such violation; 
(3)  That the cited individual has the right to contest the citation and be given an opportunity to be heard; 
(4)  The location of the court in which the cited individual must appear to contest same; and 
(5)  The location at which fines may be paid. 
(c)  The operator of said vehicle shall also be subject to citation by personal delivery of said citation. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the enforcement of any other provision of state or municipal law which may be applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 16, art. 8, § 5) 
Secs. 24-139—24-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 24-150. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property, and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the citizens of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-151. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-152. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-153. - Definitions. 
Litter shall mean any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public and private property, for the purposes of this article, shall mean the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-154. - Prohibition against littering in public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a proper receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-155. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-156. - Construction site operators. 
Construction site operators shall control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse water quality impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05-03, § 1, 5-27-2014) 
Sec. 24-157. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection 1 above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city or the municipal court; and 
(3)  Discretionary penalty. 
a.  In the sound and reasonable discretion of the municipal court judge, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound and reasonable discretion of the municipal court judge, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by the evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-05-03, § 1, 5-27-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-05-03, adopted May 27, 2014, renumbered former §§ 24-156 and 24-157 as §§ 24-157 and 24-158. 
Sec. 24-158. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09-33, § 1, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-05-03, § 1, 5-27-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 24-157. 
Secs. 24-159—24-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 24-180. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm owners and alarm businesses to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms and nuisance alarms. The City of Dunwoody finds that excessive false alarms unduly burden the Dunwoody Police Department and wastes limited public safety resources. 
(b)  This article governs alarm systems intended to summon police personnel, and requires registration, assessment of fees for excessive false alarms and nuisance alarms, provides procedures for repeat offenders, provides for the severability of the parts hereof if declared invalid, and provides an effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm activation report means a document issued by the enforcement official indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of valid incident, a nuisance alarm, or a false alarm. 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the City of Dunwoody to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administers the provisions of this article. Said alarm administrator may be a vendor contracted by the city to administer the provisions of this article. 
Alarm business/company means any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity that is appropriately licensed in the state/jurisdiction and installs, causes to be installed, permits to be installed, alters, maintains, repairs, replaces or services any alarm system. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the City of Dunwoody allowing the operation of an alarm system within the City of Dunwoody. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual; and/or silent generated by an alarm system, to which the Dunwoody Police Department is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which a Dunwoody Police Department will be requested to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles, domestic violence alarm, local alarms or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a pre-recorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the emergency communications system requesting police dispatch. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the emergency communications center that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring public safety response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to the Dunwoody Police Department arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
Emergency communications center means the ChatComm Emergency Communications (911) Center. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon police personnel which occurs as a result of mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, unless the request for response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before the Dunwoody Police Department arrives at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Dunwoody Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed, occurred or attempted in or on the premises, which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm, which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, to test the system. 
Fee means the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the City of Dunwoody authorized pursuant to this article and separate resolution, to defray the expenses of responding to a false alarm. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Monitored system means the process by which an alarm business receives signals from an alarm system and notifies emergency forces. 
Owner means any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises. 
Premises means any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures which serve as dwelling units such as single-family, multifamily or any other area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose, wherein an alarm system is installed. 
Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued. 
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction". 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether a burglar alarm signal is valid before requesting the Dunwoody Police for dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall require, at a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-182. - Alarm permits. 
(a)  Permit required. Effective January 1, 2013, no alarm system shall be used unless the alarm user first obtains a permit for such alarm system from the City of Dunwoody. There will be a fee charged for the permit. The permit fee shall be set by the City Council of Dunwoody by separate resolution. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. 
(b)  Registration. Each alarm user has the duty to obtain and complete a permit application on a form provided by the City of Dunwoody in accordance with adopted codes. The registration form shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name(s), address of the premises, mailing address (if different from the address of the premises), business and home telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the premises wherein the alarm system is installed; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two persons who can be notified, in the event of the activation of the alarm system, who shall be capable of responding to the premises within 30 minutes, and who are authorized to enter the premises to ascertain the status thereof; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business which has contracted to service the alarm system and proof of proper state licensing/registration, if required. Proof of proper state licensing may be a valid state licensing number; 
(4)  The date the registration is signed or the alarm system is placed in operation for any reason; and 
(5)  Any other documentation that is required by adopted codes. 
(c)  Non-transferability; new registration required. Alarm permits are not transferable. Upon transfer of the possession of premises at which an alarm system is maintained, the new alarm user shall register for an alarm permit within 15 days of obtaining possession of the property. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. When information required on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the City of Dunwoody within 15 days of the change. The owner shall be required to update registration information whenever there is a change in the alarm company/business responsible for maintaining, servicing, and/or monitoring the alarm system. In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders will receive, from the city, a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the city within 15 days. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-183. - Duties of the alarm user/owner. 
An alarm user/owner shall be required to: 
(1)  Register and obtain an alarm permit; 
(2)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes upon notification of the need to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system; to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises; 
(4)  Ensure that an alarm is not manually activated by the alarm user or any other person for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; 
(5)  Upon obtaining a permit number, provide that number to the alarm company; 
(6)  Obtain a new permit if there is a change of address or ownership of a business or residence or if there is updated information. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-184. - Duties of the alarm company. 
An alarm company shall be required to: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain required state and local license(s) and/or permits; 
(2)  Notify the City of Dunwoody Alarm Administrator of the existence of an alarm system prior to the alarm system being put into operation; 
(3)  Provide the owner with notice of the existence of this article, a registration form and a copy of the alarm system operation instructions in accordance with adopted codes, and the manufacturer's instructions; 
(4)  Maintain current contact information, including user permit numbers, which shall be provided to the emergency communications center at the time of a request for public safety response; 
(5)  Ninety days after the effective date of this article alarm companies will be required to use control panels meeting Security Industry Association (SIA) Control Panel Standard CP-01 on all new installations; 
(6)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide verbal and written instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user and provide written information on how to obtain service from the alarm company; 
(7)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
a.  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, EXCEPT in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. The numbers dialed shall be provided to the emergency communications center call taker. 
b.  Communicate a cancellation to the emergency communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
c.  Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm. 
d.  Provide an electronic list quarterly of all monitored alarm systems in the City of Dunwoody in a format designated by the alarm administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-185. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning police personnel when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the emergency communications center or the Dunwoody Police Department. 
(d)  An alarm company shall provide the permit number for the alarm system that produced the alarm signal at the time the alarm company notifies the emergency communications center of an alarm signal to facilitate dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-186. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  The police officer who responds to said premises shall serve the owner or authorized representative with an alarm activation report either in person or by affixing the report to the main entrance if no owner or authorized representative is on the scene. The alarm activation report will include the findings of the responding officer as to the validity of the alarm activation. 
(b)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarms within a permit year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for false alarms within a permit year may be assessed against an alarm user by separate resolution. 
(c)  Other civil penalties. Violations of other provisions of this article will be enforced through the assessment of civil penalties set by separate resolution. 
(d)  Payment of civil penalties. Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
(e)  Cause of verified response. The failure of an alarm user to make payment of any civil penalties assessed under this article within 30 days from the date of the invoice will be cause for the Dunwoody Police Department to only respond to alarm calls at that location when the alarm has been verifiably set off due to an actual crime. Verified response does not include response to panic, fire or hold up alarms. All 9-1-1 and other calls to that location will be responded to normally by the Dunwoody Police Department. All alarms will be responded to normally once the alarm user's payment has been received. 
(f)  Noncriminal (civil) violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be civil in nature and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. 
(g)  Anyone convicted of falsifying reports as required under this article is subject to maximum penalty as established by state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-187. - Alarm user awareness class. 
(a)  Alarm user awareness class. The City of Dunwoody may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. 
(b)  Alarm user awareness class in lieu of payment. An alarm user may have the option of attending an alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying one prescribed civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-188. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the chief of police within ten days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions. The written notice of appeal shall contain the cause for the appeal and any other pertinent information relevant to the case. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. The chief of police shall designate a hearing officer from the Dunwoody Police to hear the appeal. The hearing officer shall render a decision within five business days and give written notification of his/her decision. The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the chief of police by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the decision of the hearing officer. The chief of police shall have the final decision in this matter. The hearing officer's decision and the decision of the chief are subject to review by the courts by proceedings in the nature of a petition for writ of certiorari pursuant to Georgia law. 
(b)  Appeal standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 24-189. - Confidentiality, immunity and severability. 
(a)  Confidentiality. To the extent allowed by law, information contained and gathered through the alarm registration process will be held in confidence by the City of Dunwoody. 
(b)  Government immunity. Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Dunwoody Police Department response may be influenced by factors such as: The availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(c)  Severability. The provisions of this article are severable. If a court determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Chapter 25 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means intoxicating beverage, malt beverage, wine or any other beverage containing any alcohol whatsoever. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Hobby rocket means a small rocket constructed of paper, wood, plastic and other lightweight material that is able to be launched by anybody, to generally low altitudes and recovered by a variety of means. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material whether natural or artificial. 
Recreation facilities means all recreation areas in parks, including land, buildings, lakes, swimming pools, sports fields, cemeteries, and all other property and buildings owned, leased, or managed by the city, the city parks and recreation department, the designated agents or departments of the city or the city parks and recreation department, and including all recreation areas and parks in the city owned by the United States government. 
Vehicle means any motor-driven equipment, such as an automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, sled, go-cart, scooter, skateboard, ATV, child's toy vehicle, or Segway. 
Weapon means firearm, rifle, pistol, revolver, paintball gun, or any weapon designed or intended to propel a shot, bullet, or other missile of any kind, or any device capable of discharging a projectile by air, spirit, gas or explosive, or any explosive substance or harmful solid, liquid and gaseous substance, or any spear, arrow, bow and arrow, slingshot, crossbow, spear or spear gun, or any dirk, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, or any other knife, straight-edged razor, spring stick, metal knuckles, blackjack, any bat unless otherwise used in a sporting event, club or other bludgeon-type weapon, or any flailing instrument or any disk which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, or any weapon of like kind, and any stun gun, taser or similar device. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
This chapter shall be enforced by any authorized law or code enforcement officer of the city. Where there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, the law or code enforcement officer in his discretion may issue a citation, warning and/or order the person to leave the park or recreation area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be penalized pursuant to section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-4. - Parks and recreation director; powers and duties. 
The director of parks and recreation or employees under the direction of the director shall: 
(1)  Establish, conduct, and maintain a recreation system for the city in such a way as to employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner; 
(2)  Provide for, conduct, and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city; 
(3)  Recommend the setting aside, leasing or acquisition of lands or buildings within the city limits for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers or for other recreational purposes, and to provide for the maintenance and improvement of these areas; 
(4)  Cooperate with the local school board in the establishment, conduct and maintenance of a recreation system; 
(5)  Otherwise assist in the operation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Secs. 25-5—25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF RECREATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 25-26. - Littering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountain, pond, lake, swimming pool, stream or other body of water in any recreation facility, except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the recreation facility. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the recreation facility by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. It shall be unlawful to take into, carry through, or put into a recreation facility, any litter generated outside the recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-27. - Noises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to whistle, hiss or holler at another person in a boisterous, unbecoming or erring manner or make any loud noises that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, engage in any noise dispute or conversation that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, or display, play or operate any sound amplification device including radios, television sets, public address systems, musical instruments, CD players and the like in such a way which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of a reasonable person of ordinary sensibility in a recreation facility. Amplified sound devices used during a special event or rental event are allowed pursuant to a written permit by the director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-28. - Personal conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, or engage in any activity that could cause injury to other persons while on or in connection with a recreation facility. No person shall upon or in connection with a recreation facility by act or speech willfully or unreasonably hinder, interrupt or interfere with any duly permitted activity or unreasonably or willfully intrude on any areas or into the structures designated for the use of a certain person or persons to the exclusion of others by written permit of the director. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-29. - Fires restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in a recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked by signs or defined with fire rings or grills placed by or under the direction of the director or by written permit for propane gas or other grills by the director or the director's agent. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-30. - Smoking prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to smoke in any recreational facility, whether indoors or outdoors. For the purposes of this section, smoking shall include cigarettes and other legal and illegal substances, any controlled substances, and smoking in any manner, including any pipes and materials, whether organic or inorganic, utilized for lighting and inhaling thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-31. - Damaging or removal of any park property or vegetation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, graffiti, harm or damage any recreation facility buildings, wildlife, property, equipment or signs; or dig up, cut, damage or remove any trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers, rocks, mulch, water, historical artifacts or other vegetation in a recreation facility, unless otherwise designated by the director or designee or published rules. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-32. - Possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, consume or be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage in a recreation facility, other than during a permitted rental event or permitted special event, or as otherwise permitted under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-33. - Vehicles restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motorized or electric vehicle in a recreation facility except upon roadways designated and maintained for vehicular traffic at the speed limit as posted by the director or designee, and except upon walkways when permitted and approved by the director. Law enforcement and city officials whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-34. - Parking restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any motorized or electric vehicle in a recreation facility except in those areas designated by the appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas or in marked parking spaces. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle standing or parked in a recreation facility during hours when the recreation facility is closed, unless otherwise permitted to do so by the director or designee. In such instances, the vehicle may be towed from the recreation facility at the owner's expense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area or facility if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the recreation facility unless authorized by the director or the director's agent. It shall be unlawful for persons to congregate within a parking area of a recreation facility so as to disrupt traffic or other persons, or so as to create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-35. - Commercial activity restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group, organization or combination acting as a unit to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial or charitable activity in a recreation facility unless approved by permit, by the director or the director's agent. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-36. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or vehicle to enter or be within a recreation facility outside of the posted hours of operation unless approved by permit, by the director or unless such person is participating in authorized and scheduled programs, classes, special events or meetings. 
(b)  Park hours of operation are 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., unless posted otherwise as authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-37. - Access to bodies of water regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to launch or travel in watercraft, swim, bathe or wade in any body of water in a recreation facility unless designated for such use and then only in accordance with the rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated and posted at the recreation area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-38. - Animals restricted. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian whose animal is in a recreation facility to have physical control of the animal by leash or lead line at all times unless in designated dog park areas where off leash is permitted or approved, by permit, by the director or the director's agent. It shall be unlawful for any person with an animal, other than service dogs, as necessary, to access areas of a recreation facility which are restricted to animals. It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreation facility to immediately and properly dispose of waste deposited by the animal. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreation facility to have in their possession proof of current registration and a current rabies vaccination for their animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-39. - Pyrotechnics restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, use, set off or attempt to ignite any firecracker, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics, unless approved by written permit by the director or the director's agent. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-40. - Engine powered models, toys and hobby rockets restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to start, fly or use any fuel powered engine, jet-type or electric powered model aircraft, boat or rocket or like powered toy or model, except at those areas designated by the director for such use and then only in accordance with such rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated by the director or the director's designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to launch hobby rockets from a recreation facility unless done so at locations specifically designated for said purpose by the director or otherwise approved by written permit by the director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-41. - Miscellaneous prohibitions. 
(a)  Killing wildlife. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap, shoot, maim or kill any animal or wildlife, or attempt to do any of the above to any animal or wildlife within any of the city recreation facilities without the written permission of the director, unless threatened with bodily injury or death. 
(b)  Polluting water. It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any spring, branch, pond, fountain, or other water owned by or leased to the city within a recreation facility. 
(c)  Posting signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any bill, sign or notice on any tree, building or fixture, or handouts to any other person in any of the recreation facilities unless authorized by the director or designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any paper, books, refuse, or trash of any kind in any of the public parks, except in containers provided for such. 
(d)  Skateboards. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard on any street, lane, way, road and/or any parking lot in any recreation facility in the city, with the exception of pedestrian sidewalks, unless otherwise designated by signage posted by the director or designee or published rules. 
(e)  Urban camping. It shall be unlawful to reside or to store personal property in any recreation facility owned by the city. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city recreation facilities, for living accommodations purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-42. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity in city recreation facilities which requires a permit and/or a ticket without first obtaining such permit and/or a ticket. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-43. - Signage regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post signage in recreation facilities unless it is in conjunction with a permitted rental or permitted special event, or as otherwise approved by the director. Temporary signage will be limited to the numbers established in the City of Dunwoody Administrative Guidelines for Special Event Signage and Advertising or as otherwise approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-44. - Recreation facility restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to enter locked or closed (by field closed signage) any sport field for recreational use unless approved by permit, by the director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 25-45. - Violation of facility regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations relating to the use of the recreation facility as established by the director or by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Chapter 26 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to grant right to erect obstructions in streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; enclosures of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Procedure for changing street names. 
(a)  An application requesting a street name change shall be submitted to the department of community development and contain the following: 
(1)  A written petition bearing signatures of a minimum of 51 percent of the property owners fronting the street. The property owners signing shall also constitute a minimum of 51 percent of the linear street frontage. Linear street frontage shall include frontage of properties that abut both sides of the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Existing and proposed street names. 
(3)  Reason for requesting change. 
(4)  Map showing street or portion of street affected by change. 
(5)  A filing fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The application shall be processed and scheduled for public hearing as follows: 
(1)  The proposed name shall be checked by the city to ensure nonduplication. 
(2)  Public hearings before the planning commission and the city council may coincide with the schedule for rezoning cases. 
(3)  The city shall notify, by regular mail, all owners of record who have property fronting on the affected street, according to tax records available to the department, of the time and place of the public hearings. The postmaster shall also be notified of the hearings by regular mail. 
(4)  Legal notice of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearings shall be published in the official legal organ of the city at least ten days prior to the first public hearing. 
(5)  The application shall be forwarded with the community development department's recommendation to the planning commission for consideration at the scheduled public hearing and then forwarded to the city council with the recommendations of the department of community development and the planning commission. 
(6)  The final decision on the proposed change shall be made by the city council after having held the scheduled public hearing. 
(7)  Petitioners shall bear all costs necessary for street marker changes as determined by the city. 
(c)  Applications affecting the same street or portion thereof shall not be submitted more than once every 24 months. 
(d)  Requests initiated by any department or agency of the city shall be submitted to the department of community development. Review and processing procedures shall be the same as that of a property owner's application, except that the fee and a property owner's petition shall not be required in requests of this nature. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Construction work on major streets, intersections; time restrictions. 
No construction work or maintenance work shall be done within the traffic lanes of major through streets or intersections thereof from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. All underground construction work shall be paved or covered with steel plates during such rush hours or at other times when construction is not being accomplished. A list of the streets is on file with the department of public works. This section does not apply to emergency repairs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Street lighting standards—Adoption. 
(a)  To ensure adequate illumination of the public rights-of-way for the promotion of safety and security for the users of these rights-of-way and adjacent properties, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, 1981 edition, as approved by the American National Standards Institute, is adopted as the standard (except as noted in subsection (b) of this section) for the installation and operation of public rights-of-way lighting in the city. Permanent copies of the standard are on file with the public works department. 
(b)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be as follows: 

 
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth of the average. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 26-4. - Same—Compliance. 
(a)  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the public works department for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the department disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any right-of-way, the same shall be communicated in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the department may be appealed to the city council. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the department, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the department within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval, and it shall be the responsibility of the department to transmit forthwith to the city council all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and to ensure that the appeal is promptly placed upon the agenda of the council for its determination. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
(b)  Roadway or street lighting luminaires or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights, or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets, shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street and shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and that the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the city shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
(c)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. I, § 4) 
Sec. 26-5. - Public transportation carrier transit bus stop shelters. 
Bus stop shelters may be erected on private property, public streets, public property, or public rights-of-way by a public transportation carrier or as authorized by a public transportation carrier, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Plans and specifications for the proposed installations shall be submitted and approved by the city in accordance with city requirements. 
(2)  Bus stop shelters may be erected at any bus stop utilized by a public transportation carrier. 
(3)  The owner or constructor of the bus stop shelter shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure. 
(4)  A bus stop shelter may be erected only at bus stops identified by a public transportation carrier providing service to that location. The public transportation carrier may contract with appropriate subcontractors to provide and maintain bus stop shelters at various locations. 
(5)  Bus stop shelters may carry advertising placed upon them, subject to the following rules or regulations: 
a.  Such advertising matter must be attached to the shelter and not extend out beyond the parameters of the shelter; 
b.  Bus stop shelters carrying advertising matter must be constructed so as not to obstruct vision triangles at intersecting driveways and rights-of-way; 
c.  Advertising shall not violate ordinances or state law obscenity provisions; 
d.  Advertising shall not contain flashing lights or lights that would interfere with motorists on the roadway; and 
e.  Advertising shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
(6)  A bus stop shelter must conform to the reasonable rules and regulations established under this section, including the following: 
a.  Bus stop shelters should be at least 48 inches from the curb; where no curb or gutter is present, the front of the bus shelter shall be at least ten feet from the edge of the main traveled roadway. 
b.  Bus stop shelters shall permit a clearance of at least 48 inches on pedestrian paths, driveways, sidewalks, drainage structures, etc. 
c.  Sides and/or internal dividers in shelters shall be constructed to provide visibility of waiting passengers to the oncoming traffic flow on the road, highway or street on which the shelter is located; provided, however, one double-faced panel containing advertising may be attached to the end of the shelter farthest from the traffic flow on the side of the street on which the shelter is located. 
d.  Each bus stop shelter shall be properly lighted to ensure public safety and provide complete visibility of the shelter from the abutting roadway. 
e.  Bus stop shelters shall comply with all local, state and federal regulations. 
(7)  On application by a public transportation carrier or a contractor authorized by a public transportation carrier to provide bus stop shelters to a public transportation carrier, a permit shall be issued to build a shelter and allow advertising thereon unless there is adequate reason for denying the permit. 
(8)  Any public transportation carrier which provides more than one bus stop shelter shall make application for a permit to cover each of its various locations. 
(9)  An application for a building permit for construction of a bus shelter shall be submitted and accompanied by the following: 
a.  Authorization and approval of the public transportation carrier and the state department of transportation; 
b.  Plans and specifications for the proposed installation; 
c.  If a bus shelter is to be erected or maintained on property other than the right-of-way of a public road or street, an authorization of the owner of the property. 
(10)  The public transportation carrier shall remove the shelter upon the request of the city upon the city showing that such shelter poses a traffic hazard or an impediment to pedestrian traffic, or other reasonable cause. 
(11)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or part of ordinance prohibiting the construction of bus stop shelters or commercial advertising on public rights-of-way, a bus stop shelter complying with the provisions of this section may be constructed on public rights-of-way and have commercial advertising placed thereon, and the provisions of this section shall control such construction and advertisement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. I, § 5) 
Sec. 26-6. - Permit, franchise fee required prior to installation of poles, pipes, etc., on public roads or alleys. 
(a)  No person shall install, construct, maintain or cause to be installed, constructed or maintained any pipe, main, conduit, cable, wire, pole, tower, traffic or other signal and other equipment, facilities, appliances, receptacles or signs, in, on, along, over or under the public roads or alleys of the city which are a part of the city street or county road system without first obtaining a permit therefor and paying franchise fees hereafter provided; provided, however, that such franchise fees shall not be in excess of those paid by such persons as may be authorized by any federal regulatory agency where applicable. 
(b)  There is assessed a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for the use of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers and public rights-of-way. 
(c)  For each sign and each receptacle on the public right-of-way, excepting those used in connection with the collection and delivery of the United States mail, there is assessed a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. I, § 6) 
Sec. 26-7. - Defacing streets, sidewalks or curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark or otherwise deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any numbers, symbols, or advertising thereon, regardless of the purpose. This section does not apply to public utilities and their agents, Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, and other governmental agencies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. I, § 7) 
Secs. 26-8—26-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 26-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excavation means the removal of earth, rock or other soil materials for the purpose of installing utility facilities, non-single-family residential building foundations, or other similar uses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 26-34. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all excavations made for the purposes of land development, utility installations, building construction or similar activity within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 26-35. - Federal regulations—Adopted. 
Any person making an excavation shall meet the requirements as set forth in the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Regulations for construction, as adopted April 17, 1971, and each amendment thereafter, with the exceptions and amendments included in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. II, § 3) 
Sec. 26-36. - Same—Amendments and exceptions. 
The following amendments and exceptions shall apply to the development requirements adopted by section 26-35: 
(1)  Excavations involved in the construction of a basement or foundation for a single-family residential structure are exempt from all of these requirements, with the exception that any excavation or foundation grading on which construction does not proceed within 30 days shall be fenced, so as to prevent general public entrance to the building site, or filled in. However, an extension may be allowed if justified and if approved by application to the city. 
(2)  The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility of the department having applicable jurisdiction over the type of work involved. 
(3)  Table P-2, the line reading "ten to 15 feet, likely to crack" and the column "Maximum Spacing, Vertical Feet," shall contain the number "4." 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. II, § 4) 
Secs. 26-37—26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING BUILDINGS AND OTHER OVERSIZE LOADS 

Sec. 26-61. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform permitting regulations and procedures for the moving of houses and other oversize loads on city roads, streets and bridges, thereby protecting private property and lives against loss and damage, protecting the public investment in rights-of-way, roadbeds, traffic signs and signalizations and other structures, controlling and regulating the flow of traffic and ensuring the safety of the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 26-62. - Variances. 
The public works department shall be authorized to grant a variance from the requirements of this article, but only where, by reason of the exceptional historical, architectural or social uniqueness or significance of the structure, the strict application of the provisions of this article would work an undue hardship upon the owner of the structure, and provided that the grant of any variance shall not substantially impair the intent and purpose of this article, and further provided that the provisions of this article shall be complied with to the maximum extent possible. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 2) 
Sec. 26-63. - Permit required. 
No person shall move a house or other oversize load on any city road, street or bridge without a permit to do so issued by the public works department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 3) 
Sec. 26-64. - Application. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall make application on the form prescribed by the city. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of the mover/applicant; 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of the owner of the structure; 
(3)  Address of the present location of the structure; 
(4)  Destination of the structure; 
(5)  Name and address of insurance company; 
(6)  Total height, outside width and length of vehicle and load; 
(7)  Certification that the person making application on behalf of the mover has lawful authority to execute such application and that all requirements under this section and sections 26-65 and 26-66 have been met; 
(8)  The proposed date and time of the move; 
(9)  A statement that the mover/applicant agrees to hold the city harmless from all claims or causes of action arising out of any damage to a public road or bridge, to persons, to public or private property caused by a permitted load or vehicle, or its private escort vehicle, and to recompense the city for any expenditures made by the city to repair such damages caused by the permitted vehicle or load. 
(c)  As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the city, when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety, may require the use of a front or rear escort, or both, either or both of which may be a public safety vehicle. 
(d)  All permit applications must be filed at least five days prior to the date of the proposed move and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. If the application is not approved, the fee will be refunded to the applicant, less an administrative processing charge in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 4) 
Sec. 26-65. - Scope limited. 
(a)  Except as authorized under section 26-62, a permit under this article shall not authorize the operation of a vehicle or load with: 
(1)  Total load length exceeding 75 feet; 
(2)  Total load width exceeding 14 feet, including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; or 
(3)  Total height exceeding 13 feet, six inches. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, no vehicle or load shall be operated over any bridge with a posted limit which is less than the total gross weight of the vehicle and its load or less than the total gross weight permitted under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 5) 
Sec. 26-66. - Conditions to issuance. 
In addition to compliance with other conditions imposed under the provisions of this article, any person receiving a permit under this article thereby certifies that such person will comply or has complied (as applicable herein) with the following conditions governing the operation of the permitted vehicle or load: 
(1)  The permittee shall comply with federal and state laws and regulations. 
(2)  The movement of the permitted vehicle or load will take place only on Monday through Thursday, and between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
(3)  The permitted load or vehicle will not be operated over any city street or road other than those described or allowed in the permit. 
(4)  The operator of a permitted vehicle and load shall maintain 50-foot intervals between each vehicle load. In addition, when the normal flow of traffic becomes impeded, such vehicle or load shall move off the traveled portion of the public road until such traffic congestion has been cleared. Normal movement may then be resumed until another traffic congestion occurs. 
(5)  The permittee shall maintain, during the existence of the permit, public liability and property damage insurance in at least the following amounts, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the city from requiring any additional undertaking or security as may be deemed necessary to compensate the city for any injury to any public property therein, including a bridge. 

 
Proof of such liability insurance and other security shall accompany the permit application. 
(6)  The permittee shall ensure that the operator of a leased vehicle carries on such operator's person written proof of the identity of the lessee. 
(7)  The permittee shall not allow the permit to be used other than for the movement by the particular vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(8)  The minimum equipment which shall be used for moving a house is: a tandem truck, one set of tandem dollies in good condition, and one extra skidder or wrecker in good condition and capable of moving the whole load in case of a breakdown. 
(9)  The permittee shall measure the house and, prior to applying for a permit, check the route stated in the permit application to ensure obstacle clearance and necessary places periodically to pull off the road for the purpose of preventing unnecessary traffic congestion. 
(10)  Before moving a house, all masonry shall be removed from a masonry-veneered house. 
(11)  All mailboxes, highway signs and other movable obstacles to the move of the house shall be removed as the house approaches such an obstacle and re-erected immediately after the house passes such obstacle in equal or better condition than prior to removal. 
(12)  The movement shall be confined to the route stated in the application, and in no case shall exceed any straight line distance of 50 miles. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 6) 
Sec. 26-67. - Route approval. 
Prior to the issuance of a moving permit under this article, the transport route proposed by the mover/applicant must be reviewed and approved by the public works department and police department. Unless no other reasonable alternative route exists, only those sections of city streets and roads designated as truck routes by the city shall be used for the moving of such structures. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 7) 
Sec. 26-68. - Revocation, suspension or denial. 
(a)  The public works director shall be authorized to deny, suspend or revoke a permit under this article requested by an applicant or issued to a permittee. Permits may be denied, suspended or revoked for cause, including, but not limited to, any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Repeated past violations by the applicant or permittee, of a relatively minor nature; 
(3)  A single but aggravated violation; 
(4)  A material misrepresentation made by the applicant for a permit; 
(5)  Any other facts indicating that the applicant or permittee is a poor risk with regard to the safety of the traveling public and/or damage to public property. 
(b)  The city shall provide the applicant or permittee written notice of the decision to deny, revoke or suspend the application or permit. Such notice shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall include notice of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 8) 
Sec. 26-69. - Appeals. 
An applicant or permittee under this article shall be entitled to appeal a decision of the public works director denying, suspending or revoking a permit, to the city council or its designated hearing officer, by filing a notice of appeal with the public works department within ten days of the decision appealed from. The city council or its designated hearing officer shall schedule a hearing on the appeal to be held within 30 days of the date the appeal is filed and shall provide the appellant notice of the date of such hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. III, § 9) 
Secs. 26-70—26-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITIES IN CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 26-97. - Purpose; scope; exemption. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish a uniform permitting process for the construction, maintenance, renewal, removal and relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers and other equipment, facilities or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over or under those public roads under the control of the city council, thereby protecting property against blight and depreciation, sustaining the stability of neighborhoods, preserving the city's natural beauty and aesthetics, and protecting the public investment in the rights-of-way, roadbeds and structures. 
(b)  This article is intended to be administered in order to encourage innovative approaches and techniques to achieve effective and compatible use of that area traversed by a utility. The mandatory requirements of this article are minimum requirements. 
(c)  Any city-owned utilities are exempt from this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. IV, § 1) 
Sec. 26-98. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct, maintain, renew, remove or relocate pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers or other equipment, facilities or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over or under those public roads under the control of the city council without having first complied with all city ordinances regulating the use of city rights-of-way and without having first applied for and received a utility permit from the public works department allowing such utility usage of the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Where the city determines that the utility permit requests shall constitute a major utility action, as defined in subsection (d) of this section, the city may require the applicant to include in the application request a detailed statement on: 
(1)  The environmental impact of the proposed action, including the impact upon property values; 
(2)  Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided if the proposal is implemented; 
(3)  Alternatives to the proposed action; 
(4)  The relationship between local short-term uses of the environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity; 
(5)  Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be involved if the proposed action should be approved. 
(c)  Prior to submitting the environmental statement, the utilities shall consult with and obtain the comments of the general public affected, and all local, state and federal agencies which have jurisdiction by law or special expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved. 
(d)  In this section, the term "major utility action" means any permit request involving the installation, construction, relocation or replacement of new transmission, distribution or trunk lines, or the installation or construction of a new substation, or the upgrading of a substation, where such action would require additional land acquisition. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. IV, § 2) 
Sec. 26-99. - Design standards. 
(a)  The type and size of utility facilities and the manner and extent to which they are constructed can materially alter the scenic quality, appearance and view of adjacent areas. Therefore: 
(1)  New installations of major utility facilities shall be avoided in established residential areas, scenic strips, public parks and recreation areas, schools and historical sites. 
(2)  In general, new aerial installations of communication and electrical power lines shall be located on major thoroughfares. Utility routes shall be designed to bypass existing developed residential areas and areas containing underground electrical and/or communication utilities. Where alternate routes are not available, the utility may be required to construct underground. 
(b)  Ground-mounted utility facilities shall be of a design compatible with the scenic quality of the property traversed. 
(c)  The utility shall be totally responsible for the design and construction of the project. 
(d)  The utility shall be responsible for providing adequate safety measures for the public during installation, maintenance and operation of its facility. 
(e)  Every installation or relocation shall be considered as an individual installation and shall stand on its own merits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. IV, § 3) 
Sec. 26-100. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Plans and specifications for major utility installation, construction, relocation or replacement shall be submitted to the public works department and shall show in sufficient detail all pertinent data and features of the construction. 
(b)  All utility action permitted under the provisions of this article shall conform with the current applicable sections of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, the Georgia Department of Transportation Policy for Accommodation of Utilities, the National Electrical Safety Code, and the American National Standards Institute Standard Code for Pressure Piping. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. IV, § 4) 
Secs. 26-101—26-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALK DISTRICTS 

Sec. 26-129. - Program established. 
There is established a residential sidewalk district program whereby eligible residential areas may petition the city to install sidewalks within their neighborhood. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. V, § 1) 
Sec. 26-130. - Sidewalk district requirements. 
(a)  A sidewalk district can only be established in residentially zoned districts where the streets or roads within the proposed sidewalk district have been accepted by the city for perpetual maintenance. 
(b)  Sidewalk construction must begin and end at existing sidewalks or public road intersections, or immediately across from public road intersections, but may extend past a public road intersection to complete the frontage adjoining the proposed sidewalk construction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. V, § 2) 
Sec. 26-131. - Application and petition. 
(a)  Application. Anyone who desires to have a sidewalk district created shall submit an application to the director of public works or designee. Said application shall be made on forms made available by the director of public works and shall at a minimum contain a plat showing the area of the proposed sidewalk district and the location of the proposed sidewalks. 
(b)  Estimate of costs. 
(1)  Based upon the plat submitted with the application, the director of public works or designee shall prepare an estimate of the total project cost and pro rata cost per property owner for the creation of the proposed sidewalk district, including the costs for the design, contracting, acquisition of rights-of-way, and inspection for sidewalk construction funded by the sidewalk district. The director of public works' estimate may not establish a limit on the amount of the project costs and may not limit the amount that may be assessed against the property owners. 
(2)  If the application is incomplete or does not contain information sufficient for the director of public works to prepare the estimate, then the director of public works shall return the application to the applicant within 30 days of receipt, indicating the additional information required. Otherwise, the director of public works shall prepare the estimate of costs and send the estimate to the applicant within 90 days of receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  Petition. 
(1)  Circulation. The applicant shall be responsible for gaining the required signatures on a sidewalk district petition from property owners within the proposed sidewalk district. 
(2)  Contents. The petition shall contain the name, property address within the proposed sidewalk district, mailing address, and phone number of all property owners who sign the petition. If the property owner does not reside at the property within the sidewalk district, then the petition shall contain both the property address within the district and the property owner's actual address outside the district. 
(3)  Plat. The petition shall have attached to it a copy of the plat submitted to the director of public works showing the boundaries of the proposed sidewalk district and a copy of the director of public works' estimate of the total project cost and the pro rata cost per property owner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. V, § 3) 
Sec. 26-132. - Procedure. 
(a)  Return of petition. The petition for creation of the proposed sidewalk district must be returned to the director of public works within 90 days after the director of public works notifies the applicant that the preparation of the estimate of costs and pro rata costs for the project is complete; however, the director of public works has the discretion, for good cause shown, to extend the time for the return of the petition an additional 30 days, for a total of 120 days, when a request for such extension is made by the applicant to the director of public works before the expiration of the original 90-day period. 
(b)  Signatures. No assessment shall be made against abutting property unless the same is consented to in writing by the owners of 51 percent of the property abutting such improvements. Said consent shall be deemed to have been given if the requisite number of signatures of such abutting property owners is included in the petition requesting the proposed sidewalks and the creation of the assessment district. 
(c)  Notice. Upon the timely receipt of a petition containing the required number of signatures, the director of public works shall cause the matter to be placed upon the city council's public hearing agenda for a hearing on the creation of the proposed sidewalk district. The director of public works or designee shall cause a notice to be published in the city's legal organ or a newspaper of general circulation in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published at least once ten days prior to the date of said hearing, which notice shall give a brief description of the subdivision in which the work is to be done, the nature of the improvements to be made and the beginning and terminus of the road or street upon which such improvements are to be made, and such notice shall set forth the time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  Notification of decision. Within 60 days of a final decision on the petition by the city council, the director of public works or designee shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, each affected property owner of the decision of the city council. If the final decision is an approval of the petition, then the public works director shall notify each affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a good faith estimate of the individual assessment. A final decision means the approval or denial of the petition by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. V, § 4) 
Sec. 26-133. - Funding. 
(a)  Assessment. Each owner of property abutting the sidewalks shall be assessed a share of the cost to be funded by the district, which cost shall be added to the ad valorem property taxes for each owner as provided in this section. No assessment shall be made against abutting property, unless the same is consented to in writing by the owners of 51 percent of the property abutting such improvements. Abutting shall mean adjacent to, contiguous with, or adjoining. 
(b)  Pro rata costs. Each property owner's share of the cost shall be determined as follows: the total cost of the project shall be calculated by the city, and the figure so derived shall be known as the total project cost. The city shall next determine the linear feet of sidewalk that was constructed. The total cost shall then be divided by the total linear feet of sidewalk to derive the cost per foot. Each property owner abutting the sidewalks shall then be assessed an amount that equals the linear feet of street frontage the property owner has, multiplied by the cost per foot. 
(c)  Payment. The sidewalk tax assessment shall be paid by one of two options, as follows: 
(1)  Option one. The assessment may be paid in cash by the property owner within 90 days of the mailing of the assessment by the city. If paid under this option, the assessment will not bear an administrative fee, and no lien shall be recorded against the property. Payment shall be made to the City of Dunwoody and delivered to the public works department. If payment is not made in full within 90 days of the city's initial billing of the assessment, then payment option two shall automatically take effect. Once option two is in effect, the payment via option two shall be the property owner's sole option until all assessment payments are satisfied. 
(2)  Option two. The assessment shall be paid in five equal annual installments. Payment of each such assessment shall be due and payable within 60 days from the mailing by regular mail of a bill from the city's revenue director. In the event option two is selected, the cost of processing, administration, recording the lien, and satisfaction of such lien shall be added to the assessment. 
(d)  Proration. The property owner shall advise any purchaser of its property within the sidewalk district of the assessment. The property owner may conduct a proration of the assessment with the purchaser. The city shall not be responsible for the proration of the assessments between sellers and purchasers, nor shall the city be under any duty to notify any purchaser of the existence or liability for the assessment. 
(e)  Delinquent assessment payment. If the assessment is not paid when due, the assessment shall be collected in the same manner as delinquent ad valorem taxes and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties. 
(f)  Assessment constituting lien against property. The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recorded by the city manager or designee in the lien records of the clerk of the county superior court. 
(g)  Processing and administration fee established. The fee for processing and administration of this option shall be established by the city revenue director and approved by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. V, § 5) 
Secs. 26-134—26-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREETLIGHT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 26-165. - Program established. 
There is established a streetlight district program whereby eligible residential areas may petition the city to authorize installation of streetlights within their neighborhood. The public works department shall create and maintain a policy for establishment of a streetlight district. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. VI, § 1) 
Sec. 26-166. - Council approval. 
Prior to the installation of any streetlights, the city council shall approve by resolution the establishment of each such district, pursuant to the policy created by the public works department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. VI, § 2) 
Secs. 26-167—26-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADOPT-A-SPOT PROGRAM 

Sec. 26-186. - Program established. 
There is established an Adopt-a-Spot Program whereby eligible citizens, businesses, and civic and community groups may apply to the city to adopt a section of the right-of-way of the city roads to plant and maintain landscaping and to provide for litter pickup, and to be recognized for their efforts. The public works department shall create and maintain a policy for the Adopt-a-Spot Program. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. VII, § 1) 
Sec. 26-187. - Fees. 
The city council shall approve by resolution the establishment of any fees required to implement the policy created by the public works department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 23, art. VII, § 2) 
Secs. 26-188—26-212. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EVENTS IN PUBLIC PLACES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-09-13, adopted Sept. 22, 2014, repealed former art. VIII in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former art. VIII, §§ 26-213—26-216, 26-241—26-243, 26-265—26-278, pertained to assemblages in public places, and derived from the compiled ordinances of 2008, ch. 20, art. 1, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 2010-06-22, § 1, adopted June 21, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-09-30, § 1, adopted Sept. 27, 2010; Ord. No. 2011-01-02, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-02-07, § 1, adopted Feb. 28, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-06-20, § 1, adopted June 20, 2011; and Ord. No. 2012-08-10, §§ 1—6, adopted Aug. 27, 2012. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-213. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. The city manager may delegate his authority or be assisted by other employees as required. 
Event means any parade, public assemblage, or special event as defined within this article. 
Organization or group of private persons means a group of three or more persons, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Parade means a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of ten or more vehicles, 20 or more persons, five or more vehicles and ten or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and five or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. Specifically excepted from this definition are funeral processions. 
Producer means any person responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event. An event permit shall be issued only to an individual person. Therefore, if a group, organization, association, or other entity is producing the event, a designated producer shall be named for purposes of the permit, and this individual shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements of this article and other applicable laws. 
Public assemblage means any march, demonstration, picket line, procession, motorcade, rally, or gathering for a common purpose, consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof upon or in the streets, parks, or other public grounds within the city that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of vehicular traffic or that endangers or has the reasonable possibility of endangering the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
Special event means a gathering of people, generally lasting from a few hours to a few days, designed for entertainment, recreation, and/or education. Special events either affect the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks, disrupt the flow of traffic on public streets or sidewalks, or include alcohol service or sales where it is not normally permitted. Events on private property which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not required to obtain an event permit. Common special events in Dunwoody are 5K races and festivals. Filming by a film production company does not require an event permit but does require a filming permit which is handled by a separate process. 
Vendor means any person or persons or entity who engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way as an authorized participant of a permitted event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Secs. 26-217—26-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-239. - Required. 
(a)  Any person or organization planning, producing, or conducting a parade, public assemblage, or special event is required to first obtain a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in the event within the city, unless such permit is prohibited under state law or the event is otherwise protected from this requirement by federal or state law. 
(b)  Every person or organization wishing to sell or serve food, alcohol, and/or merchandise as a component of an event or within 100 yards of the event shall work with the producer of said event but shall not be required to obtain a separate event permit to operate during the event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-240. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates, or fails to comply with, any provision of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-241. - Exceptions. 
This article shall specifically not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Neighborhood parades and block parties, provided activities remain solely within the boundaries of such neighborhood and do not interfere with normal flow of vehicular traffic or such activities have obtained a street closing permit from the city; 
(3)  Private gatherings or activities that take place on city park property that do not significantly affect the customary and ordinary use of the park, such as a birthday party, and do not include any temporary structures; 
(4)  Sporting events; 
(5)  Regularly scheduled events occurring on city park property, including park and recreation facilities, by organizations with on-going agreements with the city if prior notification of events is given to the city in writing within a reasonable period of time prior to the event; 
(6)  School students going to or from classes or participating in properly supervised and sponsored activities; 
(7)  Garage sales, lawn sales, rummage sales or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property; 
(8)  Events on private property which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking; 
(9)  Filming by a film production company; 
(10)  Governmental entities acting within the scope of their functions; and 
(11)  Other activities as provided for by law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-242. - Application. 
(a)  Required. Every person or organization required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit an application to the city manager. 
(b)  Format. The producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for the event on a form prescribed by the city. As part of each application, the city may request the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the producer; 
(2)  Date(s), time(s), and location(s) for the event including proposed routes of travel for non-stationary events, such as races or parades; 
(3)  Schedule and description for activity involved with the event; 
(4)  An approximate number of event participants; vendors; including food, merchandise, and alcohol vendors; and projected attendance; 
(5)  Site plan for the event including all existing and temporary buildings, structures, parking, and points of egress for the site; 
(6)  A description of any sound amplification equipment that will be utilized outdoors in conjunction with the event; 
(7)  A special event sign application and detailed sign schedule specifying all signs to be used both at the event as well as advertising the event in the city. The sign schedule shall detail all sign dimensions, materials, durations, and locations; 
(8)  Description of plans for disposal of waste disposal, recycling collection, and clean-up of the event area after the conclusion of the event; 
(9)  Description of plans for first aid provision; 
(10)  Description of plans for storage and security of event materials, vehicles, and trailers if the event lasts multiple days; 
(11)  Description of plans for providing toilet facilities for event participants; 
(12)  Description of plans for parking that show the special event is not overly disruptive to neighboring businesses and residences; 
(13)  Dimensions of any proposed temporary structures, including but not limited to tents, buildings, or other similar structures; 
(14)  Description of plans to provide notification, in a written form, to neighboring residences and businesses surrounding the hub of the event of the producer's intent to host the event. 
a.  For events without a stationary hub, such as parades or processions without festival areas, this notification requirement may be waived by the city manager; and 
b.  The city manager may modify the method of notification in the case that written notification would be unreasonable because of a large number of businesses and residences. 
(15)  The producer of any event shall sign a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the city, providing the producer shall defend, pay, and save harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents from liability of all personal or property damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from an event and from any and all claims, attorney fees or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the event. The agreement shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. 
(16)  Any additional information which the city manager may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the producer and every partner, officer or director of the organization for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, county, state, or federal government, other than minor traffic violations. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application for an event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Filing. 
(1)  Completed event applications should be submitted to the city manager within a reasonable time prior to the planned event for security purposes, verifications, and arrangements. 
(2)  Special events and parades. An application for a special event or parade permit shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the date the special event or parade is scheduled to take place; provided, however, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the special event or parade. 
(3)  Public assemblages. An application for a public assemblage permit shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the planned public assemblage is scheduled to take place; provided, however, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the public assemblage. 
(e)  If an unforeseen circumstance arises requiring an application to be submitted with less than the reasonable time periods provided, the city manager shall have discretion to determine if an emergency exists and, subject to this article, grant or deny review of such an application in his sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-243. - Procedure for application review. 
(a)  Internal review. Upon receipt of a complete application for a permit, the city manager shall have it reviewed by the city departments, the services of which may be impacted by the event. The following issues shall be considered in reviewing the application: 
(1)  Event location. Given any provided information about the schedule, description of the activity, and projected attendance the city departments will consider if the proposed event location and site plan are adequate. 
(2)  Event type. Should the event be an activity not previously held within the boundaries of the city and not similar in scope or scale to an event previously held within the boundaries of the city, the city manager may bring the event to city council for review and approval. The city council's review and approval shall follow the standards of review of this division. 
(3)  Sound amplification. Given the provided information about the schedule and time of the event, city departments will consider if the proposed use of sound amplification will comply with the noise ordinance. 
(4)  Signage. Given the provided information about temporary signs, city departments will consider if the proposed signs comply with the administrative guidelines for special event signage and advertising. The issuance of an event permit does not preclude the need to obtain special event sign permits and does not guarantee approval of special event sign permits. 
(5)  Waste disposal and recycling collection. Given the provided information about projected event attendance, event activities, and event location, city departments will consider if the plans for waste disposal and recycling collection are adequate. 
(6)  Clean-up. Given the provided information about plans for clean-up after the event area, city departments will consider if the clean-up plans are adequate to clean the event area of rubbish and debris, returning it to its pre-event condition within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the event is to be held on public streets or public right-of-way, the producer shall remove all structures, trash, and debris from the designated area no later than the time stated under the permit for the re-opening of all streets. If the producer fails to clean-up such refuse, clean-up shall be arranged by the city, and the costs incurred for this service shall be charged to the producer. 
(7)  First aid. Given the provided information about projected event attendance and activities, city departments will consider if the plans for first aid provision are adequate. 
(8)  Toilet facilities. Given the provided information about projected event attendance, event location, and activities, city departments will consider if the plans for toilet facilities are adequate. 
(9)  Parking. Given the provided information about projected event attendance, city departments will consider if the plans for parking are adequate. 
(10)  Notification of neighbors. Given the event area, city departments will consider if the producer provided adequate plans to notify neighboring residences and businesses in writing. 
(11)  Alcohol permits. Given the provided information about alcohol sale or service, has the producer (and/or vendor) secured appropriate permits for sale or service of alcohol. 
(12)  Security. Given the provided information, including any plans for overnight storage for multi-day events, city departments will consider if the plans for security of event is adequate. 
(13)  Vehicular traffic flow. Given the provided information and plans for parking, event activities, estimated event attendance, and regular flow of vehicular traffic, city departments will consider if the event will unreasonably disrupt or otherwise obstruct the necessary flow of vehicular traffic around the event area. 
(14)  Crowd and traffic control. Given the provided information about the event activities, location, and estimated event attendance, the police department will consider if the event has an adequate plan to provide crowd and traffic control. 
(15)  Health, safety, and welfare. Given the provided information about the event, the police department will consider if the event will endanger or has the reasonable possibility of endangering the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
The city departments will provide reports to the city manager as to whether or not the provided plans for the event are adequate and if the event will unreasonably disrupt and obstruct the necessary flow of vehicular traffic or endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
(b)  External review. Upon receipt of a complete application for a permit, the city manager shall determine if proposed temporary structures or event elements require review by DeKalb County based on the city's existing service delivery strategy agreement and adopted intergovernmental agreements. 
(c)  City-cosponsored events. The city council may cosponsor an event. City-cosponsored events are events the city council has determined, pursuant to an adopted policy, to be in the general interest to the public and advance the promotion of the community. The city may provide financial and in-kind support to these events. These events must meet the requirements of this division including providing personnel and services deemed necessary and in excess of this level of support as authorized by the city council at the time of their co-sponsorship of the event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-244. - Permit approval and conditions. 
(a)  Consideration. The city manager will consider issuing a permit for an event following the completion of internal review, as described in section 26-243, and any necessary external review. 
(b)  Issuance. 
(1)  The city manager shall issue a permit for an event if the event plans are adequate for the event location, waste disposal and recycling collection, clean-up, first aid, toilet facilities, parking, security, crowd, and traffic control and the event will not unreasonably disrupt or otherwise obstruct the necessary flow of vehicular traffic or endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
(2)  No permit may be issued prior to payment of all applicable fees. 
(3)  No event shall be allowed to exceed six days in any 30-day consecutive period of time. 
(4)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, an event is subject to and must comply with any and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(5)  All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be temporary and shall not vest in the holder any permanent property rights. 
(6)  No Saturday event may begin earlier than 7:00 a.m. or end later than 11:00 p.m. in residentially zoned locations and no event may begin earlier than 7:00 a.m. or end later than 12:00 midnight in commercially zoned locations; 
(7)  No Sunday event may begin earlier than 8:00 a.m. or end later than 11:00 p.m. in residentially zoned locations and no event may begin earlier than 8:00 a.m. or end later than 12:00 midnight in commercially zoned locations; 
(8)  The city hall grounds may not be used for holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, or other event on any weekday prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. or on any Sunday prior to 1:00 p.m. or after 5:00 p.m. 
(9)  Parades, marches, foot races, cycling races, and processions shall follow routes approved pursuant to the application process. Such designated route or routes may be on file with the city manager; 
(10)  Prior to the beginning of the event, the producer shall provide to the city proof of comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of $300,000.00 personal injury per person, $1,000,000.00 maximum, and $100,000.00 property damage against all claims arising from permits issued pursuant to this article. 
a.  For public assemblages, the city manager may waive the requirement for liability insurance if he reasonably finds that it would be a substantial burden to the producer's First Amendment rights and would be significantly prohibitive of the event. 
(c)  Conditions. As part of the permit issuance, the city manager may make conditions to the permit including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  For alternate routes and locations of the event to ameliorate issues of traffic flow and public safety; 
(2)  Providing for the city to close designated streets and intersections to allow use of the public right-of-way for the event during designated hours and days; 
a.  Should state routes be disrupted or obstructed, the producer must obtain permission from the state department of transportation for the closing of state routes. 
(3)  For the employment of off-duty uniformed and P.O.S.T. certified police officers to provide for adequate crowd, traffic control, and/or security; 
(4)  For the employment of off-duty uniformed fire personnel to provide for adequate fire inspection/prevention and/or fire code enforcement; 
(5)  For the employment of off-duty medics who are state certified EMT or paramedics to provide for adequate first aid; 
(6)  For the use shuttles to provide access to additional parking areas outside of comfortable walking distance from the event; 
(7)  For a police vehicle to precede parades, marches, and/or processions; 
(8)  For the event permit, as well as any other permits required in conjunction with the event, to be posted on site during the event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-245. - Fees. 
(a)  Applicability. No producer of any event, except as may otherwise be provided herein, shall be exempt from the payment of the fees and charges required under this article. 
(b)  Fee payment. All fees shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the event permit. If the event is to be held at a public park or park pavilion, the park or park pavilion is not officially reserved until all event-related fees are paid. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application for an event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council, the application fee may be tiered based on factors including the event type, event characteristics, and event duration. 
(d)  Permit fee. Approved events shall be assessed an event permit fee in such amount as to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. At the discretion of the city council, the event fee may be tiered based on factors including the event type, event characteristics, and event duration. Public assemblages shall be exempt from the event permit fee. 
(e)  Sign deposit. A deposit for event signage based on the number of signs to be erected shall be in such amount as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. The deposit is due at the time an event permit is issued and is refundable upon submittal of an affidavit that all signs associated with the event have been removed. Such signs must be removed and such affidavit must be submitted within seven days of the conclusion of the event or the deposit shall be forfeited. 
(f)  Equipment rental fees. 
(1)  Should a city-cosponsored event desire to have use of any equipment owned by the city, such as sound equipment and the like, an additional fee and/or damage deposit, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be paid so as to cover the reasonable cost for use of the equipment, as well as the delivery and return of the items to the city. 
(2)  Should a producer desire to have use of equipment owned by companies providing service to the city, such as barriers, traffic cones, and the like, a producer would need to enter into a private agreement with such company. 
(g)  Park and pavilion rental fees. Should the producer desire to hold their event at a public park or park pavilion, to reserve said facilities, a rental agreement, on a form prescribed by the city, must be remitted to the city and the deposits and rental fees as set from time to time by resolution of the city council must be paid. 
(h)  City support service fees. 
(1)  Should a producer desire to hire city staff to provide support services at their event, such as police officers providing services including security, the fee and time minimums for such services will be in such amount as to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  In no event shall the city require public assemblages to pay for functions such as traffic control and police protection. 
(i)  Alcohol permit fees. The dispensing of alcoholic beverages, by sale or otherwise, shall be allowed as a component of an event provided the producer and/or the alcohol vendor(s) have been duly licensed by the state and the city or another local governing authority and shall further have complied with all provisions of this Code relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages off-premises at an authorized function or event including payment of any and all fees related to the sale or serving of alcohol. 
(j)  Cash bond. A cash bond may be determined to be appropriate by the city manager, and in this event the city manager shall advise the producer of the amount, and this bond shall be remitted to the city before the event permit is issued. Criteria to be considered in determining the appropriateness of requiring a bond shall include the impact of the event on the cost of services to be provided by the city and on the general public health, welfare, or safety of the city. 
(k)  Other fees. The fees required in this article shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other applicable ordinances or regulations. 
(l)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Application fees. 
a.  The producer of any event associated with and benefiting the cause of a charitable organization, recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, may be excused by the city manager from the application fee requirement if, in his reasonable discretion, the event benefits the community at large. 
b.  The producer of any event donating event proceeds to the city may be excused by the city manager from the application fee requirement. 
c.  For events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship, the producer of the event may be excused by the city manager from the application fee requirement. 
(2)  Permit fees. 
a.  The producer of an event donating event proceeds to the city may be excused by the city manager from the permit fee requirement. 
b.  For events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship, the producer of the event may be excused by the city manager from the permit fee requirement. 
(3)  Park and pavilion rental fees. 
a.  The producer of an event donating event proceeds to the city may be excused by the city manager from the park and pavilion rental fee requirement. 
b.  For events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship, the producer of the event may be excused by the city manager from the permit fee requirement. 
(4)  City support service fees. 
a.  All public assemblages shall be exempt from paying for police support services deemed necessary by the chief of police for approved events including but not limited to police support services such as traffic control and police protection. 
b.  Events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship are eligible for cost sharing of city support services such as police department support services. "Signature" and "premier" events must still meet the requirements of this article including providing personnel and services deemed necessary and in excess of this level of support as authorized by the city council at the time of their co-sponsorship of the event. 
(5)  Alcohol licensing fees. A nonprofit civic organization, recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service as demonstrated with a nonprofit authorization letter (Federal Form 501-C), may be excused by the city manager from the administrative application fee for an alcohol license. Such organizations are not exempt from the temporary or annual alcohol permit fees or the permit fees for pouring alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-246. - Liability. 
The city, its officials, employees, and agents shall not incur any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which the permit has been issued. The city, its officials, employees, and agents shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of the right-of-way or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-247. - Permit denial or revocation. 
(a)  Reasons for denial of an event permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The event will unnecessarily disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; 
(2)  The event will interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
(3)  The location of the event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; 
(4)  The event will cause unnecessary disruption of public services which would unreasonably impact the remainder of the city; 
(5)  The application contains incomplete or false information; 
(6)  The producer's plans presented for services required on the application, including but not limited to event location, waste disposal and recycling collection, clean-up, first aid, toilet facilities, parking, security, crowd, and traffic control, are inadequate; 
(7)  The producer has requested the event to occur on a date which the city has already approved another event; 
(8)  The producer fails to comply with any terms required by this article including failing to provide any information that is reasonably requested by the city manager for review due to the type of event; or 
(9)  The producer of an event on city-owned property has a criminal record with conviction(s) and/or no contest plea(s) that could have a negative effect on the use of city property such as vandalism, other property crime, or violent crime. 
(b)  Notification of denial. Should a permit be denied, the producer shall be notified in writing. 
(c)  [Revocation or suspension.] Reasons for revocation or suspension of an event permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  False or incomplete information on the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit; 
(3)  Failure to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the city; and 
(4)  Existence of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency as the city determines, in its sole discretion, to be an impact upon the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(d)  Grounds for subsequent permit denials. Should the producer fail to meet the conditions of their permit, including any additional requirements placed on the producer in accordance with their permit, and those requirements are not met despite assurances by the producer, then such failure to comply with such requirements shall be grounds for denial of any subsequent permit requested by the producer and for any other claims for funds expended by the city for those extraordinary expenses agreed to but not provided by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-248. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any producer whose event permit application has been denied or revoked may request in writing a review of this decision by the city council. This request must be in writing and received by the city clerk within five days of the permit denial or revocation. 
(b)  The city council shall set a hearing date within 30 days of receiving an appeal. At the hearing, evidence may be submitted by the producer addressing why the permit should have been granted or not revoked and by the city manager addressing why the permit was denied or revoked. The city council shall determine whether the denial or revocation of the permit is justified, or it may reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as deemed justified by the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Secs. 26-249—26-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIGNAGE 

Sec. 26-278. - Signage and advertising. 
(a)  Pursuant to administrative guidelines for event signage adopted by the city council, producers may apply for signs to advertise and direct activity within their event. 
(b)  Applicants must have permission from any property owner upon whose property the producer proposes to post a sign. 
(c)  Applications for event signage should be submitted to the community development director or his designee for approval. 
(d)  Upon approval by the community development director or his designee, recommendations and allowances made shall become conditions of the permit to be followed and carried out by the producer. 
(e)  Applicants may not be approved for signs that exceed the provisions in the administrative guidelines. 
(f)  Applicants may not appeal to the city council for relief as to the signs that exceed the provisions in the administrative guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-279. - Pole banners. 
(a)  Purpose and authority of section. 
(1)  To prescribe policy and procedures for permitting pole banners within city rights-of-way; 
(2)  To promote community events and the city in general through the installation of properly designed and installed banners on utility poles and light poles in the city right-of-way; 
(3)  To create an effective administrative process to manage a city pole banner permit process. 
(b)  Event permit required. A pole banner permit may only be issued with the proper acquisition of an event permit from the city according to the requirements as prescribed herein. 
(c)  Definition. Pole banners shall mean temporary signs suspended between brackets and attached to utility and/or light poles in the city right-of-way, designed to advertise events occurring within the city. 
(d)  Criteria for placement. 
(1)  Installation. 
a.  The applicant is responsible for the installation, maintenance, and removal of the pole banners; 
b.  Installation or any part thereof must be performed by a contractor hired and directly supervised by the applicant; 
c.  Banners must be affixed to the utility pole with appropriate hardware. If there is no hardware on an approved pole, it is the applicant's responsibility to install and donate the hardware. The hardware installed shall be left on the pole after the pole banner is removed; 
d.  Utility poles cannot be penetrated or altered in any way by the installation or removal of pole banners except where new hardware fixtures are required; 
e.  Banners are allowed only within the city corporate limits. 
(2)  Size and installation dimensions. 
a.  Banners shall be 30 inches by 72 inches in size; 
b.  Vertical orientation of the rectangle shall be 72 inches with the 30-inch width at the top and bottom in use; 
c.  No more than 24 pole banners shall be erected per permit, with only one permit allowed per special event; 
d.  If the pole mounted banner is in an area with curbs the following two options exist: 
1.  If the banner is behind the face of the curb, the bottom of the banner shall be at least nine feet above the elevation of the sidewalk or ground; 
2.  If the banner extends beyond the curb, the bottom of the banner shall be at least twelve feet six inches above the shoulder and no closer than four feet from the nearest driving lane, as measured from the white line. 
e.  If the pole mounted banner is in an area without curbs the following two options exist: 
1.  If the banner overhangs a sidewalk or ground that is not a shoulder, the bottom of the banner shall be at least nine feet above the elevation of the sidewalk or ground and not closer than four feet from the edge of the nearest driving lane, as measured from the white line; 
2.  If the banner overhangs the shoulder of the highway, the bottom of the banner shall be at least twelve feet six inches above the elevation of the shoulder and not closer than four feet from the edge of the nearest driving lane, as measured from the white line. 
(3)  Material. 
a.  Banners shall be made of durable, acrylic canvas or heavy reinforced vinyl resistant to ultraviolet rays, mold and mildew; 
b.  Each banner shall have two double-stitched reinforced hems looped at the top and bottom to facilitate installation; 
c.  All banners must be printed on both sides of the banner fabric; 
d.  Banner brackets have been placed and may be subsequently maintained by the city unless otherwise requested by the owner of the light or utility pole. 
(e)  Illumination. 
(1)  Illumination will be allowed only on pole mounted string lights in which beams or rays of light are not directed at any portion of the traveled way or which are not of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle. 
(2)  All other pole banners will not be illuminated. 
(f)  Duration. 
(1)  A pole banner permit shall become null and void if the pole banners for which the permit was issued have not been installed within six months after the date of issuance. 
(2)  Banners shall not occupy the right-of-way for a total duration of more than 60 days. 
(g)  Restrictions and limitations. 
(1)  Banners will not be allowed on freeways or interstate highways. 
(2)  No banners shall be attached to: 
a.  Traffic control devices such as signal poles; 
b.  Sign structures; 
c.  Bridges or overpass structures. 
(3)  No banner shall obstruct the view of traffic or any traffic control devices. 
(4)  No banner shall be allowed to obstruct, impede or endanger the flow of traffic. 
(5)  No banner shall resemble traffic control signs, signals, marking devices. Banners shall not appear to direct the movement of traffic, obscure, or interfere with the effectiveness of, imitate or resemble any official traffic signal, sign or device or otherwise be a traffic hazard or distraction. 
(6)  Construction projects. No banner shall be placed on any utility poles which will require removal during the permit period due to a development project in the right-of-way. If a banner is otherwise permitted for a utility pole that will need to be removed, the city shall not be responsible for replacement of the removed and/or destroyed banner and no substitute banner will be permitted. 
(7)  Removal by the city. Banners may be removed by the city and/or the owner of the utility pole at any time if, in the sole discretion of the city, the banner is damaged, faded, neglected, becomes unsightly, or does not comply with the requirements of this article. The applicant shall reimburse the city its costs to remove any pole banner that the city removes as a result. The removed pole banners will be stored for 30 days after removal and then subject to disposal. 
(h)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  Application information. Applications for pole banner permits required by this article shall be filed by the banner owner or the owner's agent with the director of community development or his/her designee. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
a.  The total number of pole banners to be erected; 
b.  The poles which banners are to be erected shall be identified on a map as provided by the city; 
c.  Name, address, phone number, certificate of insurance, and occupational tax certificate number of the banner contractor; 
d.  The payment, in full, of the applicable application fees as determined by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Time for consideration and issuance. The director of community development shall issue permits for all applications meeting the requirements of this section and all other laws and ordinances regulating pole banners within 20 business days. Pole banners not meeting the requirements shall be denied pursuant to the procedure outlined in this section. The director shall give notice in writing to the applicant of his/her decision hand-delivered, mailed by certified mail, e-mailed or faxed to the address on the permit application, and post-marked on or before the twentieth business day after the director's receipt of the application. If the director fails to act within the 20-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. A sticker or other device issued by the city shall be made available by the event director/applicant upon request. Denials may be appealed according to the procedure established by this article. 
(3)  Approved permit. The applicant must have an approved permit before commencing any work on the right-of-way. 
(4)  Indemnify and hold harmless. The applicant agrees to accept full responsibility to the public for loss or damage caused by their installation, operation, maintenance or removal of banners on the right-of-way. The applicant will hold the city harmless from any suits brought against the city arising out of the installation, occupancy, or removal of any pole banner on the city's right-of-way. The applicant, when required by the city, shall provide or cause to be provided proper insurance coverage for public protection and employee protection during installation, maintenance or removal of any pole banner. 
(5)  Safety measures. The applicant will be solely responsible for all appropriate safety measures to be taken when installing, maintaining and removing banners to ensure the safety of the traveling public as well as the safety of those installing or removing the banners. 
(6)  Traffic control measures. The traveling public shall be protected from the activities of the applicant by means of signs, flagmen and traffic control devices as determined by the city in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control devices for Streets and Highways and in accordance with any traffic control plans that are attached to the permit. 
(7)  Cancellation/revocation of permit. The permit issued by the city may be cancelled or revoked when the city has actual knowledge that the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of the permit or this article. In the event that the applicant has failed to remove any pole banners upon request by the city, the city reserves the right to remove any or all pole banners at the expense of the applicant. The removed pole banners will be stored for 30 days after removal. A cancellation or revocation of the permit may be appealed in the same manner as denials pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-13, § 1, 9-22-2014) 
CHAPTER 27 - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2013, repealed former Ch. 27, §§ 27-1—27-1654, and enacted a new Ch. 27 as set out herein. Former Ch. 27 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text have been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets and obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. 

ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

Sec. 27-1. - Title and components. 
(a)  The official title of this chapter (chapter 27) is the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. For convenience, it is referred to throughout this chapter 27 as the "zoning ordinance." 
(b)  The zoning ordinance is comprised of the text of this chapter and the official zoning maps, both of which are maintained in the community development department. The text and the maps together constitute the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-2. - Authority. 
This zoning ordinance is enacted pursuant to the city's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning granted by the Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; by the city's authority to enact regulations and exercise powers granted by the Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶¶ II and III; by authority granted by the state, including but not limited to, the City Charter, 2008 General Assembly Senate Bill 82 2008 Ga. Laws _____ et seq.; by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2(b); by the city's general police powers; and by other powers and authority provided by federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  The regulations of this zoning ordinance apply to all buildings, structures, land and uses within the incorporated area of the city. 
(b)  All buildings and structures erected, all uses of land, water, buildings or structures established, all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings, and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of existing uses are subject to all regulations of this zoning ordinance that are applicable to the zoning district in which such buildings, structures, uses or land are located. Existing buildings, structures and uses that comply with the regulations of this zoning ordinance are subject to all regulations of this zoning ordinance. Existing buildings, structures and uses that do not comply with the regulations of this zoning ordinance are authorized to continue, subject to the nonconformity regulations of article VI, division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-4. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this zoning ordinance become effective on and compliance with its provisions becomes mandatory beginning October 21, 2013, unless otherwise expressly stated in a specific provision of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-5. - Purpose and intent. 
This zoning ordinance is enacted by the mayor and city council in order to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the city and to help implement relevant provisions of the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans and policies. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-6. - General prohibition. 
No building or structure, and no use of any building, structure, land, or property, and no lot of record, may be established, constructed, expanded, altered, moved, diminished, divided, eliminated or maintained in any manner except in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-7. - Minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning ordinance must be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-8. - Compliance with other laws. 
In addition to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, all uses and development must comply with all other applicable state and federal regulations, including requirements for licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-9. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  State or federal regulations. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls. 
(b)  Other city regulations. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the city, the more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(c)  Private agreements and covenants. 
(1)  This zoning ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement or covenant, the provisions of this zoning ordinance control. 
(2)  Private restrictive covenants to which the city is not a party are not regulated by or enforced by the city. 
(d)  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All other ordinances or resolutions in conflict with this zoning ordinance are hereby repealed. This provision does not repeal conditions of use, operation, or site development accompanying zoning approvals or permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions. Modification or repeal of past conditions of approval may be accomplished as authorized and provided by this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-10. - Severability. 
The several provisions of this zoning ordinance are separable in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges any section or provision of this zoning ordinance to be invalid, such judgment does not affect the validity or continued application of zoning ordinance as a whole or any section or provision other than the sections or provisions specifically adjudged to be invalid. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges as invalid the application of any section or provision of this zoning ordinance to a particular property, building or structure, such judgment does not affect the application of the section or provision to any other property, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-1.100), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-11—27-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 27-26. - General. 
The provisions of this division address the transition from the previous zoning ordinance (the one in effect before the effective date specified in section 27-4) to this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-2.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-27. - Applications, permits and approvals. 
(a)  Any building, development or structure for which a building permit was issued or a complete permit application had been accepted for processing before October 21, 2013, may be completed in conformance with the issued building permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building, development or structure does not fully comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If building is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the original building permit, then the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the standards of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Variances, special exceptions and special permits lawfully authorized and granted prior to effective date specified in section 27-4 remain valid after the effective date specified in section 27-4, provided the terms of the authorization are met. 
(c)  Applications for variances, special exceptions and special land use permits that were submitted in complete form and are pending approval on the effective date specified in section 27-4 must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date specified in section 27-4. Building permits for construction and development approved under such zoning approvals may be issued in accordance with subsection (d). 
(d)  Building permits may be issued for construction or development approved under subsections (b) and (c) even if such building, development or structure does not fully comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If building is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the building permit, then the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the standards of this zoning ordinance. 
(e)  When a use classified as a special use under this zoning ordinance exists as a special use, permitted use, nonconforming use or a lawful use by court decree on the effective date specified in section 27-4, such use will be considered a lawfully established special use under this zoning ordinance. When any amendment to this zoning ordinance changes the classification of a permitted use to a special use, any use lawfully established before such amendment will be considered a lawfully established special use after the effective date of such amendment. A lawfully established existing use that is not allowed as a special use or permitted use in the district in which the use is now located will be considered a nonconforming use and will be subject to all applicable regulations of article VI, division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-2.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-28. - Violations continue. 
(a)  Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance will continue to be a violation under this zoning ordinance and be subject to penalties and enforcement under article VI, division 3. 
(b)  If the use, development, construction or other activity that was a violation under the previous ordinance complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance, enforcement action will cease, except for collecting penalties for violations that occurred before the effective date specified in section 27-4. 
(c)  The adoption of this zoning ordinance does not affect nor prevent any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the previous ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in section 27-4. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-2.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-29. - Nonconformities. 
(a)  Any nonconformity under the previous zoning ordinance will also be nonconformity under this zoning ordinance, as long as the situation that resulted in the nonconforming status under the previous regulation continues to exist. 
(b)  If a nonconforming situation under previous zoning regulations becomes conforming because of the adoption of this zoning ordinance, or any subsequent amendment to it, then the situation will no longer be considered a nonconformity. 
(c)  A violation under previously applicable zoning ordinances does not achieve (lawful) nonconforming status under this zoning ordinance merely by repeal of the previous zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-2.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-30. - Expired and obsolete zoning districts. 
(a)  R-CH zoning. Lots classified in the R-CH zoning district by the DeKalb County zoning code on April 12, 1999, before the existence of the city, will continue to be classified in the R-CH district. The R-CH zoning district regulations in effect in the county on April 12, 1999, and all applicable existing conditions of zoning, govern the development of the lots zoned R-CH. Lots zoned R-CH may be rezoned in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article VI, division 3. 
(b)  R-CD zoning. Lots classified in the R-CD zoning district by the DeKalb County zoning code on April 12, 1999, before the existence of the city, will continue to be classified in the R-CD zoning district. The R-CD zoning district regulations in effect in the county on April 12, 1999, and all applicable existing conditions of zoning, govern the development of the lots zoned R-CD. Lots zoned R-CD may be rezoned in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article VI, division 3. 
(c)  PC zoning. Lots classified in the PC zoning district by the DeKalb County zoning code on April 12, 1999, before the existence of the city, will continue to be classified in the PC zoning district. The PC zoning district regulations in effect in the county on April 12, 1999, and all applicable existing conditions of zoning, govern the development of the lots zoned PC. Lots zoned PC may be rezoned in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article VI, division 3. 
(d)  TND zoning. Lots classified in the TND zoning district by the DeKalb County zoning code after April 13, 1999, before the existence of the city, will continue to be classified in the TND zoning district. The TND zoning district regulations in effect in the county on April 27, 2004, and the applicable existing conditions of zoning, govern the development of the lots identified in this subsection. Lots zoned TND may be rezoned in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article VI, division 3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-2.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-31. - Status of multi-unit residential buildings in the O-I district. 
Multi-unit residential uses that exist on O-I zoned lots are considered nonconforming uses under the nonconformity regulations of article VI, division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-2.60), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-32—27-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING MAP 

Sec. 27-41. - Establishment. 
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this zoning ordinance are depicted on and maintained as part of the city's geographic information system (GIS), under the direction of the community development director. This "zoning" geographic coverage layer constitutes the City of Dunwoody's official zoning map. The official zoning map—together with all notations, references, data and other information shown on the map—is adopted and incorporated into this zoning ordinance. It is as much a part of this zoning ordinance as if actually depicted within its pages. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-3.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-42. - Maintenance and updates. 
The community development director is responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments. No unauthorized person may alter or modify the official zoning map. The community development director may authorize printed copies of the official zoning map to be produced, and must maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the official zoning map for historical reference. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-3.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-43. - Interpretation of zoning maps. 
(a)  The community development director is the final authority in determining the current zoning status of land, buildings and structures in the city. 
(b)  Where uncertainty exists regarding the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys must be construed to follow centerlines of rights-of-way or prescriptive easements. In case of closure of a street or alley, or vacation of any easement, the boundary must be construed as remaining at its previous location unless ownership of the closure or vacated area is divided other than at the center, in which case the boundary must be construed as moving to correspond with the ownership, but not beyond any previous right-of-way or easement line. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines must be construed as following those lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as following city limit lines must be construed as following the city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines must be construed to be midway in the railroad right-of-way. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of bodies of water must be construed to follow those shorelines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of creeks, streams, rivers, or other predominantly linear bodies of water must be construed to follow those centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or concentric with, or extensions of features indicated in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(5), must construed to follow those features. Distances and dimensions not specifically indicated on the zoning maps must be determined from the zoning maps by the community development director. 
(7)  Where areas appear to be unclassified on the zoning maps, and classification cannot be established by the above rules and there is no other evidence of its existing or past classification, such areas must be considered to be classified R-100 until action is taken by the mayor and city council to amend the zoning maps. 
(c)  Where uncertainties continue to exist or further interpretation is required beyond that presented in the above subsections, the question must be presented to the mayor and city council to enact a clarifying ordinance and mayor and city council's action must be recorded on the zoning maps. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-3.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-44. - Split-zoned lots. 
(a)  The zoning map may not be amended to classify a single parcel of land into two or more base zoning districts. This provision does not apply to overlay zoning districts. 
(b)  Parcels may not be divided to create a split-zoned parcel of land (into more than one base zoning district classification). This provision does not apply to overlay zoning districts. 
(c)  If an existing parcel of land is split into two or more zoning districts, each such portion of the split-zoned parcel may be used only for purposes allowed within the zoning district that each such portion is classified. No principal or accessory use of land, building or structures, and no use or building or structure authorized by administrative permit, special land use permit, or special exception, is allowed unless the use, building or structure is expressly authorized or permitted within the subject zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-3.40), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-45—27-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 27-56. - General. 
(a)  The districts. The city's residential zoning districts are listed below. When this zoning ordinance refers to "residential" zoning districts, it is referring to these districts. 
_____ 

 
_____
(b)  Purposes. 
(1)  General. Dunwoody's residential zoning districts are primarily intended to create, maintain and promote a variety of housing and living opportunities for individual households and to help ensure consistency with the comprehensive plan. While the districts primarily accommodate residential use types, some nonresidential uses are also allowed, as indicated in the use table of section 27-57. 
(2)  Single-dwelling (R) districts. When this zoning ordinance refers to "R" zoning districts, it is referring to the single-dwelling zoning districts: R-150, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, R-50, RA-5 and RA-8. The primary purposes of the R districts are as follows: 
a.  To help protect the established character of existing neighborhoods; 
b.  To accommodate infill development that is in keeping with character of existing neighborhoods; and 
c.  To accommodate uses and structures designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious and social needs of the neighborhood. 
(3)  Multi-dwelling (RM) districts. When this zoning ordinance refers to "RM" zoning districts, it is referring to the multi-dwelling zoning districts: RM-150, RM-100, RM-85, RM-75 and RM-HD. The primary purposes of the RM, multi-dwelling zoning districts are as follows: 
a.  To accommodate the development of multi-dwelling residential development in areas designated for such development by the comprehensive plan; 
b.  To accommodate infill development that is in keeping with the physical character of existing neighborhoods; and 
c.  To accommodate uses and structures designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious and social needs of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-4.10), 10-14-2013) 
_____
Sec. 27-57. - Uses allowed. 
The following table identifies uses allowed in residential zoning districts. See subsection 27-111(4) for information about how to interpret the use table. 

 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-4.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
_____
Sec. 27-58. - Lot and building regulations. 
(a)  General. This section establishes basic lot and building regulations that apply in residential zoning districts. These regulations offer certainty for property owners, developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed; they are not to be construed as a guarantee that stated minimums and maximums can be achieved on every lot. Other factors, such as topography, the presence of protected resources, off-street parking and other factors may work to further limit actual building and development potential. 
(b)  Single-dwelling districts. The lot and building regulations of the following table apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in single-dwelling residential districts, unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. Article VII, division 1, identifies exceptions to these regulations and rules for measuring compliance (see also Figure 4-1). 

 
[1] Detached houses in RA-5 and RA-8 districts are subject to the lot and building regulations of the R-50 district. 
[2] Minimum lot frontage on cul-de-sac lots is 35 feet. Minimum lot width at the required street setback must equal the required minimum frontage requirement for non-cul-de-sac lot (e.g., 100 feet in R-100). 
[3] Minimum lot frontage applies to attached house projects, not individual dwelling units within the project. 
[4] Corner lots are subject to street setbacks along all street frontages and to interior side setbacks along all other lot lines. 
[5] Add five feet for minimum setbacks from arterial streets. 
[6] Street-facing garage façades must be setback at least 20 feet from back of curb or back of sidewalk, whichever is greater. 
[7] Interior side setback applies only to end units in attached house projects. No interior side setback required for units in attached projects with common or abutting walls. See also the attached house building separation requirements of section 27-132. 
[8] Maximum lot coverage for institutional uses; including, but not limited to, educational services, places of worship, and neighborhood recreation club shall not exceed 60 percent. 
Figure 4-1: Lot and Building Regulations Diagram, Single-Dwelling Residential Districts  
(c)  Multi-dwelling districts. The lot and building regulations of the following table apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in multi-dwelling residential districts, unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. Article VII, division 1, identifies exceptions to these regulations and rules for measuring compliance (see also Figure 4-2). 

 
[1] Applies only to attached house projects and multi-unit buildings with 4 or more dwelling units. 
[2] Minimum lot frontage for detached houses on cul-de-sac lots is 35 feet. Minimum lot width at the required street setback must equal the required minimum frontage requirement for non-cul-de-sac lot (e.g., 60 feet in RM-150). 
[3] Minimum lot frontage applies to attached house projects, not to individual dwelling units or lots within the project. 
[4] See also the building spacing regulations of section 27-132 and section 27-142. 
[5] In attached house projects, interior side setbacks apply only to end units. No interior side setback is required between units with common or abutting walls. 
[6] Minimum interior side and rear setback is 50 feet for multi-unit residential buildings on lots abutting single-dwelling (R) residential zoning districts. 
[7] Corner lots are subject to street setbacks along all street frontages and interior side setbacks along all other lot lines. 
[8] Maximum lot coverage for institutional uses, including, but not limited to, educational services, places of worship, and neighborhood recreation club, and for permitted multi-unit buildings, including town homes and similar uses shall not exceed 70 percent. 
Figure 4-2: Lot and Building Regulations Diagram, Multi-Dwelling Residential Districts  
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-4.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-59. - Other regulations. 
Uses and development in residential zoning districts may be subject to other regulations and standards, including the following. 
(1)  Nonconformities. See article VI, division 4. 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures. See article III, division 3. 
(3)  Parking. See article IV, division 1. 
(4)  Landscaping and screening. See article IV, division 2. 
(5)  Signs. See chapter 20 of the Municipal Code. 
(6)  Temporary uses. See article III, division 4. 
(7)  Outdoor lighting. See article IV, division 3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-4.40), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-60—27-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 27-71. - General. 
(a)  The districts. The city's nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts are listed below. 
_____ 

 
_____
(b)  Purposes . 
(1)  General. The nonresidential and mixed-use districts are generally intended to promote consistency with the comprehensive plan and provide opportunities for shopping, employment, entertainment and living. 
(2)  Office-institution and office-institution-transitional. The primary purposes of the O-I and O-I-T districts are as follows: 
a.  To provide convenient locations for office and institutional uses; 
b.  To provide locations for the development of cultural, recreational, educational and health service facilities; and 
c.  To limit building heights to two stories in O-I-T zoned areas adjacent to single-dwelling residential districts. 
(3)  Office-distribution. The primary purpose of the O-D district is to provide convenient locations for office and distribution establishments. 
(4)  Office-commercial-residential. The primary purposes of the OCR district are as follows: 
a.  To provide for economic development within the city through redevelopment of parcels of land that have been used in the past for commercial and light industrial uses but that have become obsolete and now offer an opportunity for establishing new moderate-intensity mixed-use developments consisting of a combination of office, commercial and residential uses; 
b.  To promote redevelopment and new development in an environment that is pedestrian-oriented and that provides employment, shopping, entertainment and living opportunities in close proximity thereby reduces auto dependency; and 
c.  To encourage the conversion of vacant commercial and industrial buildings into mixed-use projects. 
(5)  Neighborhood shopping. The primary purposes of the NS district are as follows: 
a.  To provide convenient neighborhood retail shopping and service areas within the city; 
b.  To provide for the development of new neighborhood shopping districts; 
c.  To help ensure that the size and scale of neighborhood shopping centers and individual uses within shopping centers are compatible with the scale and character of surrounding neighborhoods; and 
d.  To accommodate uses designed to serve the convenience shopping and service needs of the immediate neighborhood. 
(6)  Local commercial. The primary purposes of the C-1 district are as follows: 
a.  To provide convenient local retail shopping and service areas within the city; 
b.  To provide for the development of new local commercial districts; and 
c.  To accommodate uses designed to serve the convenience shopping and service needs of groups of neighborhoods. 
(7)  Commercial-residential mixed-use. The primary purposes of the CR-1 district are as follows: 
a.  To provide convenient local retail shopping and service areas within a mixed-use (commercial-residential) setting; 
b.  To provide for the development of new commercial-residential mixed-use districts; and 
c.  To promote development patterns that accommodate residential, employment and entertainment within a walkable, mixed-use environment. 
(8)  General commercial. The primary purposes of the C-2 district are as follows: 
a.  To provide convenient general business and commercial service areas within the city; 
b.  To provide for the development of new general commercial districts; and 
c.  To accommodate uses designed to serve the general business and commercial service needs of the city. 
(9)  Industrial. The primary purposes of the M district are as follows: 
a.  To provide areas for the establishment of businesses engaged in the manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovating, painting, cleaning, or assembling of goods, merchandise, or equipment; 
b.  To help ensure that establishments operate so as to not create adverse noise and other impacts on nearby residential, office, commercial and mixed-use districts; and 
c.  To help ensure that M districts are located in areas with access to major arterials and freeways. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-5.10), 10-14-2013) 
_____
Sec. 27-72. - Uses allowed. 
The following table identifies uses allowed in nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts. See [subsection] 27-111(4) for information about how to interpret the use table. 

 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-5.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2015-06-13, § 1, 6-22-2015) 
Sec. 27-73. - Lot and building regulations. 
(a)  This section establishes basic lot and building regulations that apply in nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts. These regulations offer certainty for property owners, developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed; they are not to be construed as a guarantee that stated minimums and maximums can be achieved on every lot. Other factors, such as topography, the presence of protected resources, off-street parking and other factors may work to further limit actual building and development potential. 
(b)  The lot and building standards of the following table apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in nonresidential and mixed-use districts, unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. Article VII, division 1, identifies exceptions to these regulations and rules for measuring compliance (see also Figure 5-1). 

 
[1] Attached house developments are subject to a minimum lot area requirement of 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
[2] No interior side setback required abutting C-1, CR-1 or C-2-zoned lots. 
[3] Buildings may exceed three stories in height only if approved by fire and rescue services. Buildings in excess of five stories or 70 feet in height may be approved only through the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. Multi-unit residential and vertical mixed-use buildings that abut any attached single-dwelling residential district may not exceed 40 feet in height. Multi-unit residential buildings and vertical mixed-use buildings that abut any detached single-dwelling residential district may not exceed 35 feet in height. 
[4] Buildings in excess stated height limits may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. Buildings may exceed three stories in height only if approved by fire and rescue services. 
[5] No individual building may exceed 50,000 sq. ft. (GSF). No multi-tenant center may exceed 100,000 sq. ft. 
Figure 5-1: Lot and Building Regulations Diagram, Nonresidential and Mixed-use Districts  
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-5.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
_____
Sec. 27-74. - Other regulations. 
Uses and development in nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts may be subject to other regulations and standards, including the following. 
(1)  Nonconformities. See article VI, division 4. 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures. See article III, division 3. 
(3)  Parking. See article IV, division 1. 
(4)  Landscaping and screening. See article IV, division 2. 
(5)  Signs. See chapter 20 of the Municipal Code. 
(6)  Outdoor storage. See section 27-286. 
(7)  Temporary uses. See article III, division 4. 
(8)  Outdoor lighting. See article IV, division 3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-5.40), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-75—27-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 27-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 1, adopted April 11, 2017, repealed § 27-86 which pertained to PC, Perimeter Center district, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A, § 27-6.10), adopted Oct. 14, 2013. See div. 5, §§ 27-103—27-106. 
Sec. 27-87. - PD, Planned Development district. 
(a)  Purpose and administration of district. The PD, Planned Development district is intended to permit the planning and development of parcels of land that are suitable in location and character for the uses proposed as unified and integrated developments in accordance with detailed development plans. The PD district is intended to provide a means of accomplishing the following specific objectives: 
(1)  To provide for development concepts not otherwise allowed within non-PD zoning districts; 
(2)  To provide flexibility, unity and diversity in land planning and development, resulting in convenient and harmonious groupings of uses, structures and common facilities; 
(3)  To accommodate varied type design and layout of housing and other buildings; 
(4)  To allow appropriate relationships of open spaces to intended uses and structures; 
(5)  To encourage innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development and renewal so that the growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to those buildings; 
(6)  To encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services, or private services in lieu thereof, and to reflect changes in the technology of land development so that resulting economies may benefit those who need homes; 
(7)  To lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways; and 
(8)  To provide a procedure that can relate the type, design, and layout of residential, commercial, and industrial development to the particular site, thereby encouraging preservation of the site's natural characteristics. 
(b)  Establishing a planned development. 
(1)  No PD district may be established without the concurrent approval of an overall development plan (ODP) by the mayor and city council, in accordance with subsection (c). 
(2)  PD districts must have a minimum contiguous land area of 200,000 square feet. 
(3)  The boundaries of each PD, upon approval, must be shown on the zoning map, must be in conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan, any adopted master plan, and the approved overall development plan. 
(4)  Once adopted, an ODP may be modified in the following ways: 
a.  The community development director has sole authority to approve minor changes to conditions attached to an approved PD zoning designation. Minor changes are those that implement only slight alterations to the approved conditions, made necessary by actual field conditions at the time of development, that do not alter the impact of the development on nearby properties nor the intent or integrity of the conditions as originally imposed. Any request for minor change of conditions must be made in written form to the community development director. If an approved site plan exists, the request for minor change must be accompanied by four copies of the revised site plan. 
b.  Any major change to conditions attached to an approved PD zoning designation requires approval of a zoning map amendment in accordance with the procedures of article V, division 2. Without limiting the meaning of the phrase, the following are deemed to constitute major changes for purposes of interpreting this section: 
1.  The movement of any building or structure adjacent to an exterior boundary line, closer to the boundary line of the property to which it is adjacent; 
2.  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or any increase in the total amount of floor space of any nonresidential building; 
3.  Any decrease in the minimum size of residential units imposed in the original conditional zoning amendment; 
4.  Any reduction in any buffer requirement imposed in the original conditional zoning amendment; 
5.  Any increase in the height of any building or structure; or 
6.  Any change in the proportion of floor space devoted to different authorized uses. 
(c)  Application of regulations. 
(1)  Overall development plan. Development of the PD is governed by overall development plan that designates the land uses of the PD. The ODP must be accompanied by development standards text, which may be approved as a condition of zoning, providing development standards and uses for the project that can vary, augment or limit the requirements of this zoning ordinance and the development regulations. The ODP must be submitted as a part of the PD rezoning application. 
(2)  At a minimum the ODP must include: 
a.  Sketch plan; 
b.  Type and location of all intended uses; 
c.  Expected gross land areas of all intended uses including open space; 
d.  Gross floor area or residential unit size and number for all buildings or structures, including a statement pertaining to the appropriateness of the density and intensity of the suggested uses relative to policies and standards contained within the comprehensive plan; 
e.  Architectural elevations of all proposed building sides, a description of the types of exterior treatments of buildings, a site plan to scale, density calculations; 
f.  Circulation plan; 
g.  Street documentation; 
h.  Parking analysis; 
i.  A tree plan showing the existing trees on site that are six inches in diameter at breast height or greater for hardwoods and 16 inches in diameter at breast height for other trees; 
j.  Existing site survey and a grading plan; and 
k.  Any other information deemed necessary by staff for planning review. 
(3)  To the extent that the approved ODP and development standards for a PD contradict the development regulations and this zoning ordinance, the approved ODP for the PD district governs. 
(4)  No changes in land use or density may be allowed in any approved and incorporated overall development plan or development standards text, except as subsequently approved pursuant to a rezoning of the property. 
(5)  Due to the mixed-use nature of PD proposals, architectural compatibility must be determined based upon the context and guidance of the comprehensive plan and specific sub-area plan area in which the PD is located. As a part of the architectural design, a "four-sided" design philosophy must be used, materials used shall be enduring in their composition and include as the primary material, brick, stone or equivalent durable materials. 
(6)  Land uses within a PD district may be multiple in nature. The location and relationship of these uses must be as established in and conform to the policies and standards contained within the comprehensive plan and other appropriate adopted and approved plans and established as part of the ODP. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-6.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 27-88—27-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 27-96. - General. 
(a)  Establishment. Overlay zoning district regulations and overlay zoning district boundaries may be established or amended only in accordance with the amendment procedures of article V, division 2. 
(b)  Interpretation. Overlay zoning district regulations apply in combination with underlying (base) zoning district regulations and all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. When overlay district standards conflict with standards that would otherwise apply under this zoning ordinance, the regulations of the overlay zoning district govern. Otherwise, all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance apply in overlay districts. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-7.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-97. - DVO, Dunwoody Village Overlay. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Dunwoody Village Overlay district is primarily intended to implement the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan and the Dunwoody Village Master Plan. It is further intended to help: 
(1)  Maintain and enhance the identity and image of the Dunwoody Village area; 
(2)  Accommodate and promote walkable, development patterns containing a complementary mix of land uses; 
(3)  Create new opportunities for public open spaces and gathering spaces in the commercial core of Dunwoody; 
(4)  Ensure that new development and substantial additions to existing buildings are designed to promote the Dunwoody Village Overlay as an area of unique character while requiring that all new construction makes use of design standards and materials that enhance the district, complement existing character, and allow for the introduction of new design elements while encouraging the addition of walkability and green space; 
(5)  Support efforts to create a vibrant shopping and entertainment area in which merchants and businesses thrive and grow, thereby helping to maintain property values and keeping vacancy rates low; and 
(6)  Maintain and enhance the area's role as a place for civic activities and public gatherings within well-designed open spaces. 
(b)  Redevelopment. The city council anticipates that in the future a developer may desire to redevelop all or portions of the Dunwoody Village area, and that the type of redevelopment proposed may be difficult or impossible to carry out under the existing zoning. To accommodate and encourage large-scale redevelopment in accordance with the approved Dunwoody Village Master Plan, the city council may consider rezoning or planned development (PD) development proposals. 
(c)  Site plan review. No building permit may be issued for buildings that are subject to one or more of the overlay district regulations of this section until the building has been reviewed through the site plan review process prescribed in article V, division 10. In order to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth in this section, a code compliance certificate (CCC) shall be required prior to approval of any building permit for any exterior and building facade additions, improvements, or renovations within the Dunwoody Village Overlay. 
(d)  Architecture and design. The architecture and design regulations of this subsection apply within the Dunwoody Village Overlay district to all new buildings, additions, and exterior renovations to building facades. Work that includes maintenance and repair of the existing doors, windows, paint and roofs does not apply. These requirements govern in the event of conflict with other DVO district and base zoning regulations. 
(1)  Exterior materials. 
a.  Predominant exterior materials. Exterior finish materials must include brick, natural stone, wood, cement-based siding, and/or hard coat stucco. 
b.  Secondary exterior materials. Secondary façade materials include all predominant materials. Other materials may be approved by the director of community development during the site plan process. 
c.  Accent materials. The following materials may be used for trim, details, soffits, eaves, and other accent areas: all predominant exterior material, wood or painted wood; PVC/cementitious trim boards, aluminum and other durable metals. Other materials may be approved by the director of community development. 
d.  Restrictions. The use of plain CMU block, aluminum siding, and vinyl materials are prohibited as a façade material. 
e.  Roof materials. Acceptable roofing materials include asphalt shingles, wood shingles, reflective flat roofing systems, and other materials approved by the director of community development. Wherever asphalt shingles are used, they shall be a minimum three-dimensional architectural type. Standing seam metal roofs are permitted only as accents on porches or dormers. 
(2)  Building facades. 
a.  Provide front entrance(s) that are distinct and visible from the street, but should not exaggerate or double the height of the entrance. 
b.  Simple massing is preferred and should be used with stoops, porches, galleries, arcades, roof eaves, and/or balconies to provide expressive character. 
c.  Facades shall provide a discernable base, middle and cap that are clearly defined by horizontal elements along the bottom and top of the building. Expression of the elements should be handled through changes in material selection, color, or plane. Use of horizontal bands, cornices, and/or varied window patterns can assist in expression. 
d.  Building wall materials may be combined on each facade only horizontally, with the lighter above more substantial materials. 
e.  All glass shall be clear and free of color. 
f.  Low pitch or flat roofs shall be enclosed by a parapet that is a minimum of 42 inches in height, or a greater height as necessary to conceal mechanical equipment. 
g.  Hardwood used for rafters, fascia boards and all visible portions of roof decking shall be varnished, oiled, stained or painted. Pressure treated wood shall be painted. 
(e)  Signs. All signs within the Dunwoody Village Overlay district are subject to the requirements of the city's sign ordinance and the following additional regulations: 
(1)  Signs must be designed and constructed to be compatible with the architectural style that is characteristic of the Dunwoody Village Overlay district area. 
(2)  Ground signs must be monument-style signs with a brick base. 
(3)  For lots containing nine or fewer storefronts, ground signs may not exceed eight feet in height and eight feet in width. 
(4)  For lots containing ten or more storefronts, ground signs may not exceed 12 feet in height and eight feet in width. 
(5)  Banners are prohibited except for pole banners as permitted in chapter 26 of the Municipal Code. 
(6)  Signs must have a matte finish and be constructed of wood or other substitute material approved by the design review advisory committee because of its wood-like appearance and durability. 
(7)  Neon, gas, colored, flashing, animated, marquee, sound emitting, fluorescent, rotating or otherwise moving signs are prohibited. This prohibition notwithstanding, a single LED or neon sign up to two square feet in area is allowed, provided that the sign does not employ any flashing, animation, movement or sound and provided that the sign may be illuminated only during hours in which the establishment is open for business. 
(8)  Sign shape and lettering is limited as follows: 
a.  Sign facing must be flat in profile and may not exceed eight inches in thickness. 
b.  Sign lettering and logo content may not exceed 18 inches in height. 
(9)  Standard informational signs: 
a.  May not be more than three feet above grade; 
b.  May not exceed six square feet in area; 
c.  May not have more than two sign faces; 
d.  May not be made from flexible materials, such as vinyl, cloth or paper; 
e.  Must be free-standing and not attached to permanent or temporary structures; 
f.  Must comply with the color standards of the district; and 
g.  Must be maintained in good repair. 
(f)  Parking and circulation. The parking and circulation regulations of article IV, division 4, apply within the Dunwoody Village Overlay district except as modified by the following regulations: 
(1)  New nonresidential buildings and nonresidential uses and additions to existing nonresidential buildings and nonresidential uses may not provide more than five parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area for restaurants and three parking spaces per 1,000 square feet for all other uses. This provision does not require that existing "excess" parking spaces be removed. 
(2)  Parking areas must be separated from the main road by a minimum distance of 30 feet and include at least the landscaping required by section 27-229. Wherever possible, parking must be confined to the rear of structures or be placed underground. 
(g)  Landscaping and open space. 
(1)  The landscaping and screening regulations of article IV, division 2, apply within the Dunwoody Village Overlay district. See also subsection (i). 
(2)  Street tree regulations of chapter 16, section 16-238 shall apply within the Dunwoody Village Overlay district. 
(3)  For any redevelopment, all open space provided within Dunwoody Village shall comply with the open space requirements in section 27-106. 
(h)  Streetscape and pedestrian amenities. 
(1)  The streetscape and pedestrian regulations of this subsection apply within the Dunwoody Village Overlay District to all new buildings, additions, and exterior renovations. A minimum six-foot wide landscape area must be established abutting the back of the curb along abutting public and private streets. This landscape area must adjoin a minimum 12-foot wide sidewalk. Buildings must abut the sidewalk or be located within ten feet of the sidewalk. If buildings are set back from the edge of the required 12-foot sidewalk, the setback area must include features such as outdoor dining and seating areas, plazas and landscaped open spaces that provide a safe, comfortable and active environment for pedestrians. 

(2)  Lighting must conform to the following: 
a.  Pedestrian and street lighting must be placed in the landscape zone at intervals of 90 to 100 feet on center and must be equal distance from required street trees. 
b.  Pole height may not exceed 15 feet. 
c.  Light poles and lamps must be selected from the city's approved streetscape list, which is available in the community development department; alternative designs may be approved on a case-by-case basis with the approval of the community development director. 
(3)  Furniture must be provided as follows: 
a.  Benches and trash and recycling receptacles must be installed every 250 feet along the public street and at each building entrance adjacent to a pedestrian walkway. 
b.  Furniture must be selected from the city's approved streetscape list, which is available in the community development department; alternative designs may be approved on a case-by-case basis with the approval of the community development director. 
(4)  Maintenance of trash and recycling receptacles, including servicing, repair, and replacement, is the full responsibility of the nearest adjacent property owner. 
(5)  Recycling receptacles must be clearly identified with symbols and/or text indicating its intended use for recyclables. 
(i)  Public areas, service areas, retaining walls, and drive-thrus. 
(1)  Public plazas and outdoor dining areas must be easily accessible to pedestrians and provide protection from vehicular traffic by means of their location and design. 
(2)  All dumpsters and other building service areas must be concealed from view of public rights-of-way, publicly accessible areas of the site and residential zoning districts. All dumpsters must be concealed with secured gates screening in accordance with section 27-231. 
(3)  Retaining walls must comply with the city building code. Visible areas of retaining wall must be covered with the face brick or stone of the downhill neighbor with a roll lock at the top. Horizontal wall expanses exceeding 20 feet must include offset pilasters with the same brick or stone rising three courses above the top of the adjoining wall and finished with a double course capital of the same brick or stone. 
(4)  Evergreen hedges and street walls may be used to mask parking, so long as they are no less than 75 percent opaque and built along the build-to-line. Street walls shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet in height. The street wall shall have other individual openings not exceeding four square feet in area at height of less than 3.5 feet. 
(5)  All utilities must be placed underground unless otherwise approved by the director of community development and the public works director. 
(6)  Drive-thrus for new buildings are prohibited. 
(j)  Building placement. The form and design regulations of this subsection apply to all new buildings, and additions to existing buildings within the DVO-district that result in an increase of ten percent or more in the buildings gross floor area. These requirements govern in the event of conflict with other chapter 27 zoning regulations. 
(1)  Build-to-zone. 
a.  The build-to zone is the area on the lot where a certain percentage of the front building façade must be located, measured as a minimum and maximum yard (setback) range from the edge of the right-of-way. The requirements are as follows: 

 
b.  The required percentage specifies the amount of the front building façade that must be located in the build-to zone, based on the width of the front building façade divided by the width of the lot. 
Figure 7-1: Build-to-Zone (BTZ)  
c.  Outdoor open space, plazas and outdoor dining areas are counted as part of the building for the purpose of measuring compliance with build-to zone requirements, provided that: 
1.  The area does not exceed one-third the length of the building face or 35 feet, whichever is less; and 
2.  The area is no more than 35 feet in depth (see Figure 7-2). 
Figure 7-2: BTZ with allowed plaza (left) and BTZ on corner lot (right)  
d.  On corner lots, minimum requirements governing the percent of building façade that must be located in the build-to-zone may be reduced by 60 percent along one of the frontages, at the property owner's option, provided that a building façade must be placed in the build-to zone for the first 30 feet along each street extending from the corner (the intersection of the build-to-zones) (see Figure 7-2). 
(2)  Transparency. 
a.  Transparency regulations govern the percentage of a street-facing building façade that must be covered by glazing (e.g., transparent windows and doors). The minimum requirements are as follows: 

 
b.  The transparency of a ground story façade is measured between 2.5 and 12 feet above the adjacent sidewalk. 
c.  The transparency of an upper-story façade is measured from top of the finished floor to the top of the finished floor above. When there is no floor above, upper-story transparency is measured from the top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate (see Figure 7-3). 
Figure 7-3: Transparency Measurements  
d.  Glazed element must be clear and non-reflective and not be painted or tinted, provided that low-emission (Low-E) glass coatings are permitted. 
e.  On the ground floor or street level, finished ceiling heights must be a minimum of 12 feet tall. 
f.  Along street frontages, the base of the building and entrances shall be at the average level of the sidewalk. 
(3)  Blank wall area. 
a.  Blank walls are areas on the exterior façade of a building that do not include a substantial material change; windows or doors; columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth. Blank wall limits are established as follows: 

 
b.  Blank wall area regulations apply in both a vertical and horizontal direction. 
(4)  Street-facing building entrances. At least one street-facing building entrance must be provided on all principal buildings. The building entrance must provide ingress and egress for residents and customers. Additional entrances off another street, pedestrian area or internal parking area are also permitted. 
(k)  Building heights. All buildings heights are allowed up to three stories in the DVO-district. Buildings in excess of three stories may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. 
(l)  Modifications and adjustments. Unless otherwise stated in the chapter, the regulations of subsections (d) through (j) above may be modified only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special exceptions procedures of article V, division 6. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-7.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 1, 2-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 1, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-12-20, § I, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 27-98. - Perimeter Center Overlay. 
(a)  Overlay generally. 
(1)  Intent. The regulations of the Perimeter Center Overlay are intended to recognize and foster the transformation of Perimeter Center into a pedestrian-friendly, livable center that ensures long term economic, social, and environmental sustainability. 
(2)  Purpose. The Perimeter Center Overlay has been created to further the following public purposes. 
a.  Plan compatibility. To guide new development and redevelopment as defined by the City of Dunwoody Comprehensive Plan (adopted 2015) and as amended. 
b.  Perimeter Community Improvement districts (PCIDs). To provide implementation guidance for the general vision defined in Perimeter @ The Center - Future Focus, 2011 - A Ten Year LCI Update, dated November 2011, as amended (past, current, and future), and adopted by city council. 
(3)  Applicability. The regulations within this section, 27-98 Perimeter Center Overlay, apply to all buildings, structures, land and uses within the Perimeter Center Overlay, as illustrated on the city's zoning map and in figure 27-98-1, Perimeter Center Overlay map. 
(4)  Existing land development regulations. Refer to chapter 16, land development regulations, for additional requirements. When there is a conflict between the following regulations and chapter 16, the Perimeter Center Overlay regulations govern. 
(5)  Review and approval procedures. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all uses and development in Perimeter Center Overlay are subject to the applicable review and approval procedures of article V, as well as any applicable procedures in chapter 16 of the Municipal Code (land development regulations). 
(6)  Site plan review. All applications for development permits within the Perimeter Center Overlay must be accompanied by a site plan, which is subject to review and approval in accordance with article V, division 10. 
(7)  Relief. In some instances, unique site conditions, existing building circumstances or other constraints related to the subject property may make strict compliance with the Perimeter Center Overlay regulations impossible or highly impractical. In such instances, an applicant may seek relief from applicable regulations. Any relief granted and conditions imposed run with the land and are binding on the subject property owner and all future property owners. 

a.  Minor exception—Administrative relief. The community development director or public works director, as noted, is authorized to approve the following minor exceptions to strict compliance in accordance with the special administrative permit procedures of article V, division 7: 
1.  A change to any street or frontage option component width or depth (requires approval by the public works director); 
2.  A reduction in required landscape or yard depth by no more than ten percent; 
3.  Establishment of a public access easement in lieu of right-of-way dedication for street type frontage options, per the public works director. 
4.  Retaining walls in street type frontages up to five feet in height when extreme grades prevent the use of shorter walls and landscaping is used to mitigate the visual impacts of the taller retaining wall at the sidewalk edge; and 
5.  Any other minor exception expressly authorized under the Perimeter Center Overlay regulations. 
b.  Major exceptions—Special land use permit. Major exceptions to strict compliance with the Perimeter Center Overlay regulations include any exception to strict compliance that is not expressly authorized as a minor exception under the provisions of subsection (a)(7)a. Major exceptions require review and approval in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. 
(b)  Street types. 
(1)  Intent. Street types are established for all of the existing and new streets in the Perimeter Center Overlay area. Frontage options are defined for the space between the building or parking and the curb per street type. Street types and frontage options are intended to address the comfort, convenience, and safety of pedestrians and bicyclists; to develop a network of streets with identifiable character; and to provide an aesthetically pleasing edge to all development. 
(2)  Applicability. All new development and redevelopment within the Perimeter Center Overlay shall meet the street type frontage requirements under any one of the following circumstances: 
a.  New structure. Development of a new principal structure on a lot or a portion of a lot. 
b.  Redevelopment or renovation. Redevelopment or renovation of an existing structure or site that increases the gross building square footage by more than 50 percent. 
c.  Parking lots. Redevelopment or revision to 50 percent or more of an existing parking lot or development of a new parking lot consisting of 15 or more spaces, not including resurfacing or repairing an existing layout. 
(3)  Street types map. Figure 27-98-2, street types map, defines street types in Perimeter Center for existing and new streets. Refer to [subsection] (c), streets and blocks, for more information about new streets and their designated locations. 
Locations illustrated on the street types map are approximate. The requirements and locations of all streets shall be determined by and approved by the public works director during the site plan review process. 
a.  Street types. The following street types are established for the existing streets and any new streets adjacent to and within the Perimeter Center Overlay. Refer to figure 27-98-2, street types map, for the typologies of existing streets and proposed new streets. 
1.  Major parkway street. The major parkway street type is intended to create a parkway effect along the major transportation corridors within Perimeter Center through the use of wide landscape areas heavily planted with native or naturalized trees. Major parkways require designated bicycle facilities. Refer to [subsection] (b)(5), major parkway street type, for requirements. 
2.  Minor parkway street. The minor parkway street type is intended to create a parkway effect along transportation corridors within Perimeter Center through the use of wide landscape areas heavily planted with trees. Minor parkways require designated bicycle facilities. Refer to [subsection] (b)(6), minor parkway street type, for requirements. 
3.  Primary street. The primary street type is intended to establish a series of comfortably scaled streets with continuous building frontage and a limited number of drives interrupting the sidewalk. Primary streets require a balance between bicyclists and pedestrians and automobiles by providing designated bicycle facilities and a robust pedestrian realm, and by prioritizing bicyclists and pedestrians for a more balanced transportation route. Refer to [subsection] (b)(7), primary street type, for requirements. 
4.  Secondary street. The secondary street type is meant to establish a designated street for parking lot and structure access, while still providing a safe and comfortable pedestrian realm. Refer to [subsection] (b)(8), secondary street type, for requirements. 
b.  Street type graphics. The graphics provided in this section illustrate the preferred configuration of each street type. By applying the standards defined, other configurations are permitted. 
c.  Redesignating street types. Existing street designations are set to match the existing character to the extent possible. New streets have been designated with the intent to provide an appropriate mix of primary and secondary streets, establishing comfortable pedestrian streets while providing for parking access. Redesignation of existing streets may occur per the following: 
1.  Process. Parkways shall not be re-designated, except by a text amendment to this code. All other streets may be redesignated using the minor exception process. 
2.  Entire blocks. When redesignating street types, the entire street between intersecting streets shall be redesignated. 
3.  Primary streets. The intent is to maintain a similar amount of primary streets as established by the map. Primary streets may be re-designated as parkways or secondary streets only when a new or existing street, currently designated as secondary, within or abutting the same parcel is redesignated as a primary street. 
4.  Secondary streets. Existing secondary streets may be redesignated as parkways or primary streets as long as vehicular access to parking for all surrounding sites has been addressed. 
d.  Shared-use paths. Trail locations are required per the city's current comprehensive plan or other city-approved cycle/pedestrian plan and in coordination with public works director for locations for other trails. 
(4)  Streetscape furnishings and hardscape design. In addition to the street type frontage requirements that include minimum tree plantings and walk/trails, a street furnishings and hardscape design is required along all new and existing street frontages per the following: 

a.  Definition. The streetscape furnishings and hardscape design shall include the frontage area as defined by the street types plus any hardscaped building setback area less than 25 feet deep from the frontage edge. 
b.  Design submittal. A consistent design shall be submitted for approval with site plan review for all streets within and adjacent to the development. 
c.  Standard specifications. The design shall meet any standards defined by the city for sidewalk, curb, access, lighting, landscape, and other applicable construction details. Refer to chapter 16, land development regulations. 
d.  Perimeter Community Improvements districts (PCID) public space standards. Refer to the current PCID public space standards document for recommended streetscape component and material specifications. 
e.  Submittal requirements. At a minimum, the design submittal shall include the following: 
1.  Trees. Trees meeting the minimum requirements of [subsection] (b), street types, shall be included in the design, with details related to tree pits, tree grates, and tree planting to meet the landscape installation requirements of [section] 27-364, landscape. 
2.  Pavement design. Paving materials and pattern is required for each sidewalk and any other hardscape proposed. Pavement design shall address all walks or trails, including the minimum sidewalk or trail widths required by the frontage. 
3.  Street furnishings. Benches and/or seatwalls, planters, planter fences, tree grates, and trash receptacles shall be specified and quantities and locations listed for each street. For each block face, a minimum of two benches or seatwalls, one trash receptacle, and one recycling receptacle are required. 
4.  Bus stop facilities. Coordinate with the public works director for the location of bus stops and the required facilities. Facilities may include benches, pavement, shelters, signs, and other improvements. 
5.  Landscape design. Ground plane vegetation shall be designated for any landscape bed areas, planter areas, and open tree wells, including shrubs, perennials, annuals, and grasses. 
6.  Lighting. Pedestrian and vehicular lighting shall be specified with locations and quantities noted. All lighting shall meet any requirements of the public works director. Cut sheets and samples shall be submitted upon request. 
7.  Stormwater facilities. Any stormwater facilities proposed for the right-of-way shall be included in the streetscape design. Facilities such as stormwater planters or parkway swales may be included. Maintenance responsibilities and processes shall be included. 
8.  Identity elements. Any other elements designed to establish the identity of each street, such as banners mounted on light poles, pavement markers, artwork, or wayfinding signage, shall be included in the design submittal. 
9.  Streetscape maintenance. Property owner is responsible for regular maintenance and emptying of trash and recycling receptacles, sweeping of sidewalks and seating areas, and tree maintenance. The city may request additional maintenance procedures. 
10.  Streetscape design continuation. The approved streetscape design for each street may be utilized by the city for the extension of any street outside the development to provide continuity. 
(5)  Major parkway street type. The major parkway street type applies to existing streets per figure 27-98-2, street types map. Refer to figure 27-98-3, table of major parkway street type requirements and figure 27-98-4, existing major parkway street section. 
a.  New major parkway streets. New major parkway streets are not permitted, unless otherwise required by the public works director. This street type is applicable only to existing streets per figure 27-98-2, street types map. 
b.  Frontage options. Frontages address the pedestrian and bicycle realm as well as street and parking buffers and public space options. Parcels that are adjacent to a major parkway as designated on the figure 27-98-2, street types map, shall apply one or more of the major parkway street frontage options along the entire length of the lot line abutting the major parkway. Refer to figure 27-98-5, table of major parkway street type frontage options. 
c.  Dedication. When the sidewalk is fully or partially located on private property, right-of-way dedication is required, so that the sidewalk is fully located in the right-of-way. The public works director may approve an easement in lieu of right-of-way dedication based on the geometry of the site, topography, or other site-specific considerations. 
d.  Curb movement. The existing street curb may be required to move, based on the selection of the appropriate context-sensitive bicycle facility, per public works director. 






(6)  Minor parkway street type. The minor parkway street type applies to existing streets per figure 27-98-2 street types map and is available for new streets per public works director. Refer to figure 27-98-9. Table of minor parkway street type requirements and figure 27-98-10 minor parkway street section - existing and new. 
a.  New minor parkway streets. New minor parkway streets are not permitted, unless a minor exception is approved by the public works director. 
b.  Frontage options. Frontages address the pedestrian and bicycle realm as well as street and parking buffers and public space options. Parcels that are adjacent to a minor parkway as designated on figure 27-98-2, street types map, shall apply one or more of the minor parkway street frontage options along the entire length of the lot line abutting the minor parkway. Refer to figure 27-98-11, table of minor parkway street type frontage options. 
c.  Dedication. When the sidewalk is fully or partially located on private property, right-of-way dedication is required, so that the sidewalk is fully located in the right-of-way. The public works director may approve an easement in lieu of right-of-way dedication based on the geometry of the site, topography, or other site-specific considerations. 
d.  Curb movement. The existing street curb may be required to move, based on the selection of the appropriate, context sensitive bicycle facility, per the public works director. 






(7)  Primary street type. The primary street type applies to new and existing streets per figure 27-98-2, street types map. 
a.  New primary streets. Refer to figure 27-98-15, table of primary street type requirements, for primary street type requirements for new streets, figure 27-98-16, primary street type section: typical, illustrates the typical street section. A narrow version is available for limited application (refer to figure 27-98-17, primary street type section: narrow). 
b.  Frontage options. Frontages address the pedestrian and bicycle realm as well as street and parking buffers and public space options. Parcels that are adjacent to a primary street as designated on figure 27-98-2, street types map shall apply one or more of the primary street frontage options along the entire length of the lot line abutting the minor parkway. Refer to figure 27-98-18, table of primary street frontage options. 
c.  Dedication. When the sidewalk is fully or partially located on private property, right-of-way dedication is required, so that the sidewalk is fully located in the right-of-way. The public works director may approve an easement in lieu of right-of-way dedication based on the geometry of the site, topography, or other site-specific considerations. 
d.  Curb movement. The existing street curb may be required to move, based on the selection of the appropriate, context sensitive bicycle facility, per the public works director. 










(8)  Secondary street type. The secondary street type applies to new and existing streets per figure 27-98-2, street types map. 
a.  New secondary streets. Refer to figure 27-98-25, table of secondary street type requirements for secondary street type, requirements for new streets, figure 27-98-26, secondary street type section - typical, illustrates the typical street section. A narrow version is available for limited application (refer to figure 27-98-27, secondary street type section - narrow). 
b.  Frontage options. Frontages address the pedestrian and bicycle realm as well as street and parking buffers and public space options. Parcels that are adjacent to a secondary street as designated on figure 27-98-2, street types map, shall apply one or more of the secondary street frontage options along the entire length of the lot line abutting the secondary street. Refer to figure 27-98-28, table of secondary street frontage options. 
c.  Dedication. When the sidewalk is fully or partially located on private property, right-of-way dedication is required, so that the sidewalk is fully located in the right-of-way. The public works director may approve an easement in lieu of right-of-way dedication based on the geometry of the site, topography, or other site-specific considerations. 
d.  Curb movement. The existing street curb may be required to move, based on the selection of the appropriate, context sensitive bicycle facility, per the public works director. 






(c)  Streets and blocks. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the following requirements is to form an interconnected network of streets with multiple intersections and block sizes scaled to support multiple modes of transportation, including walking, biking, transit use, and driving, within the Perimeter Center Overlay area. Also refer to chapter 16 for additional regulations. 
(2)  Applicability. All new development and redevelopment on site five acres or larger within the Perimeter Center Overlay shall meet the general block, lot, and street design requirements under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  New structure. Development of a new principal structure on a lot or portion of a lot. 
b.  Redevelopment or renovation. Redevelopment or renovation to an existing structure or site that increases the gross building square footage by more than 50 percent. 
c.  Parking lots. Redevelopment or revision to 50 percent or more of an existing parking lot or development of a new parking lot consisting of 15 or more spaces, not including resurfacing or repairing an existing layout. 
(3)  New street locations. 
a.  Street types map. Proposed street locations are illustrated on figure 27-98-2, street types map, defined to establish a network that would fulfill the streets and blocks intent and regulations. 
b.  Public works director. Locations illustrated on the street types map are approximate. The requirements and locations of all streets shall be determined by and approved by the public works director during the site plan review process. 
(4)  Street connectivity. The following provides requirements and guidance for locating new streets and connecting to surrounding context. 
a.  The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new developments. 
b.  Cul-de-sac and dead end streets should be avoided and utilized only when topography and other existing barriers, such as highways, rail lines, or waterways, prevent street connectivity. 
c.  Streets should follow natural features rather than interrupting or dead-ending at the feature. 
d.  Streets should terminate at another street with either open space or a building façade across from the termination. 
e.  When adjacent developments do not provide connectivity, coordinate with the community development director and public works director to determine the potential for future connections and provide for those connections. 
(5)  Block configuration. Refer to figure 27-98-31 for an illustration of typical block elements and section 16-240 for blocks. 
a.  Blocks should be deep enough to accommodate buildings facing streets with parking located in the interior. Refer to [subsection](b), street types, for minimum building frontages required for all streets. 
b.  Blocks may be configured to include existing lots within an existing zoning district that is outside of the Perimeter Center Overlay. 

c.  A network of streets is required to meet the maximum block size requirement. Proposed new streets to meet these sizes are illustrated on figure 27-98-2, street types map. 
d.  Block sizes for zoning districts. Block sizes for residential and commercial development and redevelopment are designated in section 16-240. 
e.  Block sizes for Perimeter Center (PC) districts. Maximum block perimeter for all PC districts is 2,400 feet. Recommended block perimeter is a maximum of 1,800 feet. 
f.  Exceptions. Exceptions to block sizes include locations adjacent to natural features, such as steep grades and drainage areas, and other existing barriers, such as an inability to connect to adjacent parcels. 
(6)  Block driveway access configurations. 
a.  Blocks may include alleys, drives, or driveway entrances for service, parking accessibility, and other routes internal to the development. 
b.  Access to blocks should be aligned across the street from access to other blocks. 
c.  In the Perimeter Center districts, driveway locations are defined in the general building type requirements. Refer to [section] 27-105(a)(10), driveways. 
d.  Mid-block pedestrianways. Mid-block pedestrianways are required through blocks longer than 800 feet and at locations that connect public rights-of-way with other public facilities such as parks and transit. 
1.  When combined with mid-block street crossings, these pathways should align to facilitate easy pedestrian movements. 
2.  Mid-block pedestrianways should be located in the middle third of a block face. 
3.  Minimum width for mid-block pedestrianways rights-of-way or easements is 20 feet. 
4.  A minimum of one canopy tree per 600 square feet of area is required. 
5.  Mid-block pedestrianways should be treated with the minimum design requirements per [subsection] (b)(4), streetscape furnishings and hardscape design. 
6.  Shared-use paths through blocks per [subsection] (b)(3)d, may fulfill the requirements for mid-block pedestrianways. 
(7)  Street types. Refer to [subsection] (b), street types, for requirements for streets. 
a.  Street type. All new and existing streets shall utilize one of the permitted street types per figure 27-98-2 and the requirements of [subsection] (b), street types. 
b.  Frontage options. For each side of a street adjacent to or within the development, one of the frontage options defined by street type shall be utilized. 
c.  Other internal street. Other street types completely internal to the development may be approved by the public works director and the community development director through minor exception. 
d.  Public use. All streets shall be available for public use at all times. Gated streets and streets posted as private are not permitted. 
e.  Dimensions. The dimensions defined in each street type provide the acceptable ranges. The public works director shall determine the appropriate configuration and dimensions for each street. Minor exceptions may be approved by the public works director during the approval process. 
f.  Additional director requirements. During the pre-submittal conference, the community development director and/or public works director may adjust requirements for right-of-way, pavement width, or street elements depending on unique site locations and characteristics. 
g.  Street construction. All street construction, whether publicly dedicated or privately held, shall follow street type and frontage requirements and any other specifications defined by the city. 
h.  Private streets. Private streets that prevent street connectivity or are inconsistent with adopted plans shall not be permitted. 

(d)  General building design criteria. 
(1)  Intent. These criteria are intended to address each building's appearance and cohesiveness within the overall Perimeter Center Overlay area. Further, the criteria are intended to elicit high quality buildings, enhance the pedestrian experience, maintain an appropriate scale, and implement the vision for the area as defined in current plans. 
(2)  Applicability. The following outlines the general design criteria applicable to all buildings within the Perimeter Center Overlay. 
a.  Applicable façades. These criteria apply to all façades visible from the street, facing streets, facing main parking lots, and adjacent to open spaces, unless otherwise noted. 
b.  Applicable development sites. All new development and redevelopment within the Perimeter Center Overlay shall meet the general building design requirements under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  New structures and additions. Development of a new principal structure or additions to a principal structure on a lot or a portion of a lot. 
2.  Existing façade renovation. An alteration to an existing structure that includes renovation of more than 50 percent of an applicable façade. 
(3)  Materials. 
a.  Major façade materials. Major façade materials include high quality, durable, finish materials, such as brick, stone, and glass. Other high quality materials may be approved by the director of community development during the site plan process. A minimum of 80 percent of each façade shall be constructed of major materials. Street façade materials shall continue around the corner of the building to non-street-facing façades a minimum depth of 20 feet. Refer to figure 27-98-32, major materials. 
b.  Minor materials. Acceptable high quality minor façade materials include all major materials; cement-based stucco; wood lap siding and shingles;, architectural metal siding; architecturally finished concrete; fiber cement siding or shingles (such as Hardie Company products or similar); synthetic stucco/EIFS (see restrictions below); glass block; split-faced, burnished, glazed, or honed concrete masonry units (CMU), cast stone concrete elements. No more than 20 percent of each façade shall consist of minor materials. 
c.  Accent materials. The following materials may be used for trim, details, soffits, eaves, and other accent areas: vinyl; aluminum and other durable metals; and metal for beams, lintels, trim, and ornamentation. Other materials may be approved by the director of community development during the site plan process. 
d.  Restrictions. 
1.  The use of plain CMU block and vinyl are prohibited as a façade material. 
2.  Synthetic stucco (EIFS) used on the first or second floor of a building shall be a "high-impact" system. Conventional EIFS may be used above the second floor. 
e.  Roof materials. Wherever asphalt shingles are used, they shall be a minimum three-dimensional architectural type. 
(4)  Windows, awnings, and shutters. 
a.  Quantity of windows. A minimum of 15 percent window coverage is required per story on all street facing façades and any façade visible from a street. 
1.  Measurement. Window requirements are measured as a percentage of the façade per floor. 
2.  Blank walls. Windows shall be distributed so that no rectangular area greater than 30 percent of any story's façade, as measured from floor to floor, and no horizontal segment of a story's façade greater than 30 feet in width is windowless and violates the minimum percentage requirements. 
b.  Transparent glass. All window glass shall be highly transparent with low reflectance. Light transmission should be approximately 60 percent for ground story windows and a minimum of 55 percent for upper story windows. 
c.  Awnings. All awnings shall be canvas or metal. Plastic awnings are prohibited. Awnings shall not be translucent. Refer to figure 27-98-33, awnings. 


d.  Shutters. If installed, shutters, whether functional or not, may be designed to the following standards: 
1.  All shutters should be sized for the windows, so that if the shutters were to be closed, they would not be too small for complete coverage of the window. 
2.  Shutters should be wood, metal, or fiber cement. Other "engineered" woods may be approved during the site plan process with an approved sample and examples of successful, high quality local installations. 
(5)  Garage doors. The following requirements apply to garage doors provided on any street façade: 
a.  Location. Garage doors are not permitted on primary street façades unless not utilized for vehicular access (but for patio access, open air dining). Garage doors are permitted on secondary street façades with direct access to the street. The preferred location is on interior lot façades. 
b.  Recessed from façades. Garage doors located on street facing façades shall be recessed a minimum of three feet from the dominant façade of the principal building facing the same street. 
c.  Design. Garage doors facing a secondary street and intended to be closed during business hours shall be clad with materials consistent with the design of the building. Carriage-style doors are required on the townhouse and detached house building type. 
(6)  Ground story at sloping façades. 
a.  Intent. Given the slopes in many parts of the Perimeter Center area, building design must accommodate grade changes along the sidewalk without creating tall, out-of-scale blank walls. Large, unarticulated building façades signal to pedestrians that an area is not intended for walking, reducing activity in the area and creating dead zones. Refer to figure 27-98-34, examples of ground story along slope. 
b.  Regulations for shopfronts. 
1.  Grade transitions on the building along the sidewalk should be designed to maximize active pedestrian-scale frontages between waist and eye level while minimizing blank walls. 
2.  Unless impracticable, the interior floor level should step to match the exterior grade. 
3.  If it is necessary for the interior floor to remain constant along the grade, changes may be accommodated by a storefront window display space. 
4.  Knee wall and retaining walls shall not exceed 30 inches in height except along a maximum 15-foot section of façade length. 
5.  If grade change is more than 12 feet along a single block face, entrance requirements may be increased to one entrance per 80 feet of building frontage. 
6.  Building entrances adjacent to the street should be within three feet of the elevation of the adjacent sidewalk, unless utilizing the PC district building types. 
c.  Regulations for residential and other building frontages. 
1.  Grade transitions at the building along the sidewalk should be designed to minimize blank walls. 
2.  Unless impracticable, the interior floor level should step to match the exterior grade. 
3.  Multiple front entrances along the street activate each segment of building section at each grade. 
4.  Transition zones between the sidewalk and building façade of porches, terraces, and landscape areas may be used assist with grade changes. 
5.  If it is necessary for the interior floor to remain constant along the grade, changes can be accommodated by terraced planters and retaining walls. 
6.  Retaining walls shall not exceed 30 inches in height except along a maximum 15-foot section of frontage. 
7.  When the elevation of the first floor is more than three feet above grade, windows should be provided into the basement or lower floor elevations. 
(7)  Fueling stations. Refer to figure 27-98-35, recommended gas station layout, for one illustration of the following criteria: 
a.  Building location. A principal building should be built up to any corner with the longest façade along any primary street. If no primary street abuts the parcel, along the parkway façade. 
b.  Side yard parking. One double loaded aisle of parking is permitted on the interior side along a primary street, perpendicular to the street. 
c.  Pumps and canopy location. The pumps and canopy may be located on the interior of the parcel, but may have driveways to a street. 
d.  Building build-to zone. A building should be built to within five feet to 15 feet of the edge of the street type frontage. 
e.  Building façade design. The façade of all buildings shall meet all general design criteria within this section, [subsection] (d), general building design criteria. 
f.  Canopy design. The canopy, columns, and structure shall be constructed substantially of the same materials utilized on the building. 
g.  Pavement. Site paving shall consist of maximum 22-foot driveways and lanes along parking and along pumps. All other areas shall be landscaped. 
h.  Frontage. A maximum of 50 percent of the frontage may be used for parking and fuel areas. 

(8)  Accessory drive-through structures. Refer to figure 27-98-36, recommended drive-through facility layout, for one illustration of the following requirements: 
a.  Structure/canopy. Drive-through structures or canopies shall be located on the rear or side façade of the building or in the rear of the lot behind the building, where permitted by use. The structure should not be visible from any primary street. 
b.  Stacking lanes. Stacking lanes shall be located perpendicular to the primary street or behind the building. 
c.  Canopy design. The canopy, columns, and structure shall be constructed substantially of the same materials utilized on the building. 
(9)  Parking structures fronting a street. The following requirements are provided for parking structures fronting a secondary street or parkway. 
a.  Primary streets. Parking structures, whether accessory or principal use, shall not front a primary street, unless otherwise approved with special land use permit per article V, division 3. 
b.  Perimeter Center districts. In the Perimeter Center (PC) districts, parking structures as the principal use on the lot require a special land use permit (refer to article V, division 3, special land use permits). 
c.  Parking structure design requirements. 
1.  Blank wall limitations. On any street façade, no rectangular area greater than 30 percent of any story's façade, as measured from floor to floor, and no horizontal segment of a story's façade greater than 15 feet in width may be solid, blank wall. 
2.  Pedestrian entry. A defined pedestrian entrance/exit is required separate from the vehicular entrance and directly accessing the sidewalk. If the entry is enclosed, windows are required to meet a transparency rate of 65 percent. 
3.  Structures along highways. Structured parking located along highways shall incorporate architectural elements (e.g., trellises, planters, landscape, panels) that provide visual screening of vehicles and interior lighting. 

(Ord. No. 2017-05-14, § 1(Exh. A), 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 27-99—27-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERIMETER CENTER DISTRICTS 

Sec. 27-103. - General. 
(a)  Intent and applicability. 
(1)  Intent. The Perimeter Center (PC) district regulations are intended to promote the same purposes identified for the Perimeter Center Overlay, as stated in [section] 27-98(a)(2). 
(2)  Applicability. The PC zoning district regulations apply to properties zoned to a PC district in accordance with the regulating map (figure 27-104-1) and the amendment procedures of article V, division 2. 
(b)  Administration and procedures. 
(1)  Establishment of Perimeter Center districts. Perimeter Center (PC) zoning district classifications may be applied to property and PC district boundaries may be amended only in accordance with the amendment procedures of article V, division 2 and the regulating map of figure 27-104-1. 
(2)  Effect of establishment. Once property has been classified in a Perimeter Center district, that property is subject exclusively to the applicable Perimeter Center district regulations and any applicable overlay district regulations. 
(3)  Review and approval procedures. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all uses and development in Perimeter Center districts are subject to the applicable review and approval procedures of article V, as well as any applicable procedures in chapter 16 of the municipal code (land development regulations). 
(4)  Site plan review. All applications for development permits within a Perimeter Center district must be accompanied by a site plan, which is subject to review and approval in accordance with article V, division 10. 
(5)  Relief. The Perimeter Center districts are intended to accommodate development as-of-right when such development occurs in strict conformance with applicable regulations. In some instances, however, unique site conditions, existing building circumstances or other constraints related to the subject property may make strict compliance impossible or highly impractical. In such instances, an applicant may seek relief from applicable regulations. Any relief granted and conditions imposed run with the land and are binding on the subject property owner and all future property owners. 
a.  Minor exception—Administrative relief. The community development director is authorized to approve the following minor exceptions in accordance with the special administrative permit procedures of article v, division 7: 
1.  The location of a building relative to any minimum setback requirement or build-to zone width/location, provided that location deviates from strict compliance by no more than five feet; 
2.  An increase in total impervious coverage by no more than five percent, not to exceed the total amount of permitted impervious plus semi-pervious coverage; 
3.  A decrease in build-to zone coverage by no more than ten percent; 
4.  A reduction in the amount of required shopfront building frontage along primary streets, by no more than ten percent; 
5.  Additional height of any building story by no more than two feet, provided that the overall building height does not exceed the maximum permitted height; 
6.  An increase in the maximum permitted height of a retaining wall by up to five feet; and 
7.  Any other minor exception expressly authorized under the Perimeter Center district regulations. 
b.  Major exceptions—Special land use permit. Major exceptions to strict compliance with the Perimeter Center district regulations include any exception to strict compliance that is not expressly authorized as a minor exception under the provisions of section 27-103(b)(5)a. Major exceptions require review and approval in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. 
(c)  How to use this code. Refer to figure 27-103-1, how to use the code, for an overview of code use. 

(Ord. No. 2017-05-14, § 2(Exh. B), 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 27-104. - Districts. 
(a)  Districts and regulating map. 
(1)  District map. The permitted location for each Perimeter Center district is designated in figure 27-104-1, regulating map. 
(2)  District requirements. The requirements in this subsection apply to the Perimeter Center districts as follows. 
a.  Requirements specific to each district. Refer to [sections] 27-104(b) through 27-104(e) for specific descriptions and requirements for each district. 
b.  Use requirements for all districts. Refer to [section] 27-104(f) uses for use requirements applicable to all districts. 
c.  Sustainability measures for all districts. Refer to [section] 27-104(g), sustainability measures, for sustainable development practice requirements applicable to all districts. 
(3)  Street types. Refer to section 27-98(b)(b) street types within the Perimeter Center Overlay for information on street types and street frontage requirements applicable to all Perimeter Center districts. 
(4)  Transition yards. Refer to section 27-230, transition yards, for information on buffer and screen requirements between different districts and uses. 
(5)  New streets and blocks. Refer to section 27-98(c), streets and blocks, within the Perimeter Center Overlay for information on new street design requirements and block configurations. 
(6)  Other Perimeter Center Overlay requirements. Refer to section 27-98(d), general building design criteria within the Perimeter Center Overlay. 


Figure 27-104-2. PC-1 District Requirements 
(b)  PC-1 district. Requirements for this district are provided in figure 27-104-2, PC-1 district requirements. 
(1)  Description and intent. The PC-1 district is intended to apply to the central core area of Perimeter Center, including the area directly surrounding the Dunwoody MARTA train station. This district allows for the highest intensity of buildings, a high level of employment uses, and active ground story uses and design that support pedestrian mobility. 

Figure 27-104-3. PC-2 District Requirements 
(c)  PC-2 district. Requirements for this district are provided in figure 27-104-3, PC-2 district requirements. 
(1)  Description and intent. The PC-2 district is meant primarily for employment uses, residential buildings, and limited shopfront retail and services. 

Figure 27-104-4. PC-3 District Requirements 
(d)  PC-3 district. Requirements for this district are provided in figure 27-104-4, PC-3 district requirements. 
(1)  Description and intent. The PC-3 district is a smaller scale less intensive commercial district, permitting both shopfront buildings and office buildings. 

Figure 27-104-5. PC-4 District Requirements 
(e)  PC-4 district. Requirements for this district are provided in figure 27-104-5, PC-4 district requirements. 
(1)  Description and intent. The PC-4 district is primarily meant for residential uses at a scale that provides a transition between the intensity of Perimeter Center and the surrounding single-family residential neighborhoods. 
(f)  Uses. The following applies to all Perimeter Center districts. 
(1)  Use table. The following apply to the uses outlined in this section. Refer to figure 27-104-6, table of permitted uses. 
a.  Use categories. Refer to [sections] 27-111 through 27-116. 
b.  Permitted and special uses. Each use may be permitted as-of-right, permitted with a special administrative permit, permitted as a special exception, or permitted with a special land use permit. Refer to [section] 27-111(4), use tables. 
c.  Number of uses. A lot may contain more than one use. 
d.  Principal and accessory uses. Each of the uses may function as either a principal use or accessory use on a lot, unless otherwise specified. 
e.  Building type. Each use shall be located within a permitted building type (refer to [section] 27-105, building types), unless otherwise specified. 
(2)  Use subcategories. For the purposes of fulfilling the use mix requirements defined in each district table (refer to [section] 27-104(b), PC-1 district through [section] 27-104(e), PC-4 district), utilize the following subcategories of uses, consisting of those uses listed in the table, right, that may contribute to the mix. Some permitted uses are not included. 
a.  Lodging and residence subcategory. 
Household living 
Group living 
Lodging 
b.  Civic subcategory. 
Club or lodge, private 
Cultural exhibit 
Educational services 
Hospital 
Place of worship 
c.  Office subcategory. 
Construction and building sales and service 
Medical service 
Office or consumer service 
Research and testing services 
d.  Retail sales subcategory 
Retail sales 
Food and beverage retail sales 
e.  Service use subcategory. 
Animal services 
Day care 
Repair or laundry services, consumer 
Personal improvement services 
Eating and drinking establishments 
Financial services 
Entertainment and spectator sports 
Sports and recreation, participant 

(g)  Sustainability measures. 
(1)  Intent. The following requirements are intended to further the sustainability goals of the city defined in the most current sustainability plan adopted by the city. 
(2)  Applicability. The sustainable development measures in this section shall be addressed by all new developments in a Perimeter Center (PC) district that involve the complete replacement of an existing building or construction of a new building. 
(3)  Calculation and evaluation. 
a.  Minimum points required. The applicant shall achieve no fewer than seven points from any combination of the sustainable development measures as valued in figure 27-104-7, sustainability measures and values. No partial points will be accepted. 
b.  Minimum requirements of the measure. All points shall be awarded based on meeting the minimum requirements of each sustainability measure, as indicated in this section. 
c.  Newly constructed measures. Measures count only if they are part of the new development application; measures already in place at the time of application do not count, unless otherwise approved by the community development director. 
d.  Required documentation. The following documentation is required: 
1.  Documentation of which measures and total number of points the applicant will achieve shall be indicated on the development permit application submitted to the city (refer to article V, division 9). 
2.  Documentation is required to clearly illustrate the extent to which the minimum requirements of each of the selected measures is to be met through permanent construction or policies. 

(4)  Energy category measures. 
a.  Energy efficiency. Newly constructed buildings must demonstrate an average ten-percent improvement over the energy code currently in effect in the city. 
b.  Renewable energy. Incorporate renewable energy generation on-site with production capacity of at least five percent of the building's annual electric or thermal energy, established through an accepted building energy performance simulation tool. The following renewable energy generation sources are applicable: solar thermal or photovoltaics, ground-sourced heating or cooling, fuel cells and microturbines using non-fossil fuel, wind energy conversion. Other means of generating electricity without using a fuel, such as kinetic, heat exchange, approved by the community development director. 
c.  Green roof. Install a vegetated roof for at least 50 percent of any building roof area or roof deck; a minimum of 2,500 square feet is required to receive credit. 
d.  Heat island reduction. Use any combination of the following strategies for 35 percent of all on-site, non-roof hardscape areas, including sidewalks, plazas, courtyards, parking lots, parking structures, and driveway: coverage of the surface at canopy tree maturity in 15 years, and/or solar reflective paving and roofing with a SRI (solar reflectance index) of at least 29. 
(5)  Water category measures. 
a.  Building water efficiency. Indoor water use in new buildings and major renovations must be an average 20 percent less than in baseline buildings. Baseline water usage shall be determined based on fixtures per the Energy Policy Act of 1992 and subsequent rulings by the United States Department of Energy or a similar method approved by the community development director. 
b.  Water-efficient landscaping. Reduce potable water used for landscape irrigation by 50 percent from a calculated midsummer baseline case by using either one of the following methods: utilizing all xeriscape plant materials and providing no permanent irrigation system, or using only captured rainwater with an irrigation system. 
c.  Pervious pavement. Install an open grid or pervious pavement system that is at least 40 percent pervious on 65 percent of all hardscape surface areas, including sidewalks, plazas, courtyards, parking lots, and driveways. The water shall be directed into the groundwater or other acceptable storm accommodation per the public works director. 
(6)  Transportation category measures. 
a.  Enhanced bicycle amenities measure. Inclusion of two of the following earns one point. Inclusion of three of the following earns two points. 
1.  Lockable enclosed bicycle storage. Provide one secure, enclosed bicycle storage space for ten percent of planned employee occupancy with no more than ten spaces required. 
2.  Employee shower facilities. Provide a minimum of one shower facility per 150 employees, minimum of one total. 
3.  Repair center. Provide a designated bicycle repair center open to the public and consisting of, at least one air pump, water, and basic tools for minor repairs. 
b.  Transportation access measure. Site must be within one-fourth mile of existing or proposed transit stop with provision of enhanced access to transit and shall include one or more of the following. 
1.  Construction of a bus turnout on development property or in adjacent street right-of-way. 
2.  Construction of additional shared use paths other than those required per [section] 27-98(b)(3)d, shared use paths. 
3.  Provision of direct platform connection to rail station. 
4.  Additional easement for provision or enhancement of transit. 
5.  Other items approved by the public works director. 
(7)  Alternative measure. The applicant may submit an alternative sustainable development measure for approval by the community development director. The measure shall further a sustainability goal and shall not be considered standard practice for current developments. The measure shall be unrelated to any of the other measures defined in this section. Based upon their review, the community development director shall approve for the number of points to be awarded. Required documentation shall clearly illustrate that the measure furthers a sustainability goal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05-14, § 2(Exh. B), 5-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01-03, § I, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 27-105. - Building types. 
(a)  Requirements for all building types. The building types detailed in this section outline the required building forms for new construction and renovated structures within the Perimeter Center districts defined in [section] 27-104, districts. 
(1)  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all new development, or new structures or buildings, established in [section] 27-103(a)(2). All structures must meet the requirements of one of the building types permitted within the zoning district. 
(2)  Districts, building types, and street types. For each lot, a designated Perimeter Center district is found on figure 27-104-1, regulating map. 
a.  District. Each district, per [section] 27-104, districts, has a set of requirements related to streets, open space, uses, and permitted building types. 
b.  Building types. Each building type, as established in this section 27-105, has a set of requirements, including requirements related to the façades facing different street types. 
c.  Street types. Street types, per section 27-98(b), street types, of the Perimeter Center Overlay, include frontage requirements for the space between the build-to zone of the building type and the curb of the street. 
(3)  Uses. Uses are permitted by district, per [section] 27-104(f), uses. Each building type can house a variety of uses depending on the district in which it is located. Some building types have additional limitations on permitted uses as located within the building. 
(4)  General building design requirements. Refer to section 27-98(d), general building design criteria within the Perimeter Center Overlay, for information on building design requirements additional to and applicable to all building types. 
(5)  Multiple principal structures. Multiple structures are permitted on all lots in the perimeter center districts. All structures shall meet the requirements of one of the permitted building types for the district. 
(6)  Permanent structures. All buildings constructed shall be permanent construction, unless otherwise noted. 
(7)  Other structures. Utility structures and towers permitted in the district are exempted from the building type standards. 
(8)  Build to the corner. The corner of the lot is defined as the intersection of the two build-to zones of each street. Refer to figure 27-105-1, corner and build-to zones on different street types. 
a.  Corners at primary street and parkways. Buildings shall be built up to the corner, occupying the intersection of the two build-to zones of any intersection of two primary streets, a primary street at any parkway, or two parkways. Courtyards shall not be located in this area. 
b.  Corners involving secondary streets. Buildings should be built to the corner, occupying the intersection of the two build-to zones of any intersection involving a secondary street. Courtyards should not be located in this area. 
(9)  Treatment of build-to zones, setbacks, and transition yards. Refer to [section] 27-621 terms defined for definition of build-to zones and setbacks. 
a.  Landscape areas. All build-to zones and setbacks shall only contain courtyards (as permitted by street type frontage), plazas (as permitted by street type frontage), patios (as permitted by street type frontage), sidewalk or trail extensions, buffers, and/or landscape yards, unless otherwise specifically noted. 
b.  Transition yards. Refer to [section] 27-230 for size and landscape requirements. 
c.  Surface parking. Surface parking lot yard location is determined by building type and shall only be permitted in setbacks when the setback is labeled as a "building setback". Parking shall be set back from a lot line abutting another property a minimum of five feet. Refer to [section] 27-105(b), regulations specific to building types. 

d.  Driveways. Driveways may cross perpendicularly through build-to zones and setbacks, when permitted per [section] 27-105(a)(10), driveways, below, or to connect to a parking lot on an abutting lots. 
e.  Perimeter buffer. On all PC district lots, a required transition yard of 100 feet is established at the lot line of a PC district and any City of Dunwoody residential zoning district not within the PCID Overlay area. Within the perimeter buffer, building height is restricted to three stories or 42 feet, whichever is less. Refer to [section] 27-104, districts. 
(10)  Driveway access. Location of vehicular driveway access is based on the major or minor parkway, primary street, and secondary street designations in figure 27-98-2, street types, map per the hierarchy as follows. Refer to figure 27-105-2, driveway locations by street type. 
a.  Public works director. The public works director shall determine the quantity of driveways, need for closure of existing driveways, width of driveways, and proximity of driveways to other driveways or streets. 

b.  Alleys/lanes. Access from an adjacent alley or lane is unlimited. Construction of new private or public alleys/lanes through blocks is encouraged. Typically, alleys or lanes cut through a block and provide vehicular access to multiple garages, parking lots, or service areas. Minimum pavement width for an alley or lane is 16 feet and maximum pavement width is 24 feet. 
c.  Secondary street access. If no alley exists, one driveway access per 200 linear feet of street frontage or two total driveway access points, whichever is greater, are permitted from each secondary street per site. 
d.  Primary street. If no alley or secondary street exists, one driveway access point is permitted off each primary street. 
1.  Side parking off primary street. When side parking with the drive located perpendicular to the street centerline, is utilized as permitted by the building type, one driveway access is permitted off the primary street. This driveway counts towards entrances permitted by [section] 27-105(a)(10)d, above. The sidewalk paving shall extend across the driveway, signaling priority to the pedestrian. 
e.  Parkways. If no alley, secondary street, or primary street exists, existing driveways may be utilized off parkways. New driveways off minor or major parkways are permitted only if no other option exists and a minor exception is granted by the public works director. 
f.  Shared driveways. Shared driveways are encouraged for all other adjacent developments. 
g.  Inter-lot drives. When two or more parking lots are located adjacent to each other and each lot contains the same building type, the parking lots shall be connected with a drive perpendicularly crossing the transition yard. Other parking lots should be connected wherever practical. 
h.  Pedestrian facilities. At-grade, designated pedestrian routes, including sidewalks and crosswalks, shall be supplied connecting each parking area to either the primary sidewalk (and front entrance) or a rear public entrance. 
1.  Crosswalks shall include pavers or colored concrete pavement across driveways. 
2.  Vehicular areas, such as driveways, parking drive lanes, loading lanes, bike lanes/facilities, and parking areas, shall not be utilized as designated pedestrian routes. 
3.  Pedestrian connections are desirable between all adjacent sites and land uses. 
i.  Driveway width. Driveways shall be no greater than 22 feet in width at the right-of-way line. Driveways wider than 22 feet shall include landscaped, pedestrian refuge islands with a walk area to reduce the crossing to no more than 22 feet. 
j.  Loading facilities. Loading facilities for all building types in all perimeter center districts shall be located as follows: 
1.  Loading facilities shall not face primary streets. 
2.  Loading facilities shall not be located in any required building setback area. 
3.  Preferred location for loading facilities is on the interior of the lot, not visible from any streets. 
4.  Loading facilities visible from a parkway or secondary street shall be screened from the sidewalk by a fence/wall or a combination of fence/wall and landscape screening. 
i.  Fence/wall. Fences and walls shall be no taller than six feet and shall have a minimum overall opacity of 80 percent. Materials shall meet the requirements of [section] 27-98(d)(3)a, major façade materials, in the Perimeter Center Overlay. 
ii.  Landscape. Tree canopies shall be used to screen above the six-foot wall or fence. 
iii.  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs and hedges may be utilized to fulfill no more than one third of the screening, as measured along the screen length. A double row of five-gallon shrubs, with mature height of a minimum six feet, is required. 
k.  Accessory buildings. The following applies to all accessory buildings or structures in any PC district: 
1.  Attached accessory structures are considered part of the principal structure and shall meet all requirements of the principal structure. 
2.  Detached accessory structures shall comply with all building and district requirements unless otherwise modified in the following: 
i.  Detached accessory structures are not permitted between the face of the building and any street right-of-way line. 
ii.  Detached accessory structures shall be a maximum of ten feet lower in height than the overall building height or 15 feet in height, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Regulations specific to building types. 
(1)  Building type descriptions and intents. 
a.  Shopfront building. The shopfront building is intended for use as a mixed use building located close to the sidewalk with parking typically in the rear or side of the lot. 
The most distinctive element of this building type is the ground floor front façade with large amounts of storefront glass and regularly spaced entrances, typically for retail and service uses. 
b.  General building. The general building is intended to be built close to the sidewalk, but may also allow for a landscape yard and drop off drives. This building can be structured to house offices or residential uses including multi-family, and may have limited amounts of accessory retail and service uses in the ground floor. 
Parking is typically provided in structures at the rear of the lot, internally in the rear of the building, but may also have limited surface parking along the side of the building. 
c.  Townhouse building. The townhouse building is a building typically comprised of several multi-story single-family units, located adjacent to each other, each with its own entrance to the street. 
d.  Detached house building. The detached house building is a building surrounded by landscape yard, with an entrance facing the street, and typically housing single family uses. 
Parking is required to be located in the rear, either incorporated into a detached garage or in an attached garaged accessed from the rear of the building. 
e.  Civic building description. The civic building is the most flexible building type limited to civic and institutional types of uses. 
These buildings are distinctive within the urban fabric created by the other building types and could be designed as iconic structures. 
(2)  Building type regulations. The following defines and illustrates the regulations for each building type. 
a.  Shopfront building regulations. 



b.  General building regulations. 



c.  Townhouse building regulations. 



d.  Detached house building regulations. 



e.  Civic building regulations. 



(c)  Explanation of specific building type requirements. The following explains and further defines the standards outlined on the tables on the previous pages, specific to each building type, refer to [subsections] (b)(2)a through (b)(2)e. 
(1)  Building siting by street types. The following explains the line item requirements for each building type table within the section entitled "Building siting." 
For each building type, requirements are defined for each street type frontage that may occur surrounding the site. Refer to figure 27-98-2, street types map, for the type defined for each street in the Perimeter Center area. Each street type is defined with frontage options in [section] 27-98(b), street types, including the major and minor parkway, primary street, and the secondary street. 
a.  Build-to zone coverage. The minimum percentage of building wall or façade along the street for each street type (parkway, primary street, secondary street per figure 27-98-2, street types map) is designated on each building type table. Refer to [subsections] (b)(2)a through (b)(2)e. 
1.  Measurement. The width of the principal structures (as measured within the build-to zone along the frontage edge) is divided by the length of the frontage parallel to the property line following the street. Refer to figure 27-105-18, minimum build-to zone coverage. 
2.  Courtyards. Courtyards, per [section] 27-621, terms defined, located along the façade in the build-to zone count towards the minimum coverage. Refer to street types for limitations of courtyards along some frontages. 
b.  Build-to zone. The build-to zone is designated separately for each street type frontage on each building type table. Refer to figure 27-105-1, corner and build-to zones, on different street types and figure 27-98-2, street types map. 
1.  Measurement. The build-to zone for all districts and street type frontages is measured from the edge of the street type frontage area onto the site, along the frontage edge. Refer to figure 27-105-19, location of build-to zone in relation to frontage. 
2.  Encroachments. Awnings and building mounted signage may extend beyond the build-to zone into the frontage area, but may not extend into the street right-of-way. 
3.  Porches, arcades, galleries. Porches, arcades and galleries may be included on the building façade design, utilizing the range of depth permitted by the build-to zone. If located outside the building coverage requirement, the depth of the arcade or gallery may exceed the build-to zone. 


c.  Off-street parking along frontage. Off-street parking is permitted behind any buildings on the site, but is only permitted exposed along a frontage if designated on the table of requirements for each building type. 
1.  Side parking. Where noted, side off-street parking along a primary street may be permitted with a maximum of one double loaded aisle of parking perpendicular to the street centerline and with a maximum width of 72 feet. Refer to the street type frontage parking edge for design requirements in front of the parking and figure 27-105-20, side off-street parking. 

(2)  Floor-to-floor height. The following explains the line item requirements for each building type table within the section entitled "Floor-to-floor height." 
Overall permitted building heights are designated by district in stories. Refer to [section] 27-104 districts. 
a.  Ground story, minimum and maximum height. (Refer to figure 27-105-21, measuring story height). Each building type indicates a permitted range of height in feet for the ground story of the building. 
1.  Taller spaces. Spaces exceeding the allowable floor-to-floor heights of the building type are not permitted on primary street façades. These spaces are unlimited on interior lot and secondary street façades, and limited to no more than 50 percent of major or minor parkway façades. 

b.  Ground story elevation. The allowable ground story elevation for each building type is defined, establishing whether or not a visible basement is permitted. 
1.  Visible basements. Visible basements, permitted by entrance type, are optional. The visible basement shall be a maximum of one-half the height of the tallest story. 

(3)  Uses within building. The following explains the line item requirements for each building type table within the section entitled "Uses within building." Refer to [section] 27-104(f), uses for uses permitted within each zoning district. The requirements in this section of the building type tables may limit those uses within a specific building type. 
a.  Ground and upper story. The uses or category of uses which may occupy the ground and/or upper story of a building. 
b.  Parking within building. The area(s) of a building in which parking is permitted within the structure. 
c.  Required occupied space. The required depth of occupied space from the noted façade(s). Refer to [section] 27-621, terms defined, for the definition of occupied space. 
(4)  Street façade design requirements. The following explains the line item requirements for each building type within the section entitled "street façade requirements". 
These requirements apply only to façades facing public or private streets and façades facing main parking lots where visitors or customers park. 
a.  Minimum fenestration. (refer to figure 27-105-23, measuring fenestration, per façade). The following articulates the minimum amount of ground story transparent glass required on façades facing street and parking façades. 
1.  Measurement. Ground story windows, when defined separately from the overall minimum fenestration, shall be measured between two feet and eight feet from the average grade at the base of the front façade. Refer to figure 27-105-22, measuring ground story windows. 
2.  Transparent. Transparent means any glass in windows and/or doors, including any mullions, that is highly transparent with low reflectance. 
3.  Other stories. A general minimum fenestration requirement applies to all other stories visible from any street. Refer to [section] 27-98(d)(4),a quantity of windows. 
4.  Arcades, galleries, courtyards. Ground story windows shall be located on the interior façade of any arcade or gallery. Ground story windows shall continue around a minimum of 60 percent of courtyard façades. 
b.  Entry area. Size requirements and recommended types of entrance areas per building type. 
c.  Required number of street entrances. The minimum number of and maximum spacing between entrances on the ground floor building façade with primary street frontage. 
d.  Vertical façade divisions. The use of a vertically oriented expression line or form to divide the façade into vertical divisions at increments no greater than the dimension shown, as measured along the base of the façade. Elements may include a column, pilaster, or other continuous vertical ornamentation a minimum of 1.5 inch depth. Refer to [section] 27-621, terms defined, for the definition of expression line. 
e.  Horizontal façade divisions. The use of a horizontally oriented expression line or form to divide portions of the façade into horizontal divisions at locations designated. Elements may include a cornice, belt course, molding, string courses, or other continuous horizontal ornamentation a minimum of 1.5 inch depth. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05-14, § 2(Exh. B), 5-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01-03, § II, 1-28-2019) 
Sec. 27-106. - Open space types. 
(a)  Intent. To provide open space as an amenity that promotes physical and environmental health within the community and to provide access to a variety of active and passive open space types. 
(b)  Applicability. The standards outlined apply to open space required per Perimeter Center district (refer to [section] 27-104(b) through [section] 27-104(e)). 
(1)  Existing open space. At the discretion of the city, existing open space on the site may be used to meet the minimum requirement; however, the existing open space shall conform to one of the types defined. 
(2)  Rooftop open space. Rooftop terraces or open space shall not count towards required open space. 
(3)  Fee in-lieu. Open space requirements of this section must be met by open space provided on the development site, unless off-site open space or a fee in lieu of open space provision is approved in accordance with the special administrative permit process. 
(c)  General requirements. All open space shall meet the following requirements. 
(1)  Open space types. All open space provided within any perimeter center district shall comply with one of the open space types defined by [subsections] (e) through (h). 
(2)  Access. All open space types shall provide public access from a pedestrian route associated with a vehicular right-of-way and/or adjacent building entrances/exits. 
(3)  Dedicated. Open space types shall be designated by easement or, with permission of the city, may be either located within the right-of-way or dedicated by plat as a separate lot. 
(4)  Fencing. Open space types may incorporate fencing provided that the following requirements are met. 
a.  Height. Fencing shall be a maximum height of 48 inches, unless approved by the community development director for such circumstances as proximity to railroad right-of-way and use around athletic facilities. 
b.  Level of opacity. Fence opacity shall be no greater than 60 percent. 
c.  Type. Chain-link fencing is not permitted along any street frontage, with the exception of dedicated sports field or court fencing approved by the community development director. 
d.  Spacing of openings. Openings or gates shall be provided on every street face at a minimum of one per every 200 feet. 
(5)  Open water body. All open water bodies, such as lakes, ponds, pools, creeks, and streams, within an open space type shall be located at least 20 feet from a property line to allow for pedestrian and bicycle access as well as a landscape area surrounding the water body. 
(6)  Parking requirements. Parking shall not be required for any open space type, unless otherwise determined by the community development director. 

(7)  Continuity. New open space shall connect to abutting, or proximate existing or planned trail right-of-way. 
(8)  Measuring size. 
a.  Size. The size of the open space type is measured to include all landscape and paving areas associated directly with the open space type. 
b.  Minimum dimension. The minimum length or width of the open space type, as measured along the longest two straight lines intersecting at a right angle defining the maximum length and width of the lot. Refer to figure 27-106-1, measuring minimum dimensions. 
(9)  Minimum percentage of street frontage required. A minimum percentage of the open space perimeter, as measured along the outer edge of the space, shall be located directly adjacent to a parkway, primary street, or secondary street. This requirement provides access and visibility to the open space. 
(10)  Improvements. As noted in the specific requirements for each open space type ([subsections] (e) through (h)), the following types of site improvements and structures may be permitted on an open space type. 
a.  Fully enclosed structures permitted. Fully enclosed structures may include such uses as small cafes, kiosks, community centers, and restrooms. 
(1)  Maximum area. For some civic open space types, fully enclosed structures are permitted, but limited to a maximum building coverage as a percentage of the open space area. 
(2)  Semi-enclosed structures. Open-air structures, such as gazebos, are permitted in all open space types. 
b.  Maximum impervious and semi-pervious surface permitted. The amounts of impervious and semi-pervious coverage are provided separately for each open space type ([subsections] (e) through (h)) to allow an additional amount of semi-pervious surface, such as permeable paving, above the impervious surfaces permitted, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, paths, and structures as permitted. 
c.  Maximum percentage of open water body. The maximum amount of area within an open space type that may be covered by an open water body, including, but not limited to, ponds, lakes, and pools. 
(d)  Stormwater in open space types. Stormwater management practices, such as normally dry storage and retention facilities or ponds maintaining water at all times, may be integrated into open space types and utilized to meet stormwater requirements for surrounding parcels. 
(1)  Stormwater features. Stormwater features in open space may be designed as formal or natural amenities with additional uses other than stormwater management, such as an amphitheater, sports field, or a pond or pool as part of the landscape design. Stormwater features shall not be fenced and shall not impede public use of the land they occupy. 
(2)  Walls. Retaining walls over 30 inches in height are not permitted in any open space accommodating stormwater. 
(3)  Qualified professional. A qualified design professional shall be utilized to incorporate the stormwater features into the design of the open spaces. 

 

 

 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-05-14, § 2(Exh. B), 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 27-107—27-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USES AND USE-SPECIFIC REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - USE CLASSIFICATIONS 

Sec. 27-111. - General. 
This division contains a description of the use classification system used to classify principal uses in this zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Use categories. This zoning ordinance classifies principal land uses into five major groupings, which are referred to as use categories: 
a.  Residential; 
b.  Quasi-Public and Institutional; 
c.  Commercial; 
d.  Industrial; 
e.  Agricultural. 
(2)  Use subcategories. Each use category is further divided into more specific "subcategories." Use subcategories classify principal land uses and activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions. 
(3)  Specific uses. Some use subcategories are further broken down to identify specific use, business or activity types that are regulated differently than the parent subcategory as a whole. 
(4)  Use tables. The use tables in sections 27-57 and 27-72 identify uses allowed in residential districts and in nonresidential and mixed-use districts, respectively. 
a.  Use categories, use subcategories and specific use types. The use categories and subcategories described in this division are identified in the first column of the use tables. In some cases, specific use types are listed in addition to the use categories and subcategories. 
b.  Permitted uses. Uses identified with a "P" in the use tables are permitted as of right in the subject zoning district, subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
c.  Special uses. 
1.  Uses identified with an "S" in the use tables may be allowed if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. Special land uses are subject to compliance with any supplemental use regulations identified in the final column of the tables and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
2.  Uses identified with an "E" in the use tables may be allowed if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of article V, division 6. Special exception uses are subject to compliance with any supplemental use regulations identified in the final column of the tables and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
3.  Uses identified with an "A" in the use tables may be allowed if reviewed and approved in accordance with the administrative permit procedures of article V, division 7. Administrative permit uses are subject to compliance with any supplemental use regulations identified in the final column of the tables and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
d.  Prohibited uses. Uses identified with an "-" are expressly prohibited. Uses that are not listed in the use table and that cannot reasonably be interpreted to fall within the use categories described in this article III, division 1 are also prohibited. 
e.  Supplemental use regulations. The final column of use table identifies supplemental regulations that apply to some uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, compliance with such regulations is required regardless of whether the use is permitted as of right or requires any form of special use approval. 
(5)  Determination of use categories and subcategories. 
a.  The community development director is authorized to classify uses on the basis of the use category and subcategory descriptions of this section. 
b.  When a use cannot be readily classified into a use category/subcategory or appears to fit into multiple categories/subcategories, the community development director is authorized to determine the most similar, and thus most appropriate, use category/subcategory based on the actual or projected characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use category and subcategory descriptions provided in this section. Any decision made by the community development director to authorize a use in a zoning district where it is not specifically authorized shall be published, and notice sent to adjacent property owners, per paragraph (5)e. below. In making such determinations, the community development director is authorized to consider all of the following: 
1.  The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the use; 
2.  The types of equipment and processes to be used; 
3.  The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or employees; 
4.  Parking demands associated with the use; and 
5.  Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination. 
c.  If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the community development director must categorize the use in the category, subcategory or specific use type that provides the most exact, narrowest and appropriate match. 
d.  If the community development director is unable to determine the appropriate use category for a proposed use, the community development director is authorized to deny the permit request. 
e.  Any person or entity (i.e.: an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor, or a neighbor whose property is within 1,500 feet of the subject property aggrieved by the decision of the community development director on use determinations may appeal the decision within 30 days of the community development director's decision. Decisions pertaining to "uses" as conditioned in [subsection] b. above will be published on-line, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and provided in writing via first class mail to adjacent property owners. The 30-day appeal period shall commence from the date written notification is sent to adjacent property owners. Appeal shall be in accordance with the appeal procedures of article V, division 8. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-8.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-112. - Residential use category. 
The residential use category includes uses that provide living accommodations to one or more persons. 
(1)  Household living category. Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. When dwelling units are rented, tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Dwelling units rented whole or in part for periods of less than one calendar month are not included in the household living category. They are considered a form of lodging (subsection 27-114(10). 
a.  Detached house. A principal residential building containing one dwelling unit located on a single lot with private yards on all sides. 
b.  Attached house. A residential building containing two or more dwelling units, each located on its own lot with a common or abutting wall along shared lot lines. Each dwelling unit has its own external entrance. 
c.  Multi-unit building. A residential building, other than an attached house building, containing two or more dwelling units that share common walls and/or common floors/ceilings. 
d.  Mixed-use building, vertical. A building in which commercial uses occupy the ground floor and dwelling units occupy one or more upper floors. 
(2)  Group living. Residential occupancy of a dwelling by other than a "household," typically providing communal kitchen/dining facilities. Examples of group living uses include but are not limited to fraternities, sororities, convents, monasteries, nursing homes and the following specific use types: 
a.  Nursing home. An establishment providing inpatient, skilled nursing and rehabilitative services to patients who require health care but not hospital services. Care is ordered by and under the direction of a physician. 
b.  Personal care home. Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services, including watchful oversight, for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. "Personal services" includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. Personal care homes cannot provide nursing or other medical services, with the exception that those services defined specifically as "personal services" may be conducted by nurses or other appropriate medical personnel, or admit and retain residents who need continuous medical or nursing care. 
1.  Personal care home—Family. A personal care home that offers care to at least one but not more than four persons. 
2.  Personal care home—Group. A personal care home that offers care to at least five but not more than seven persons. 
3.  Personal care home—Community. A personal care home that offers care to eight or more persons. 
c.  Shelter, homeless. The provision of overnight housing and sleeping accommodations for one or more persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of temporary, short-term housing assistance, and in which may also be provided meals and social services including counseling services. 
d.  Supportive living. Four or more dwelling units in a single building or group of buildings that are designed for independent living for persons with disabilities of any kind and in which are provided supportive services to the residents of the complex but which supportive services do not constitute continuous 24-hour watchful oversight, and that does not require licensure as a personal care home by the Office of Regulatory Services of the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
e.  Transitional housing facility. The provision of long-term but not permanent living accommodations for more than six persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of long-term housing assistance. 
f.  Child-caring institution. Any institution, society, agency, or facility, whether incorporated or not, which either primarily or incidentally provides full-time care (room, board, and watchful oversight) for children through 18 years of age outside of their own homes, and that is licensed by the state department of human resources as a child caring institution. 
g.  Community living arrangement. Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, that undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of daily personal services, supports, care, or treatment exclusively for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage and whose residential services are financially supported, in whole or in part, by funds designated through the department [of] behavioral health and developmental disabilities (DBHDD). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-8.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-113. - Quasi-public and institutional category. 
The quasi-public and institutional use category includes educational, medical and religious institutions and other quasi-public uses. The quasi-public and institutional use category includes the following use subcategories: 
(1)  Ambulance service. Privately operated ambulance or emergency medical services. 
(2)  Club or lodge, private. The use of a building or lot by a membership-based organization that restricts access to its facility to bona fide, dues-paying members and their occasional guests. Private clubs and lodges are characterized by definite membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution and bylaws. Examples include country clubs and fraternal organizations. This subcategory does not include adult entertainment establishments or adult service facilities. 
(3)  Cultural exhibit. Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, museum exhibition of works of art. 
(4)  Day care. Uses providing care, protection and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence for fewer than 24 hours per day. 
a.  Adult day care center. A day care establishment operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision and oversight only during day-time hours of seven or more adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped or mentally handicapped. 
b.  Adult day care facility. A day care establishment operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision and oversight only during day-time hours of six or fewer adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped or mentally handicapped. 
c.  Child day care center. A day care establishment operated by any person with or without compensation providing for the care, supervision and protection of seven or more children who are under 18 years of age, without transfer of legal custody. Children who are related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship to the operators of the day care center must be included when computing the number of children within a child day care center. See also "kindergarten," which is included in the educational services use classification. 
d.  Child day care facility. A day care establishment operated by any person with or without compensation providing for the care, supervision and protection of six or fewer children who are under 18 years of age, without transfer of legal custody. Children who are related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship to the operators of the day care facility must be included when computing the number of children within a child day care facility. 
(5)  Educational services. The provision of tuition-based learning opportunities for academic or career advancement purposes. 
a.  College or university. Colleges and other institutions of higher learning that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree. They are certified by the state or by a recognized accrediting agency. Colleges tend to be in campus-like settings or on multiple blocks. Examples include universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing schools, conservatories and seminaries. 
b.  Kindergarten. An establishment operated for compensation providing for the care, supervision, instruction and protection of seven or more children who are under seven years of age, without transfer of legal custody. 
c.  Elementary, middle or senior high schools. Private schools at the primary, elementary, middle school (junior high) or senior high school level that provide state-mandated basic education. 
(6)  Hospital. Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and offering inpatient (overnight) care. 
(7)  Place of worship. A place of public assembly for religious worship that is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. Typical uses include synagogues, temples, mosques and churches. Typical accessory uses include schools, religious education, social gathering rooms, food service facilities, indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, day care centers, kindergartens and similar uses. 
(8)  Utility facility, essential. Structures and facilities necessary for the distribution of electricity, gas, water, stormwater, wastewater, communication, transportation or other similar service, excluding telecommunications towers, telecommunications antennas and public utility facilities. 
(9)  Neighborhood recreation club. A non-profit organization which provides recreational facilities and programs for neighborhood or other association of persons, and characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, and a charter and bylaws. Neighborhood recreation club shall also mean, where the context requires, the premises and structures owned, used or occupied by the members of the association in which the activities of the neighborhood recreation club are conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-8.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-114. - Commercial use category. 
The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service or involve the selling, leasing or renting of merchandise to the general public. The commercial use category includes the following use subcategories. 
(1)  Adult use. 
a.  Body art service. Provision of any of the following procedures: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding or scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Georgia Composite Medical Board, which may not be performed in a body art services establishment. 
b.  Sexually oriented business. An adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theatre, a semi-nude model studio or a sexual device shop. See subsection 27-149(c) for additional definitions. 
(2)  Animal services. The following are animal services use subcategories: 
a.  Animal care/boarding. The keeping of and care for any number of companion animals for remuneration or profit. Typical uses include boarding kennels, pet resorts/hotels, doggy or pet day care facilities, foster care homes, dog training centers and animal rescue shelters. 
b.  Animal grooming. Grooming of companion animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shops. 
c.  Animal hospital/veterinary clinic. Typical uses include pet and veterinary clinics, dog and cat hospitals and animal hospitals. 
(3)  Communication services. Broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. Typical uses include recording studios, television and radio studios and telecommunication towers and antennas. 
a.  Telecommunication facility. 
1.  Telecommunications antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
2.  Telecommunications tower. Any structure that is designed or constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "telecommunications tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and alternative tower structures. 
3.  Alternative tower structure. A telecommunications tower, the visual presence of which is camouflaged or concealed in the form of a clock tower, campanile, light pole, artificial tree or similarly camouflaged telecommunications antenna-mounting structure. 
(4)  Construction and building sales and services. Establishments that provide services, supplies or equipment to construct, develop, repair maintain, or visually enhance a structure or premises. Typical uses include lumber yards, hardware stores, home improvement centers, equipment rental or sales, building contracting/construction businesses and janitorial services, pest control services, landscape maintenance contractors and window cleaning services. Hardware stores, paint stores and similar retail sales businesses that do not include any visible outdoor storage or display are classified under the "retail" use subcategory. Uses that involve only office or administrative functions with no on-site equipment or service vehicle storage are classified under the "office or consumer service" subcategory. 
(5)  Eating and drinking establishments. Provision of prepared food and/or beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. Typical uses include ice cream shops, bakeries, coffee shops, cafes, restaurants and bars. 
a.  Food truck. A licensed motor vehicle or other mobile food dispensation unit that is temporarily parked outside of the right-of-way and in which food items are sold to the general public. 
(6)  Entertainment and spectator sports. Provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic and other events to spectators, such as typically occurs in theaters, cinemas, auditoriums, special events facilities, stadiums and arenas. 
a.  Special events facility. A meeting or gathering place for personal social engagements or activities, where people assemble for parties, weddings, wedding receptions, reunions, birthday celebrations, business conferences or similar activities, in which food and beverages may be served to guests. 
(7)  Financial services. Financial or securities brokerage services. Typical uses include federally chartered banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, consumer investment advisory businesses, pawn shops and check cashing establishments. 
a.  Convenient cash business. A check cashing establishment, precious metal broker other substantially similar business. 
1.  Check cashing establishment. Check cashing establishment means any establishment licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-700 et seq. 
2.  Precious metal broker. An establishment engaged in whole or in part in the business of buying gold, precious metals or jewelry. 
b.  Pawn shop. An entity engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130(5)), or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on a condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
(8)  Food and beverage retail sales. Retail sale of food and beverages for off-premises consumption. Typical uses include groceries, liquor stores and wine stores. 
(9)  Funeral and interment services. Provision of services involving the care, preparation or disposition of human dead. The following are funeral and interment services use subcategories: 
a.  Cemetery/columbarium/mausoleum. Land or other facilities used for burial or interment of the dead, including pet cemeteries. 
b.  Cremating. Crematory services involving the purification and reduction of the human body by fire. Typical uses include crematories and crematoriums. (Note: cremating is also considered an accessory use to a cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum) 
c.  Undertaking. Undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(10)  Lodging. Provision of lodging on a temporary basis, which may include incidental food, drink and other sales and services intended for the convenience of overnight guests. Lodging is most typically offered for transient occupancy for periods of less than one month duration. The following are lodging uses: 
a.  Bed and breakfast. A detached house in which the owner offers overnight accommodations and meal service to guests for compensation. 
b.  Hotel/motel. An establishment, other than a bed and breakfast, in which short-term lodging is offered for compensation and that may or may not include the service of one or more meals to guests. Typical uses include hotels and motels. 
(11)  Medical service. Personal health services including prevention, diagnosis and treatment services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses and other health personnel and medical testing and analysis services. Typical uses include medical and dental offices, including chiropractic offices, physical therapy offices, psychologist and psychiatrist offices, health maintenance organizations, blood banks and health centers. 
(12)  Office or consumer service. Professional, governmental, executive, management or administrative offices. Typical uses include administrative offices, law offices, architectural and engineering firms, insurance companies, travel agencies, photography studios, tax preparation services and similar offices and consumer service businesses. Medical offices are included under the "medical services" use subcategory. 
(13)  Parking, non-accessory. Parking that is not provided to comply with minimum off-street parking requirements and that is not provided exclusively to serve occupants of or visitors to a particular use, but rather is available to the public at-large. A facility that provides both accessory parking and non-accessory parking is classified as non-accessory parking. 
(14)  Personal improvement service. Informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include hair salons, barber shops, beauty shops, nail salons, massage and/or spa establishments, esthetician services, yoga or dance studios, personal fitness training studios, driving schools and martial arts schools. Health clubs are classified under the "participant sports and recreation" use subcategory. 
a.  For additional license and operational regulations applicable to massage and spa establishments see chapter 10, article IX of this Code, massage establishments and spas. 
(15)  Repair or laundry service, consumer. Provision of repair, dry cleaning or laundry services to individuals or households, but not to firms. Excludes vehicle and equipment repair. Typical uses include laundry/dry cleaning drop-off stations (with no on-premises dry cleaning), hand laundries, appliance repair shops, locksmiths, shoe and apparel repair and musical instrument repair. 
(16)  Research service. An establishment that conducts educational, scientific, high-technology or medical research not involving the mass production, distribution or sale of products. Research services do not produce odors, dust, noise, vibration or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject property. Research-related establishments that do produce such external impacts are classified as "manufacturing and production, light." 
(17)  Retail sales. Businesses involved in the sale, lease or rent of new or used products or merchandise to consumers. Typical uses include drug stores, department stores, florists, quick-service copy shops, TV and electronics stores, jewelry stores, camera shops, bike shops, sporting goods stores, office supply stores, furniture stores and apparel stores. 
(18)  Sports and recreation, participant. Provision of sports or recreation primarily by and for participants. (Spectators are incidental and nonrecurring). Examples include bowling alleys, health clubs, skating rinks, billiard parlors, driving ranges and miniature golf courses and batting cages. 
(19)  Vehicle and equipment sales and service. Sales or rental of motor vehicles and repair and maintenance services for motor vehicles. The following are vehicle sales and service use subcategories: 
a.  Car wash. A building or site containing facilities for washing automobiles. It may use automatic production line methods—a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical device—or provide space, water and equipment for hand washing, cleaning or detailing, whether by the customer or the operator. 
b.  Gasoline sales. Uses engaged in retail sales of personal automobile and vehicle fuels including electric vehicle charging stations. Note: Level 1 (slow-charging) and level 2 (medium) battery charging stations are considered accessory uses and are not regulated as auto fueling stations. Gasoline sales uses may include retail sales activities, such as convenience stores. 
c.  Vehicle sales and rentals. Sales of autos, trucks, motorcycles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats, together with incidental maintenance activities. Typical uses include automobile and boat dealers, car rental agencies and recreational vehicle sales and rental agencies. 
d.  Vehicle repair, minor. A vehicle repair establishment that provides lubrication and/or checking, changing, or additions of those fluids and filters necessary to the maintenance of a vehicle. Customers generally wait in the car or at the establishment while the service is performed. Examples include quick lube services. Also includes vehicle repair establishments that provide replacement of passenger vehicle parts or repairs that do not involve body work or painting or require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential. Examples include tire, muffler and transmission shops. 
e.  Vehicle repair, major. Any vehicle repair activity other than "minor vehicle repair." Examples include repair or servicing of commercial vehicles or heavy equipment or body work, painting, or major repairs to motor vehicles. 
f.  Vehicle storage and towing. Storage of operating motor vehicles or vehicle towing services. Typical uses include towing services, private parking tow-aways (tow lots), impound yards and fleet storage yards. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-8.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-06-13, § 2, 6-22-2015) 
Sec. 27-115. - Industrial use category. 
The industrial use category includes uses that produce goods and that store or distribute materials or goods in large quantities. The industrial use category includes the following use subcategories: 
(1)  Manufacturing and production, light. Manufacturing or refurbishing of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials. Typical uses include: catering establishments, printing and related support activities; machinery manufacturing; food processing and manufacturing; computer and electronic product manufacturing/assembly; electrical equipment, appliance, component manufacturing/assembly; furniture and related product manufacturing/assembly; and other manufacturing and production establishments that typically have few, if any, negative external impacts on surrounding properties. 
(2)  Recycling facilities. An establishment that collects, stores, or processes recyclable material for the purpose of marketing or reusing the material in the manufacturing of new, reused or reconstituted products. 
a.  Recyclable material drop-off facilities. An establishment that accepts consumer recyclable commodities directly from the consuming party and accumulates or stores them for not more than 30 days. Establishments that process recyclable material are classified as "recyclable material processing facilities." (Note: Small consumer-oriented donation and (recycling) collection drop boxes for items such as clothes, books, newspapers, cans and glass items may be considered an accessory use, subject to the regulations of article III, division 3.) 
b.  Recyclable material processing facilities. Establishments that receive and process consumer recyclable commodities for subsequent use in the secondary market. 
(3)  Warehousing, wholesaling and freight movement. Temporary storage, wholesale sales or distribution of materials and equipment. Typical uses include storage warehouses, self-storage warehouses, moving and storage firms, trucking or cartage operations, truck staging or storage areas, wholesale sales of materials and equipment to entities other than the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-8.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-116. - Agriculture and transportation use category. 
The agricultural use category includes the following subcategories: 
(1)  Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including the growing of farm crops and raising or livestock and farm animals. 
a.  Community Garden. An area of land managed and maintained by an individual or group to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops, such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption, sales or donation. 
(2)  Transportation. Land and facilities used for or in support of the transport of people. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-8.60), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-117—27-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 27-131. - Animal services. 
(a)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
(1)  All buildings and outdoor activity areas must be set back at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(2)  No boarding or outdoor animal runs or kennels are allowed unless required in connection with medical treatment or when located in a zoning district that allows animal boarding. 
(3)  When located in a multi-tenant center, the use must be adequately soundproofed and odor-proofed, and pet food must be secured to avoid rodents. 
(b)  Animal care/boarding and animal grooming. 
(1)  All buildings and outdoor activity areas associated with animal care/boarding and animal grooming uses must be set back at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(2)  When located in a multi-tenant center, the use must be adequately soundproofed and odor-proofed, and pet food must be secured to avoid rodents. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-132. - Attached houses. 
The following building separation requirements apply to all attached house buildings on sites containing two or more attached house buildings. For the purpose of these provisions, the front and rear faces are those exterior building walls generally perpendicular to the party (or abutting) walls between dwelling units and the side face is the exterior building wall that is generally perpendicular to the building's front and rear faces. 
(1)  Building setbacks must be provided as required by the applicable zoning district requirements. 
(2)  Buildings that are front face to front face, rear face to rear face, or front face to rear face must be separated by a distance of at least 60 feet. 
(3)  Buildings that are side face to front face or rear face must be separated by a distance of at least 40 feet. 
(4)  Buildings that are side face to side face must be separated by a distance of at least 20 feet. 
(5)  Buildings may not exceed 250 feet in length along any elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-133. - Bed and breakfast. 
Bed and breakfast are subject to all of the following regulations: 
(1)  A bed and breakfast must be occupied by the owner or renter-occupant of the dwelling. 
(2)  The minimum lot area requirement for a bed and breakfast is 20,000 square feet. 
(3)  A dwelling must have a minimum floor area of at least 2,500 square feet in order to be used for a bed and breakfast. 
(4)  No separate kitchen facilities are allowed for the bed and breakfast. 
(5)  The exterior residential appearance of the dwelling must be maintained, and no signs other than those otherwise permitted within the subject zoning district are allowed. 
(6)  Meals may be served only to members of the resident household and to registered overnight guests of the bed and breakfast. 
(7)  Business and accounting records for the bed and breakfast use must be made available to the city upon request to verify compliance with regulations. 
(8)  Guests may not stay longer than seven nights and may not re-register for a period of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-134. - Car washes. 
Wastewater from car washes must drain directly into the public sanitary sewer unless otherwise approved by the city. Car washes are subject to the drive-through requirements of section 27-211. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-135. - Community gardens. 
Community gardens are subject to the following regulations. 
(1)  A community garden area may be divided into separate garden plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. 
(2)  Community garden group members may or may not reside on the subject property. 
(3)  Any structure used in conjunction with a community garden must comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Be located at least ten feet from any property line. 
b.  If the total area of structures used in conjunction with a community garden does not exceed 64 square feet, the structures are not considered accessory buildings. Otherwise, all structures used for community gardens are accessory buildings and must comply with all applicable accessory use and structure regulations. 
c.  The following are not considered structures for the purposes of this section: benches, bike racks, cold-frames, hoop houses, raised/accessible planting beds, compost or waste bins, picnic tables, garden art, rain barrel systems and children's play areas. 
(4)  The site must be designed and maintained so that water will not drain onto adjacent property. 
(5)  Sales activities may occur only in locations where retail sales are an allowed use, provided that on-site sales of crops grown on a community garden site may be authorized as a temporary use in accordance with subsection 27-188(c). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-136. - Convenient cash businesses. 
(a)  Convenient cash businesses are allowed only on lots with frontage on a major arterial. 
(b)  Convenient cash businesses may not be located within 1,000 feet of an existing convenient cash business, pawn shop or liquor store. This separation distance must be measured as a straight-line distance between the main customer entrance doors of the existing and proposed uses or between the main customer entrance door of the proposed use and the lot line of the property occupied by the existing use, whichever method results in the greater separation distance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-137. - Day cares. 
(a)  Adult day care center. All outdoor recreation areas associated with adult day care centers must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least four feet in height. 
(b)  Adult day care facility. Adult day care facilities are subject to all of the following requirements: 
(1)  All outdoor recreation areas must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least four feet in height. 
(2)  Persons seeking to operate an adult day care facility must file a permit application with the community development department. Each application must be accompanied by the applicant's affidavit certifying the maximum number of adults that will be served simultaneously and that the proposed adult day facility will meet and be operated in accordance with all applicable state laws and regulations and with all ordinances and regulations of the city. The community development department may require that the applicant provide additional information deemed necessary to determine whether the proposed facility will meet applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. If a proposed adult day care facility is required to obtain a certificate of registration from the state department of human resources, a permit for the operation of the facility may not be issued until proof has been submitted by the applicant that the certificate of registration has been obtained. 
(c)  Child day care center. All outdoor play areas associated with child day care centers must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least four feet in height. 
(d)  Child day care facility. Child day care facilities are subject to all of the following requirements: 
(1)  At least 30 square feet of indoor play area must be provided for each child, based on maximum allowed enrollment. 
(2)  At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area must be provided for each child, based on maximum allowed enrollment. All outdoor play areas must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least four feet in height. 
(3)  Not more than 50 percent of the floor area of a residence may be used for a child day care facility. 
(4)  The exterior residential appearance of the dwelling must be maintained, and no signs other than those otherwise permitted within the subject zoning district are allowed. No cut-outs, animal characters, or other graphics may be affixed to the exterior of the building or displayed on the premises. 
(5)  Persons seeking to operate a child day care facility must file a permit application with the community development department. Each application must be accompanied by the applicant's affidavit certifying the maximum number of children that will be served simultaneously and that the proposed child day care facility will meet and be operated in accordance with all applicable state laws and regulations and with all ordinances and regulations of the city. The community development department may require that the applicant provide additional information deemed necessary to determine whether the proposed facility will meet applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. If a proposed child day care facility is required to obtain a certificate of registration from the state department of human resources, a permit for the operation of the facility may not be issued until proof has been submitted by the applicant that the certificate of registration has been obtained. 
(6)  In reviewing and acting on special land use permit applications for child day care facilities, authorized review and decision-making bodies must consider the following factors in addition to the generally applicable special land use permit approval criteria of section 27-359: 
a.  Whether there is adequate off-street parking for all staff members and for visitors to the child day care facility; 
b.  Whether the proposed off-street parking areas and the proposed outdoor play areas can be adequately screened from adjacent properties so as not to adversely impact any adjoining land use; 
c.  Whether there is an adequate and safe location for the dropping off and picking up of children at the child day care facility; and 
d.  Whether the character of the exterior of the proposed structure will be compatible with the residential character of any surrounding residential buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-138. - Food trucks. 
Food trucks are subject to all of the following regulations: 
(1)  Food trucks may only be located on a lot containing a principal building or use. 
(2)  The number of food trucks allowed per site is limited as follows: 
a.  A maximum of one food truck is allowed on sites with less than 20,000 square feet of land area. 
b.  On sites with land area of 20,000 square feet or more, one food truck is allowed per 20,000 square feet of land area or fraction thereof. 
c.  For purposes of this provision, a site may consist of one lot or a combination of contiguous lots. 
d.  The number of food trucks allowed may be increased above the limits established in this section if approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. 
(3)  Food trucks must be located at least 100 feet from the main entrance of any eating or drinking establishment and at least 100 feet from any outdoor dining area serving a non-food truck eating or drinking establishment. 
(4)  Food trucks may not obstruct pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle circulation routes, and must be set back at least five feet from the edge of any driveway or public sidewalk and at least 15 feet from fire hydrants. 
(5)  Food trucks and any associated seating areas may not occupy parking spaces provided to meet the minimum parking requirements of the principal use, unless the principal use's hours of operation do not coincide with those of the food truck business. Food trucks may not occupy any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(6)  No freestanding signs or audio amplification are allowed as part of the food truck's operation. 
(7)  Hours of operation of food trucks are limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(8)  Food trucks and associated outdoor seating must be removed from all permitted locations when not in operation. 
(9)  Operators are responsible for ensuring that all waste is disposed of in accordance with city regulations and for maintaining all areas used for food vending and customer activity in a safe and clean condition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-139. - Gasoline sales. 
(a)  Gasoline pumps, electric vehicle charging equipment and other vehicle service areas must be set back at least 30 feet from all rights-of-way, provided that canopies over gas pump areas are subject to a minimum 15-foot setback. 
(b)  Major vehicle repair activities may be conducted in association with the gasoline sales uses only in those zoning districts that allow major vehicle repair uses. 
(c)  Rental of vehicles or trailers is allowed as an accessory use to a gasoline sales use if the subject lot is at least one acre in area. Parking or storage areas for vehicles or trailers available for lease or rental may be located only in side or rear yard areas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-140. - Homeless shelters and transitional housing facilities. 
The maximum allowed capacity of any homeless shelter or transitional housing facility in the RM-150 district is six persons. In all other districts in which homeless shelters or transitional housing facilities are allowed, they may not exceed a maximum capacity of 20 persons. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.100), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-141. - Kindergartens. 
All outdoor recreation areas for a kindergarten must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least four feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.110), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-142. - Multi-unit residential buildings. 
The following building separation requirements apply to all multi-unit buildings on sites containing two or more multi-unit buildings. For the purpose of these provisions, the front and rear faces are those exterior building walls generally perpendicular to the party walls between dwelling units and the side face is the exterior building wall that is generally perpendicular to the building's front and rear faces. 
(1)  Building setbacks must be provided as required by the applicable zoning district requirements. 
(2)  Buildings that are front face to front face, rear face to rear face, or front face to rear face must be separated by a distance of at least 60 feet. 
(3)  Buildings that are side face to front face or rear face must be separated by a distance of at least 40 feet. 
(4)  Buildings that are side face to side face must be separated by a distance of at least 20 feet. 
(5)  Buildings may not exceed 250 feet in length along any elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.120), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-143. - Parking, non-accessory. 
Non-accessory parking garages may include gasoline pumps if the pumps are located entirely within the parking garage structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.130), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-144. - Pawn shops. 
The following provisions apply to all pawn shop uses: 
(1)  Pawn shops are allowed only on lots with frontage on a major arterial. 
(2)  Pawn shops may not be located within 1,000 feet of an existing pawn shop or convenient cash business. This separation distance must be measured as a straight-line distance between the main customer entrance doors of the existing and proposed uses or between the main customer entrance door of the proposed use and the lot line of the property occupied by the existing use, whichever method results in the greater separation distance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.140), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-145. - Personal care homes. 
Congregate personal care homes may be approved in R districts only when located on a campus with a land area of at least 25 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.150), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-146. - Places of worship, convents and monasteries. 
The following regulations apply to places of worship, convents, monasteries and their accessory uses: 
(1)  In residential zoning districts, places of worship, convents and monasteries require a minimum lot area of three acres, with a minimum public street frontage of 100 feet. These minimum lot area and frontage regulations apply only to places of worship, convents and monasteries developed or established after July 29, 1970. 
(2)  Places of worship, convents and monasteries in residential districts are allowed only on lots with frontage on a major or minor arterial. These minimum lot area and frontage regulations apply only to places of worship, convents and monasteries developed or established after July 29, 1970. Any place of worship, convent or monastery with frontage on a street other than a major or minor arterial is considered a nonconforming use if constructed pursuant to a development permit issued between July 30, 1970 and April 13, 1999. 
(3)  Uses, buildings or structures operated by a place of worship that are not specifically included within the "place of worship" use subcategory (see subsection 27-113(7)) are allowed only in districts where those uses are allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.160), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-147. - Residential infill. 
Applicability: The residential infill regulations of this subsection apply to the construction and reconstruction of detached houses and the subdivision of land zoned single family: 
(1)  Front door threshold elevation. 
a.  Replacement of a detached house. The proposed front door threshold elevation for any new detached house may not be more than two feet higher than the front door threshold elevation of the residential structure that existed on the lot prior to demolition (see Figure 9-1). If there was no previous residential structure on the subject lot, or if the lot has been part of an approved subdivision that resulted in the creation of any new lots, then the proposed front door threshold elevation for a new detached house on the lot may not be more than two feet higher than the average elevation of the existing natural grade at the front building line (see Figure 9-2). If the proposed construction would require alteration or eradication of the original threshold, then the original elevation must be measured and certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 
Figure 9-1: Residential Infill, Maximum Threshold Elevation Based on Previously Existing Threshold  
Figure 9-2: Residential Infill, Maximum Threshold Elevation Based on Average Grade Elevation at Front Building Line  
b.  Threshold averaging. The community development director is authorized to approve a proposed front door threshold elevation for new detached houses that exceed the threshold elevation allowed by subsection (1)a. if the applicant for a building permit establishes that the elevation of the front door threshold of the proposed residential structure does not exceed the average elevation of the front door thresholds of the residential structures on both lots immediately abutting the subject lot (see Figure 9-3). If any adjacent lot is vacant, the front door threshold shall be calculated using the formula in [subsection] (1)a. above (for lots with no previous residential structure, Figure 9-2). The applicant must provide the community development director with the threshold elevations, as certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 
Figure 9-3: Residential Infill, Maximum Threshold Elevation Based on Threshold Averaging  
c.  Sewer elevation. If an existing dwelling or lot is not connected to county sewer and if the community development director determines that the proposed residence is unable to be connected to county sewer by gravity flow within the allowable front door threshold height provided for in [subsection] (1)a or (1)b above, then the community development director is authorized to approve a maximum three-foot increase in the front door threshold height over and above the threshold elevation allowed by subsection (1)a or (1)b to provide for gravity flow into the existing sewer tap. The community development director's determination must be based on sewer line elevation data and other evidence provided by the applicant and any other pertinent information available to the director. 
d.  Topographical conditions. If exceptional topographical restrictions exist on the subject lot that were not created by the owner or applicant, the community development director is authorized to approve a maximum three-foot increase in the front door threshold height over and above the threshold elevation allowed by either subsection (1)a, (1)b, or (1)c above. The applicant must provide a site plan, including topography, certified by an engineer or landscape architect. 
(2)  Contextual street setbacks. Detached houses constructed on block faces that are occupied by two or more existing detached houses must comply with the contextual street setback regulations of this subsection. 
a.  The street facing façade of a detached house subject to these contextual street setback regulations must be located within the range of street setbacks observed by detached houses that exist on the nearest two lots on both sides of the subject lot. 
b.  If one or more of the nearest two lots on both sides of the subject lot is vacant, the vacant lot will be deemed to have a street setback depth equal to the minimum street setback requirement of the subject zoning district. 
Figure 9-3[4]: Residential Infill, Contextual Setbacks (1)  
c.  Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot or that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in determining the street setback range (see Figure 9-4). 
Figure 9-4: Residential Infill, Contextual Setbacks (2)  

d.  If the subject lot is a corner lot, the street setback range must be determined on the basis of the nearest two lots with frontage on the same street as the subject lot. 
e.  If the subject lot abuts a corner lot with frontage on the same street, the street setback range must be determined on the basis of the abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots with frontage on the same street as the subject lot. 
f.  These contextual street setback regulations may not be used to reduce the setback of a street-facing garage door to less than 20 feet. 
(3)  Contextual lot characteristics. Proposed subdivisions that are adjacent to block faces that are occupied by two or more existing detached houses must comply with the contextual lot characteristic regulations of this subsection in addition to those requirements in chapters 16 and 27. 
a.  Minimum lot area shall be determined by calculating the average area of lots that exist on the nearest four lots on both sides of the subject lot. 
b.  Minimum lot frontage shall be determined by calculating the average frontage of lots that exist on the nearest four lots on both sides of the subject lot. 
c.  Minimum lot width shall be determined by calculating the average width of lots that exist on the nearest four lots on both sides of the subject lot, measured along the building setback line. 
d.  Corner lots or lots with multiple street frontages 
1.  Area. Minimum lot area shall be determined by calculating the average area of lots that exist on the nearest four lots on both sides of the subject lot for all street frontages. 
2.  Frontage. Minimum lot frontage shall be determined by calculating the average frontage of the nearest four lots on the side(s) with frontage on the same street as the subject frontage. An additional 15 feet shall be provided on all frontages above the minimum distance obtained by the average calculation for minimum lot frontage. 
3.  Width. Minimum lot width shall be determined by calculating the average width of the nearest four lots on the side(s) with frontage on the same street as the subject width. 
e.  Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot or that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in determining contextual lot characteristics, except as required for corner lots. 
f.  In no circumstance shall the provisions of this subsection reduce any provision required by the base zoning district. 
(4)  If existing land is proposed to be subdivided, the reference parcels for the purposes of determining contextual requirements shall be those immediately adjacent to and outside the parcel or group of parcels comprising the subject subdivision. Additionally, upon a determination of the community development director, parcels with the following characteristics shall not be used in calculating contextual street setbacks or lot characteristics. Where practical—the next immediate adjacent parcel meeting the requirements for use as a reference parcel, if any, shall be used for subject calculations: 
a.  Unbuildable lots; 
b.  Substandard or nonconforming lots; 
c.  Unsubdivided property, or meets and bounds lots, which are uncharacteristic of the area and/or significantly exceed one or more of the minimum lot regulations for the zoning district, and/or are large raw undeveloped property which are expected to be the subject of a future subdivision request. 
(5)  Building plans. Building plans for a detached house must be submitted for review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. Plans must contain all information necessary to determine compliance with the building code and this zoning ordinance. 
(6)  Exceptions. Exceptions to the requirements of this section 27-147, residential infill, may be requested through the special exception process as outlined in section 27-416. In addition to the review criteria of section 27-421(b), the zoning board of appeals shall also determine that the proposed exception will not be detrimental to or adversely impact adjacent property. 
(7)  Determination: The community development director is authorized to determine whether the provisions of the contextual regulations for lot size, width, frontage and setbacks apply to the construction of a single family home on a lot, whether the lot(s) is part of a proposed subdivision or one that was previously recorded. In this capacity, the director may determine whether a proposed subdivision of land is subject to the same regulations. Findings used in this determination shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
Whether the lot(s): 
1.  Is significantly different in character and/or contrary to the prevailing orientation of lots outside of the subdivision, (within the immediate surrounding or adjacent area); or 
2.  Creates multiple new lots or lot/block configurations which create a different context; or 
3.  Creates new streets and alignments of lots; or 
4.  Alters other characteristics of the property such that the lot(s) represent a different context, are altered visually or physically from the characteristics of the adjacent/previous neighborhood and such conditions render the application of the contextual regulations for lot size, width, frontage, and setback impractical, unreasonable, or unwarranted. 
The owners of property adjacent to the subject lot(s) will be notified of and may appeal the decision of the community development director per article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.170), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 2, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-148. - Schools, (private) elementary, middle or senior high. 
The following minimum lot area requirements apply to private elementary, private middle schools and private senior high schools that require special land use approval: 
(1)  Elementary school: five acres plus one additional acre for each 100 students, based on the design capacity of the school. 
(2)  Middle school: 12 acres plus one additional acre for each 100 students, based on the design capacity of the school. 
(3)  High school: 20 acres plus one additional acre for each 100 students, based on the design capacity of the school. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.180), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-149. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of the city zoning ordinance to regulate land use by sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this division have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this division to restrict or deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this division to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. 
(1)  Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the mayor and city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Gary v. City of Warner Robins , 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 2000 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 200); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga , 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker , 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food and Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale , 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); 5634 E. Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd , 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset , 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph , 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols , 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); Gammon v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); High Five Investments, LLC v. Floyd County, No. 4:06-CV-190, R. 128 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 14, 2008); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); and Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia , 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County , 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food and Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park , 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson , 214 (1978); and 
(2)  Based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); 
(3)  The mayor and city council finds: 
a.  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter and sexual assault and exploitation. 
b.  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
c.  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this division, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this division are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(4)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A substantial business activity exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
b.  At least 25 percent of the wholesale value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
c.  At least 25 percent of the retail value (defined as the price charged to customers) of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
d.  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of the foregoing items; 
e.  The establishment maintains at least 25 percent of its interior business space for the display, sale and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access those items are included in interior business space maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); 
f.  The establishment maintains at least 500 square feet of its interior business space for the display, sale and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access those items are included in interior business space maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items) and limits access to the premises to adults only; 
g.  The establishment offers for sale or rental at least 1,000 of the foregoing items and limits access to the premises or to the portion of the premises occupied by said items to adults only; 
h.  The establishment regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, using "adult," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
i.  The establishment maintains an adult arcade, which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly feature persons who appear semi-nude. 
(3)  Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
(4)  Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this division, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
(5)  Interior business space means the floor area inside a sexually oriented business that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
(6)  Nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
(7)  Operate or cause to operate means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. The term "operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
(8)  Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
(9)  Regularly means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
(10)  Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition includes the lower portion of the human female breast, but does not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirts, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
(11)  Semi-nude model studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
b.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
c.  In a structure: 
1.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
(12)  Sexual device means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and includes devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
(13)  Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. This definition shall not be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, or any establishment that does not restrict access to its premises or a portion of its premises to adults only. 
(14)  Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theatre, a semi-nude model studio, or a sexual device shop. 
(15)  Specified anatomical areas mean and include: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(16)  Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
a.  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
b.  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
(d)  Standards. 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses are subject to the following standards: 
a.  It is unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: 
1.  Five hundred feet from any parcel in the city zoned R-150, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, RA-5, R-50, RA-8, RM-150, RM-100, RM-85, RM-75 or RM-HD; 
2.  Six hundred feet from any business in the city licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises; and 
3.  One thousand feet from any place of worship or a public or private elementary or secondary school in the city. 
b.  For the purpose of this subsection, measurements must be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on a boundary line of the sexually oriented business parcel to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel in the city zoned R-150, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, RA-5, R-50, RA-8, RM-150, RM-100, RM-85, RM-75 or RM-HD. Measurements must be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of the structure containing the sexually oriented business to the closest part of any structure in the city occupied by a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, or a business licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises. 
(2)  All sexually oriented businesses must submit with the application for a building or occupancy permit, a certified boundary survey by a licensed surveyor of the site and the property lines of surrounding properties identifying the use of properties at or within 1,000 feet of the boundary lines of the subject property. 
(3)  Each sexually oriented business must provide off-street parking spaces as required by article IV, division 1. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.190), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-150. - Telecommunications towers and antennas. 
The regulations of this section apply to all telecommunications towers and antennas. 
(1)  Co-located antennas. 
a.  Antennas that are attached or affixed to existing telecommunications towers or other existing structures are permitted as of right in all zoning districts, provided that the antenna does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure. 
b.  Co-location antennas that substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure, require administrative permit approval in accordance with article V, division 7 (private property) or an administrative variance in accordance with subsection (6) below (right-of-way). For the purpose of this section, "substantial change" shall mean: 
1.  Increases height by more than ten percent or 10/20 feet (right-of-way/private property), whichever is greater, as measured from facility as it existed as of October 1, 2012. 
2.  Appurtenance added protrudes from body of structure more than six feet in width (right-of-way) or 20 feet in width (private property). 
3.  If it involves installing more than the standard number of cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four cabinets (private property); or if it involves installation of any cabinets if there are no pre-existing cabinets, or involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other associated ground cabinets (right-of-way). 
4.  Involves excavation or deployment outside the current "site." "Site" shall be defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements (private property) or the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground (right-of-way). 
5.  For concealed or stealth-designed facilities, if a modification would defeat the concealment elements of the wireless tower or base station. 
6.  The modification would not comply with other conditions imposed on the applicable wireless tower or base station, unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that does not exceed the above thresholds. 
Building-mounted antennas in residential zoning districts must be visually screened from view of all abutting lots. Building-mounted antennas in other zoning districts must be screened or designed and installed so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(2)  Federal law. The regulations of this section must be applied within the constraints of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Action of 2012. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Telecommunication towers that require administrative permit approval are subject to the following setbacks: 
1.  If located on a lot abutting a residential zoning district or a lot occupied by a residential use, the tower must be set back from the zoning district or lot boundary by a minimum distance of one-half the overall height of the tower or 200 feet, whichever is greater; or 
2.  If located on a lot abutting a nonresidential or mixed-use district that is not occupied by a residential dwelling, the tower must be set back from the abutting lot by a minimum distance of 33 percent of the overall height of the tower or 200 feet, whichever is greater. 
b.  Telecommunications towers that require special land use permit approval must be set back at least 200 feet from any property line, unless a greater setback is expressly required as part of the special land use permit approval. 
c.  Telecommunications towers must either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communications Commission, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. These color and design requirements do not apply to alternative tower structures. 
d.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures must, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
e.  Towers may not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, it must be done in a way that minimizes the disturbance to surrounding views. 
f.  Telecommunications towers must be entirely enclosed by a security fence of at least six feet in height. Towers must be equipped with an anti-climbing device. This requirement does not apply to alternative tower structures, provided equivalent alternative security measures are installed. 
g.  In addition to any other landscaping or buffer requirements that may apply, telecommunications towers must be landscaped with plant material that effectively screens the tower site from adjacent uses. Existing tree growth and natural land forms on-site must be preserved to the maximum extent possible. At a minimum, a landscaped strip ten feet in width must be provided around the perimeter of the tower site. 
h.  Telecommunications towers must be constructed to the minimum height necessary to accomplish their required telecommunications purpose. 
i.  The environmental effects of radio frequency emissions may not serve as a basis to approve, deny or otherwise regulate a telecommunications tower to the extent that emissions comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
j.  All decisions denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications tower must be in writing and be supported by a written record documenting the reasons for the denial and the evidence in support of the decision. Decisions must be made within a reasonable time from the date a completed application is duly filed. 
k.  Each applicant requesting approval of a telecommunications tower must provide to the community development director as a part of the application an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the city or within one-quarter mile of the city boundaries, including information regarding the location, height and design of each tower. The community development director may share this information with other applicants or with other organizations seeking to locate a telecommunications tower within the city. In sharing this information, the community development director is not in any way representing or warranting that the sites are available or suitable. 
l.  No new telecommunication tower may be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence must be submitted at the time of application demonstrating that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna and may consist of one or more of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
5.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable; or 
6.  There are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
m.  The placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment necessarily required in connection with an otherwise authorized telecommunication tower or antenna is specifically authorized. 
n.  Any telecommunications antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six months will be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower must remove the antenna or tower within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city. 
(4)  Special land use permit approval criteria. In reviewing and acting on special land use permit applications for telecommunication towers, authorized review and decision-making bodies must consider the following factors in addition to the generally applicable special land use permit approval criteria of section 27-359: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree cover and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
g.  Compliance with telecommunication tower regulations of this section. 
(5)  Small cell technologies—Definitions. As used in this subsection, the term: 
Accessory equipment means any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with small cell technology or small cell technology wireless support structures and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or similar structures. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services. 
Application means a formal request submitted to the city to construct a small cell technology wireless support structure or co-located antenna. An application shall be deemed complete when all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the city's regulations, ordinances and forms pertaining to the location, construction or operation of wireless facilities are submitted by the applicant to the city. 
Collocation means the placement or installation of new small cell wireless technology on the property of a utility, or other franchisee, legally existing in the public right-of-way. Such term includes the placement of accessory equipment within an existing equipment compound. 
Equipment compound means an area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless support structure within which accessory equipment is located. 
Small cell technology means (1) individual small cell wireless antennas; or (2) networks of spatially separated small cell wireless antenna nodes connected to a common source via transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure commonly referred to as "distributed antenna systems (DAS)." 
Small cell technology wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, designed to support or capable of supporting small cell technology wireless facilities. 
Stealth technology means a method of concealing or reducing the visual impact of small cell technology and/or small cell technology wireless support structures by use of incorporating features or design elements of the installation which either totally or partially conceals the structure; achieves the result of having the structure blend into the surrounding environment; or otherwise minimizes the visual impact of the structure. 
(6)  Placement of small cell technologies in the right-of-way. The following standards shall apply for the placement of small cell technology in the public right-of-way or public road: 
a.  Any small cell technology in a city right-of-way shall be co-located on the property of a utility, or other franchisee, legally existing in the public right-of-way, unless the applicant can demonstrate that no co-location opportunities exist, utilizing the same factors as in subsection (3)l. of this section. The applicant may apply for an administrative variance for a co-location where a substantial change will take place or placement of a new small cell wireless support structure within the area of the public right-of-way, to be determined by the city manager or his/her designee. 
b.  In applying for an administrative variance for a co-located small cell technology, the review process, including timelines, shall be in accordance with any applicable state and federal law. In reviewing the application, the city manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to assess the location(s) applied for and condition the approval on reasonably alleviating certain aesthetic and safety concerns of the request. 
c.  In applying for an administrative variance for a small cell wireless support structure, the review process, including timelines, shall be in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7) of the Federal Telecommunications Act, and the FCC rules interpreting same, as well as the consideration of the following factors by the city manager or his/her designee to determine if the administrative variance is appropriate: 
1.  Demonstrated need for the small cell technologies within the geographic area requested in order to deliver adequate service. 
2.  Proof that all co-location sites in the area of need are/were pursued and have been denied; or that there does not exist the ability to co-locate using existing structures. The applicant must demonstrate all actions taken to achieve co-location. 
3.  The character of the area in which the small cell technology wireless support structure is requested, including evidence of surrounding properties and uses. 
4.  Stealth technology, if any, proposed to be utilized by the applicant, or proof that stealth technology is either unnecessary or cannot be used. 
5.  Proof that the proposed small cell technology wireless support structure is the minimal physical installation which will achieve the applicant's goals. 
6.  The safety and aesthetic impact of: any proposed small cell technology wireless support structure; related accessory equipment; and/or equipment compound. 
d.  Within 90 calendar days, if for a substantial change co-location, or 150 calendar days, if for a new small cell wireless support structure, of the date an application for an administrative variance is filed with the city, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the city and the applicant, the city manager or designee shall: 
1.  Make his final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and 
2.  Advise the applicant in writing of the final decision, including the specific reason(s) for said decision based on the applicable factors in this subsection. 
e.  Any appeal of a decision rendered pursuant to this subsection shall be made by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(7)  [Notification.] Within 30 calendar days of the date an application is filed with the city, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete the application. To the extent additional information is required, to complete the application, the time required for the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the 60 calendar day review period (for section 6409 co-location), 90 calendar day review period (for substantial change co-location) or 150 calendar day period (for new support structures) set forth herein. 
(8)  [Applicant election.] In submitting an application for telecommunications equipment, the applicant shall make an affirmative election at the time of application as to whether to apply for a co-location (under section 6409), including co-location of small cell technology on private property and right-of-way, or for a new telecommunications tower (private property) via administrative use permit or special use permit or small cell technology wireless support structures (right-of-way) via administrative variance. If a co-location application is denied, and applicant elects to apply for a new tower or support structure, the timeline/shot clock requirements shall reset and follow anew the appropriate provisions of the Telecommunications Act and applicable Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.200), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-09-18, § 1, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 27-151. - Utility facilities, essential. 
Essential utility facility structures are subject to the lot and building regulations of the subject zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.210), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-152. - Vehicle repair, major. 
(a)  Major vehicle repair uses may not be located within 300 feet of school, park, playground or hospital, as measured between lot lines. 
(b)  Major vehicle repair uses may not be located on a lot that is adjacent to or directly across the street from any R or RM district. 
(c)  All service and repair activities must be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.220), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-153. - Vehicle repair, minor. 
All minor vehicle repair establishments must be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.230), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-154. - Vehicle sales and rental. 
(a)  Vehicle sales and rental uses require a minimum lot area of one acre. 
(b)  All vehicles and trailers must be set back at least 30 feet from all rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.240), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-155. - Vehicle storage and towing. 
(a)  Vehicle storage and towing uses may not be located within 1,000 feet of any residential district or lot containing a residential use, as measured between lot lines. 
(b)  Vehicle storage and towing uses must be enclosed by a wall that is at least eight feet in height and that provides complete visual screening of stored vehicles. 
(c)  No dismantling, repair or other activity may be conducted on the premises. 
(d)  Vehicles at impound or towing establishments may not be held longer than provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-9.250), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-156—27-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ACCESSORY USES 

Sec. 27-166. - Generally applicable regulations. 
(a)  Accessory uses allowed. Accessory uses and structures are permitted in connection with lawfully established principal uses. 
(b)  Accessory use determinations. The community development director is authorized to determine when a use, building or structure meets the criteria of an accessory use or accessory structure. In order to classify a use or structure as "accessory" the community development director must determine that the use or structure: 
(1)  Is customarily found in conjunction with the subject principal use or principal structure; 
(2)  Is subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use; and 
(3)  Provides a necessary function for or contributes to the comfort, safety or convenience of occupants of the principal use. 
(c)  Time of construction and establishment. 
(1)  Accessory uses may be established only after the principal use of the property is in place. 
(2)  Accessory buildings may be established in conjunction with or after the principal building. They may not be established before the principal building is in place. 
(d)  Location. Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same lot as the principal use to which they are accessory, unless otherwise expressly stated. Accessory buildings are expressly prohibited in front street yards. 
(e)  Accessory buildings and structures. 
(1)  Applicable regulations and standards. Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same regulations and standards as applicable to principal uses and structures on the subject lot, unless otherwise expressly stated. Accessory buildings attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means are considered part of the primary structure and are subject to the lot and building regulations that apply to the principal building. Accessory buildings attached by structures less than 30 inches in height or less (e.g.: patios, walks, decks without railing) are not considered part of the primary structure and must comply with accessory building and structure regulations. 
(2)  Building separation. Accessory buildings must be separated by a minimum distance of ten feet from the principal building on the lot, unless the accessory building is located entirely within the principal building setbacks, in which case no separation is required. Structures less than 30 inches in height do not require a building separation. 
(3)  Maximum accessory building floor area. Accessory buildings in all residential zoning districts are subject to the following maximum floor area limits: 

 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 2, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-167. - Amateur radio service antenna structures. 
Amateur radio service antenna structures over 70 feet in overall height require review and approval in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3. All amateur radio service antenna structures must be set back from all property lines a distance equal to at least one-half the height of the structure's overall height. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-168. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose . The home occupation regulations of this section are intended to allow Dunwoody residents to engage in customary home-based work activities, while also helping to ensure that neighboring residents are not subjected to adverse operational and land use impacts (e.g., excessive noise or traffic or public safety hazards) that are not typical of residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Type A and Type B home occupations. Two types of home occupations are defined and regulated under this section: Type A and Type B. 
(1)  Type A home occupations. Type A home occupations are those in which household residents use their home as a place of work, with no employees, customers or clients coming to the site. Typical examples include telecommuting office workers, writers, consultants, artists and crafts people. 
(2)  Type B home occupations. Type B home occupation are those in which household residents use their home as a place of work and either one non-resident employee or customers come to the site. Typical examples include tutors, teachers, photographers and licensed therapists or counselors. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Personal care homes. Personal care homes are not regulated as home occupations and are exempt from the home occupation regulations of this section. Personal care homes are allowed as indicated in the use tables of sections 27-57 and 27-72. Supplemental regulations applicable to some personal care homes can be found in section 27-145. 
(2)  Day care. Day care uses are not regulated as home occupations and are exempt from the home occupation regulations of this section. Day care uses are allowed as indicated in the use tables of sections 27-57 and 27-72. Supplemental regulations applicable to some day care uses can be found in section 27-137. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast. Bed and breakfasts are not regulated as home occupations and are exempt from the home occupation regulations of this section. Bed and breakfasts are allowed as indicated in the use tables of sections 27-57 and 27-72. Supplemental regulations applicable to bed and breakfasts can be found in section 27-133. 
(d)  Prohibited home occupations. The following uses are expressly prohibited as home occupations: 
(1)  Any type of assembly, cleaning, maintenance or repair of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines or of large appliances (such as washing machines, clothes dryers or refrigerators); 
(2)  Dispatch centers or other businesses where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; 
(3)  Equipment or supply rental businesses; 
(4)  Taxi, limo, van or bus services; 
(5)  Tow truck services; 
(6)  Taxidermists; 
(7)  Restaurants; 
(8)  Funeral or interment services; 
(9)  Animal care, grooming or boarding businesses; and 
(10)  Any use involving the use or storage of vehicles, products, parts, machinery or similar materials or equipment outside of a completely enclosed building. 
(e)  Where allowed. 
(1)  Type A home occupations. Type A home occupations are permitted as of right as an accessory use to a principal use in the household living use category. Type A home occupations are subject to the general regulations of subsection (f) and all other applicable regulations of this section. More than one Type A home occupation is allowed as an accessory use, but the general regulations of subsection (f) apply to the combined home occupation uses. 
(2)  Type B Home occupations. Type B home occupations may be approved as an accessory use to a principal use in the household living use category only as expressly stated in subsection (g). Type B home occupations are subject to the general regulations of subsection (f), the supplemental regulations of subsection (g) and all other applicable regulations of this section. Multiple Type B home occupations are prohibited as an accessory use to a household living use, and a Type A home occupation may not be conducted with a Type B home occupation. 
(f)  General regulations. All Type A and Type B home occupations are subject to the following general regulations. 
(1)  Home occupations must be accessory and secondary to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. They may not change the character of the residential building they occupy or adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Home occupations may not, for example, produce light, noise, vibration, odor, parking demand, or traffic impacts to that are not typical of a residential neighborhood in Dunwoody. Home occupations must be operated so as not to create or cause a nuisance. 
(2)  Any tools or equipment used as part of a home occupation must be operated in a manner or sound-proofed so as not to be audible beyond the lot lines of the subject property. 
(3)  External structural alterations or site improvements that change the residential character of the lot upon which a home occupation is located are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots, the addition of commercial-like exterior lighting or the addition of a separate building entrance that is visible from abutting streets. 
(4)  Signs that directly or indirectly, name, advertise, or call attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity occurring on the subject property are prohibited. 
(5)  Home occupations and all related activities, including storage (other than the lawful parking or storage of vehicles), must be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit. 
(6)  The area devoted to the conduct of all home occupations present on the property is limited to 25 percent of the dwelling unit's floor area or 500 square feet, whichever is less. 
(7)  No window display or other public display of any material or merchandise is allowed. 
(8)  The use or storage of hazardous substances is prohibited, except at the "consumer commodity" level, as that term is defined in 49 C.F.R. Section 171.8. 
(9)  Only passenger automobiles, passenger vans and passenger trucks may be used in the conduct of a home occupation. No other types of vehicles may be parked or stored on the premises. 
(10)  The provisions of subsection (9) (above) are not intended to prohibit deliveries and pickups by common carrier delivery vehicles (e.g., postal service, united parcel service, Fed Ex, et al.) of the type typically used in residential neighborhoods. 
(g)  Use permits and supplemental regulations for Type B home occupations. 
(1)  Special land use permit approval required. Type B home occupations are allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article V, division 3, provided that teaching-related home occupations conducted entirely within the principal dwelling are not subject to the special land use permit procedures, but instead require review and approval in accordance with the administrative permit procedures of article V, division 7. 
(2)  Supplemental regulations. All Type B home occupations are, at a minimum, subject to the following regulations in addition to the general regulations of subsection (f). 
a.  Customers or clients may visit the site only from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No more than two clients or customers may be present at any one time, except that up to three students may be present at one time in a teaching-related home occupation (e.g., tutor or music/dance instructor). 
b.  Resident and customer parking shall be provided within a garage and/or driveway on-site. While conducting the home occupation no resident or customer vehicles shall be parked on the street. 
c.  The home occupation shall not create any noise, noxious smell or odor, vibration or other adverse impact upon adjacent property. 
d.  One nonresident employee is allowed with a Type B home occupation if no customers come to the site at any time. Home occupations that have clients, customers or students coming to the site at any time may not have nonresident employees. For the purpose of this provision, the term "nonresident employee" includes an employee, business partner, co-owner or any other person affiliated with the home occupation, who does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the home occupation. 
e.  No stock in trade may be displayed or kept for sale on the premises and no on-premises sales may be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 2, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-169. - Electric vehicle charging stations. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Private (restricted-access) electric-vehicle (EV) charging stations are permitted as accessory uses in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Public EV charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to allowed nonresidential uses in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Parking. 
(1)  Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfying minimum off-street parking space requirements. 
(2)  Public electric vehicle charging stations must be reserved for parking and charging electric vehicles. Electric vehicles may be parked in any space designated for public parking, subject to the restrictions that apply to any other vehicle. 
(c)  Equipment. Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located so as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety hazards on sidewalks. 
(d)  Signage. 
(1)  Information must be posted identifying voltage and amperage levels and any type of use, fees, or safety information related to the electric vehicle charging station. 
(2)  Public electric vehicle charging stations must be posted with signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle charging purposes only. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment. 
(e)  Maintenance. Electric vehicle charging stations must be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or other contact information must be provided on the equipment for reporting when it is not functioning or other problems are encountered. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-170. - Geothermal energy systems. 
(a)  General. Geothermal energy systems are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  Geothermal energy systems must be located entirely within the lot lines of the subject property or within appropriate easements. 
(2)  No portion of a geothermal energy system may be located within a stream or stream buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-171. - Residential composting. 
(a)  The composting of landscape waste (including grass clippings, leaves, and chipped brush) and food waste (including discarded fruits, vegetables, and grains) is an allowed accessory use in residential zoning districts, subject to the regulations of this section. 
(b)  Only landscape waste generated from plants grown and maintained on the subject lot may be composted. This provision is not intended to prohibit property owners from adding "outside" materials or ingredients to speed or enhance decomposition. 
(c)  Only food waste resulting from food preparation or consumption by residents of the subject lot and their visitors may be composted. This provision is not intended to prohibit property owners from adding "outside" materials or ingredients to speed or enhance decomposition. Meat products are prohibited in residential compost bins. 
(d)  All food waste must be placed within rodent-resistant compost bins, which must be set back at least ten feet from all lot lines. 
(e)  Landscape waste compost piles may not exceed 125 cubic feet in volume, and may not exceed five feet in height. 
(f)  Landscape waste compost piles must be set back at least ten feet from all lot lines. Landscape waste compost piles that are not contained within a rodent-resistant compost bin must be set back at least 30 feet from all dwelling units on abutting lots. 
(g)  Only animal waste from herbivores is allowed within compost piles or bins. 
(h)  Burning of compost piles is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-172. - Satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  Where allowed. 
(1)  Satellite dish antennas up to 40 inches in diameter are permitted as of right in all zoning districts. They are subject to all applicable accessory structure setback regulations. 
(2)  Satellite dish antennas over 40 inches in diameter, up to 120 inches in diameter, are permitted as of right in nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts. They are subject to all applicable accessory structure setback regulations. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  In multi-unit residential (RM), nonresidential and mixed-use districts, satellite antennas may be located anywhere in the buildable area of the lot (outside of required setbacks) or on an allowed principal or accessory building on the lot. 
(2)  In detached house and attached house (R and RA) districts satellite antennas may be located only to the rear of any principal structure. If usable communication signals cannot be obtained from a rear location, the satellite antenna may be located in the side yard. Both locations are subject to applicable zoning district setbacks. 
(3)  If usable satellite communication signals cannot be received by locating the antenna in the rear or to the side of the principal structure, the antenna may be placed in the front yard or on the roof in a location that is visible from the street, provided that the diameter does not exceed 18 inches and that approval of the community development director is obtained prior to installation. The community development director is authorized to issue a permit for a front location only upon a showing by the applicant that usable communication signals are not receivable from any location on the property other than the location selected by the applicant. 
(c)  Height and screening. 
(1)  Ground-mounted satellite dish antennae must be screened to reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from public streets. 
(2)  All satellite television antennae must meet all manufacturers' specifications, be located on noncombustible and corrosion-resistant material and be erected in a secure manner. 
(3)  All satellite television antennae must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning pursuant to the requirements of the electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-173. - Solar energy systems. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Accessory solar energy systems must comply with all applicable building ordinance and electrical code requirements. 
(2)  Owners of accessory solar energy systems are solely responsible for negotiating with other property owners for any desired solar easements to protect access to sunlight. Any such easements must be recorded with the county recorder of deeds. 
(b)  Building-mounted solar energy systems. 
(1)  Building-mounted solar energy systems may be mounted on principal and accessory structures. 
(2)  All applicable setback regulations apply to building-mounted solar energy systems. Systems mounted on principal structures may encroach into interior side and rear setbacks in accordance with subsection 27-576(d). 
(3)  Only building-integrated and/or flush-mounted solar energy system may be installed on street-facing building elevations. 
(4)  Solar energy systems may not extend more than three feet above the applicable maximum building height limit for the subject building type or more than five feet above the highest point of the roof line, whichever is less. 
(c)  Ground-mounted solar energy systems. 
(1)  In residential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy systems may not be located in a required street setback or street yard area. 
(2)  Ground-mounted solar energy systems may be located within required interior side and rear setbacks. 
(3)  Ground-mounted solar energy systems are subject to applicable accessory structure height and lot coverage regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-174. - Relatives' residences. 
A second kitchen facility may be constructed and used within a detached house for the exclusive use of relatives of the real property owner, subject to all of the following regulations: 
(1)  The real property owner must live in the detached house. 
(2)  Relatives must be related by blood, marriage or law. 
(3)  The area of the second kitchen facility may not exceed the area of the main kitchen facility. 
(4)  Access to the relatives' living area must come from the interior of the residence, although secondary access to the exterior of the dwelling is not prohibited. 
(5)  Permits for the second kitchen facility may not be issued until the property owner has applied to and received from the community development director an administrative permit for a relatives' residence. The relatives' residence permit must be in recordable form and, upon execution, must be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. The community development director must provide a copy of the permit to the board of tax assessors. The unit must be removed when it is vacated by the relatives for whom the unit was installed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-175. - Retail sales kiosks, vending machines and donation drop boxes. 
Retail sales kiosks, vending machines and donation drop boxes are allowed only if located entirely within an enclosed building or within the exterior perimeter footprint of an allowed building. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-10.100), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-176. - Chickens in single-family residence districts 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the city council in enacting the following regulations is to allow Dunwoody citizens the right to keep and raise backyard chickens in all single-family residential zoning districts in the City of Dunwoody. Further, the city council finds it appropriate to regulate backyard chicken raising in the manner presented in this section, so as to be permissive enough to easily allow citizens to keep chickens on their property, but restrictive enough to protect the interests of neighboring residents from unnecessary noise, odor, and the invitation of rodents, wild birds and predatory animals to the property. Additionally, these regulations are intended to ensure the humane treatment of animals. 
(b)  Prior authorization. 
(1)  The community development director or their designee shall develop an application form and determine the submittal requirements for the review of these requests. A person seeking to keep and raise chickens on a single-family property shall first submit a complete application to the community development department. 
(2)  In order to obtain zoning approval, persons keeping chickens must show that they can meet the requirements of this section by providing a conceptual site plan showing the property with dimensions and the location of existing and required structures. The city may conduct site inspections of the subject property to make compliance determinations under this section prior to and after zoning approval. The community development director is authorized to approve or disapprove an application if he/she determines that the application fails to meet the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Prior to obtaining zoning approval, the city may inspect the applicant's lot for compliance with city codes and zoning approval shall grant the right to a city code enforcement officer to enter onto applicant's lot at any time to investigate any chicken-related complaints or concerns. 
(4)  This section does not authorize persons to violate applicable restrictive covenants and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations. Persons applying for and receiving zoning approval under this section are solely responsible for compliance with all applicable restrictive covenants and homeowners' association rules and regulations. 
(5)  Zoning approval for the keeping and raising of chickens shall be granted to the applicant only and shall not transfer to any future occupant or property owner. 
(c)  General regulations. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section: 
a.  The term "coop" means an enclosure, cage or pen, usually with bars or wires, in which chickens are traditionally confined; and 
b.  The term "chicken" refers to female chickens only (i.e., hens). The keeping and raising roosters, crowing hens, ducks, geese, turkeys and other poultry or fowl are prohibited in the City of Dunwoody. 
(2)  Feed and any other food source provided to the chickens shall be stored in predator-proof containers. Every person who owns, controls, keeps, maintains or harbors chickens must keep them confined on the premises at all times within a chicken coop or chicken run. 
(3)  Chickens shall be kept for personal use only. Selling chickens, eggs, or chicken manure, or the breeding of chickens for commercial purposes is prohibited. 
(4)  Chickens shall not be slaughtered on premises. 
(5)  The construction of chicken coops and runs shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
(6)  Maximum number of chickens allowed per residential lot: 
a.  No more than six chickens shall be kept on any lot in the City of Dunwoody. 
b.  No chickens may be kept on lots under 10,000 square feet. 
(d)  Requirements for chicken coops and enclosures/runs. 
(1)  Chickens shall be securely housed in coops and provided with runs. 
(2)  Coops shall not exceed six feet in height above grade and must allow for a footprint of at least two square feet per chicken housed in the coop. The maximum single coop footprint size is 40 square feet. The minimum ground space required per chicken in a run is five square feet. Runs must be located under coops or otherwise covered at all times. 
(3)  Coops and runs must be kept clean, sanitary and free from standing water at all times. Coops and runs shall be constructed, designed and maintained in such a way as to be impermeable to and free of rodents, vermin, wild birds, and predators, including, but not limited to, cats, coyotes, dogs, raccoons and skunks. 
(4)  Coops and runs must be located in the rear yard of the lot. 
(5)  Coops and runs must be setback no less than 35 feet from the rear property line and no less than 15 feet from side property lines. Coops and runs must be a minimum of 20 feet from corner side lot lines. 
(6)  The maximum size of the total coop and run area shall be 100 square feet. Mobile coops shall be prohibited unless properly anchored to the satisfaction of the building official or his/her designee. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall prevent construction of a coop or pen that abuts the applicant's house. 
(8)  Runs must be situated on a well-drained area that allows the chickens to have access to dry ground at all times. Feces shall be removed and disposed of, composted or land applied in a manner to avoid odor. 
(9)  As provided for herein, the keeping of chickens is not considered an 'agricultural' activity. 
(e)  Health, sanitation and nuisance as applied to the keeping of chickens. 
(1)  Chickens shall be kept within a coop and run. No person shall release or set any chicken free from such coop or enclosure except as set forth in subsection (c)(3), above. Chickens shall not be permitted to trespass on neighboring properties. 
(2)  Chicken coops and runs shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Chickens shall not be permitted to create a nuisance consisting of odor, noise or pests, or contribute to any other nuisance condition on-site or on adjacent property. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  Failure of the applicant to abide by all the applicable regulations of this section, the City of Dunwoody Code of Ordinances, or any state or federal law regarding chicken-raising and/or coops, shall be a violation of the City of Dunwoody Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  The applicant and/or property owner shall be jointly responsible for compliance with all provisions of this section. 
(3)  No person convicted as a repeat violator of subsections (a)—(e) of this section will be permitted to, or continue to, keep chickens on their premises. 
(4)  If the provisions of this section conflict with any other provisions of the City of Dunwoody Code of Ordinances, the provisions contained in this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05-13, § 1, 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 27-177—27-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 27-186. - Description and purpose. 
(a)  A temporary use is the use of property conducted from an area or structure (e.g., parking lots, lawns, trucks, tents, or other temporary structures) that does not require a building permit and that may or may not comply with the use or lot and building standards of the zoning district in which the temporary use is located. 
(b)  The temporary use regulations of this section are intended to permit such occasional, temporary uses and activities when consistent with the overall purposes of this zoning ordinance and when the operation of the temporary use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-11.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-187. - Authority to approve. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly stated, temporary uses are subject to all city permit procedures and municipal code requirements. 
(b)  The community development director is authorized to approve temporary uses that comply with the provisions of this division and to impose conditions on the operation of temporary uses that will help to ensure that they do not create significant adverse impacts on surrounding uses and that they operate safely, consistent with the general purposes of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Temporary uses and special events on city streets or city-owned land are subject to the special event provisions of chapter 26 of the Municipal Code. 
(d)  The community development director is also authorized to require that temporary uses that are deemed likely to generate significant impacts on the surrounding area be processed as special land use permits in accordance with article V, division 3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-11.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-188. - Authorized temporary uses. 
(a)  Garage sales. 
(1)  Up to two garage sales per calendar year are permitted as temporary uses without a permit. Any additional garage sales require community development approval. 
(2)  Garage sales in residential zoning districts are permitted only on lots occupied by a residential dwelling unit. 
(b)  Temporary buildings. 
(1)  The community development director is authorized to approve temporary buildings to be used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building. The temporary building shall not be approved until a permit for the land development or building construction has been issued. 
(2)  Temporary buildings shall be removed prior to the expiration or finaling of a building or land development permit on the subject site. Temporary buildings must be removed when construction has been completed and prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Temporary outdoor seasonal sales. The regulations of this subsection apply to temporary outdoor sales of plants, flowers, produce, seasonal greenery and similar items customarily displayed and sold outdoors on a seasonal basis. The community development director is authorized to approve temporary outdoor seasonal sales in NS, C-1, C-2, and M zoning districts and on the site of a place of worship, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any application for a temporary use permit for outdoor seasonal sales must be accompanied by written authorization of the subject property owner to use the property for temporary outdoor seasonal sales. 
(2)  No permit for temporary outdoor seasonal sales may be approved for the same lot or any portion of the same lot for a cumulative total of more than 60 days in any calendar year. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor seasonal sales uses are permitted only on lots that have adjacent hard-surface parking with a curb cut. 
(4)  No operator, employee or representative may solicit directly to motorists. 
(d)  Temporary outdoor sales. The regulations of this subsection apply to temporary outdoor sales activities (other than temporary seasonal sales) where the point of sales occurs outside of a building (e.g., parking lot tent sale). The community development director is authorized to approve temporary outdoor sales of merchandise in NS, C-1, C-2 and M zoning districts, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any application for a temporary use permit for outdoor sales of merchandise must be accompanied by written authorization of the subject property owner to use the property for temporary outdoor sales of merchandise. 
(2)  No temporary outdoor sales of merchandise may be conducted within 50 feet of the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Applicants for temporary outdoor sales permits must obtain a business license. 
(4)  No temporary outdoor sales of merchandise may be approved for a time period exceeding three consecutive days. 
(5)  No permit for temporary outdoor sales of merchandise may be approved for the same lot or any portion of the same lot for a total of more than six days in any calendar year. 
(6)  Except as authorized by the permit for temporary outdoor sales of merchandise, all other sales of merchandise must be conducted within a permanent building that has a floor area of at least 300 square feet and that complies with the requirements of this zoning ordinance and all other applicable parts of the municipal code. 
(7)  Temporary outdoor sales activities are prohibited on vacant lots. 
(8)  No temporary buildings are permitted in connection with a temporary outdoor sales use. 
(9)  All activities associated with temporary outdoor sales are limited to daylight hours and all displays and equipment must be removed nightly. 
(10)  No operator, employee or representative may solicit directly to motorists. 
(e)  Temporary portable storage containers. The community development director is authorized to approve the use of portable storage containers as a temporary use in any zoning district. The following regulations apply in residential districts. 
(1)  Temporary portable storage containers are permitted for a period not to exceed a total of 60 days within any calendar year unless a valid building or construction permit is in place for the subject property, in which case the portable storage container may remain in place for a maximum of 120 days or until the permit expires, whichever occurs first. If a dwelling has been damaged by natural disaster or casualty, the community development director is authorized to grant extensions of otherwise applicable portable storage container time limits. 
(2)  Temporary portable storage containers may not exceed 8.5 feet in height or more than 260 square feet in area. 
(3)  Temporary portable storage containers may not be located in the public right-of-way or obstruct intersection visibility. 
(4)  Temporary portable storage containers may not be located in side setbacks or side yards. Temporary portable storage containers may not be located in a street yard unless located on a driveway or other paved surface. 
(5)  Rail cars, semi-trailers or similar equipment may not be used for temporary (or permanent) storage. 
(6)  Signs on temporary portable storage containers must comply with all applicable city sign regulations. 
(7)  Certificates or occupancy or completion may not be issued until all portable storage containers are removed from the subject property. 
(f)  Temporary telecommunications service. The community development director is authorized to approve a Communication Transmission Van (CTV) often referred to as "Cellular on Wheels" subject to the following criteria. 
(1)  Vehicles and all related equipment shall only be permitted on commercially zoned property within the PCID and may not be closer than 200 feet from any residential zoning district, or less than 50 feet to any property line or right-of-way. 
(2)  No part of the vehicle, structure or apparatus, including antenna, may be higher than 35 feet or the allowable building height in the zoning district, whichever is less. 
(3)  Noise caused by a generator or other equipment shall not exceed 75 decibels as measured at 30 feet from the source. 
(4)  Where deemed necessary by the director, appropriate screening or camouflage for the site and/or structures shall be incorporated. 
(5)  Such provision shall require the applicant, to at all times indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the city, and its officers, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said CTV's. 
(6)  All applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC shall be complied with. Conformance with all applicable city codes and permits is required. 
(7)  Written approval from the property owner shall be provided. 
(8)  The facility shall be secured through the use of acceptable fencing and screening and the use shall not obstruct fire or emergency access, or site visibility. 
(9)  Such provisions shall be for temporary deficiencies in coverage and shall be limited to a maximum of 60 days per calendar year per site. 
(10)  Any other conditions of approval determined to comply with the provisions of [section] 27-189. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-11.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-189. - Conditions of approval. 
In approving any temporary use, the community development director is authorized to impose conditions that will help to ensure that the use and its associated activities do not create significant adverse impacts on surrounding uses and that they operate safely, consistent with the general purposes of this zoning ordinance. Such conditions may include the following: 
(1)  Requirements for vehicle access and parking; 
(2)  Restrictions on hours of operation; 
(3)  Limitations on signs and outdoor lighting; 
(4)  Requirements for financial guarantees covering the costs of cleanup and/or removal of structures or equipment; and 
(5)  Other conditions necessary to carry out the general purposes of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-11.40), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-190—27-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERALLY APPLICABLE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - PARKING AND CIRCULATION 

Sec. 27-201. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The regulations of this division are intended to help ensure provision of off-street motor vehicle parking facilities, bicycle parking areas and other motorized and non-motorized transportation circulation facilities in rough proportion to the generalized demands of different land uses. By requiring such facilities, it is the intent of this division to help avoid the negative impacts associated with spillover parking into adjacent areas, while at the same time avoiding the negative environmental and visual impacts that can result from very large parking lots and other vehicular use areas. 
(2)  The provisions of this division are also intended to help protect the public health, safety and general welfare by: 
a.  Promoting multi-modal transportation options and enhanced pedestrian and cyclist safety; and 
b.  Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation and access demands of various land uses in different areas of the city. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations of this division apply to all districts and uses. 
(2)  New uses and development. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking regulations of this division apply to all new buildings constructed and all new uses established in all zoning districts. 
(3)  Change of use. When an existing or previously existing use fails to provide the number of off-street parking spaces required under this zoning ordinance and a new use is proposed the existing parking (deficit) may be continued. When the number of parking spaces required for the new use exceeds the number of spaces required for the use that most recently occupied the property, additional spaces are required only to make up the difference between the number of spaces required for the previous use and the number of spaces required for the new use, based on the regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Enlargements and expansions. 
a.  Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking regulations of this division apply whenever an existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to include additional dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, employees or other units of measurement used for establishing off-street parking requirements. 
b.  In the case of enlargements or expansions that trigger requirements for additional parking, additional spaces are required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use. In other words, there is no requirement to address lawfully existing parking space deficits. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-202. - Minimum motor vehicle and bicycle parking ratios. 
Except as otherwise expressly stated, off-street motor vehicle and bicycle parking spaces must be provided in accordance with the following table, provided that: 
(1)  No use is required to provide more than eight bicycle parking spaces; and 
(2)  The community development director is authorized to reduce minimum bicycle parking ratios for multi-tenant centers and other sites occupied by multiple uses when the director determines that common bike rack locations and overall bike parking availability will be adequate to meet bicycle parking demands on the subject lot. 

 
[1] Parking requirements for shopping centers are calculated based on the area of the entire shopping center, rather than the individual uses within the center. This parking calculation provision applies only to shopping centers in which restaurants make up less than 50 percent of the center's gross floor area. Parking requirements for any drive-through uses within a shopping center are always calculated separately. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, adopted April 11, 2017, changed the title of § 27-202 from "Minimum motor vehicle parking ratios" to read as herein set out. 
_____
Sec. 27-203. - Calculation of required parking. 
The following rules apply when calculating the required number of off-street parking spaces: 
(1)  Multiple uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, lots containing more than one use must provide parking in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses on the lot. 
(2)  Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a fractional number, any fraction of less than one-half is rounded down to the next lower whole number, and any fraction of one-half or more is rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
(3)  Area measurements. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all area-based (square footage) parking standards must be computed on the basis of gross floor area. 
(4)  Occupancy- or capacity-based standards. For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on employees, students, members, residents or occupants, calculations must be based on the largest number of persons working on any single shift, the maximum enrollment or membership or the maximum fire-rated capacity, whichever is applicable and whichever results in the greater number of spaces. 
(5)  Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the community development director is authorized to apply the off-street parking ratio specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or establish a minimum off-street parking requirement for the proposed use in accordance with subsection (6). 
(6)  Establishment of other parking ratios. The community development director is authorized to establish required minimum off-street parking ratios for unlisted uses and in those instances where authority to establish a requirement is expressly granted. Such ratios may be established on the basis of a similar use/parking determination (as described in subsection (5)), on parking data provided by the applicant or information otherwise available to the community development director. Parking data and studies must include estimates of parking demand based on reliable data collected from comparable uses or on external data from credible research organizations (e.g., Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or American Planning Association [APA]). Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location. Parking studies must document the source of all data used to develop recommended requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-204. - Motor vehicle parking reductions. 
(a)  Transit-served locations. 
(1)  The minimum off-street motor vehicle parking requirement for nonresidential uses located on lots within 1,500 feet of the pedestrian entrance of a light rail station or bus rapid transit stop is reduced by two spaces or 20 percent from the minimums stated in section 27-202, whichever results in a greater reduction. Any authorized reduction in motor vehicle parking spaces must be offset by provision of bicycle parking spaces at a rate of one bicycle space for each two reduced motor vehicle parking spaces. Required bicycle parking spaces may not be counted toward satisfying this requirement. 
(2)  The minimum off-street motor vehicle parking requirement for dwelling units in multi-unit and mixed-use buildings located on lots within 1,500 feet of the pedestrian entrance of a light rail station or bus rapid transit stop is reduced by 15 percent from the minimums stated in section 27-202. Any authorized reduction in motor vehicle parking spaces must be offset by provision of bicycle parking spaces at a rate of one bicycle space for each two reduced motor vehicle parking spaces. Required bicycle parking spaces may not be counted toward satisfying this requirement. No bicycle parking may be used to reduce any guest parking requirements. 
(b)  Motorcycle parking. In parking lots containing over 20 motor vehicle parking spaces, motorcycle or scooter parking may be substituted for up to five automobile parking spaces or five percent of required motor vehicle parking, whichever is less. For every four motorcycle or scooter parking spaces provided, the automobile parking requirement is reduced by one space. Each motorcycle and scooter space must have a concrete surface and minimum dimensions of four feet by eight feet. This provision applies to existing and proposed parking lots. 
(c)  Bicycle parking. Uses that provide bicycle parking and storage spaces in excess of the minimum requirements of section 27-202 are eligible for a reduction of required motor vehicle parking, in accordance with section 27-205. 
(d)  Car-share service. 
(1)  For any development, one parking space or up to five percent of the total number of required spaces, whichever is greater, may be reserved for use by car-share vehicles. The number of required motor vehicle parking spaces is reduced by one space for every parking space that is leased by a car-share program for use by a car-share vehicle. Parking for car-share vehicles may be provided in any non-required parking space. 
(2)  For any residential or mixed-use development that (a) is required to provide 50 or more parking spaces to serve residential dwelling unit and (b) provides one or more spaces for car-share vehicles, the number of required parking spaces may be reduced by four spaces for each reserved car-share vehicle parking space. No reduction of required visitor parking spaces is allowed. 
(e)  On-street parking. Nonresidential uses may count on-street parking spaces on public street rights-of-way abutting the subject property towards satisfying off-street motor vehicle parking requirements for nonresidential uses if such spaces meet city design specifications. One on-street parking space credit may be taken for each 20 linear feet of abutting right-of-way where parallel on-street parking is allowed. Credit for angled parking, where allowed, will be determined by the community development director. Only space on the same side of the street as the subject use may be counted, except that the community development director is authorized to allow spaces on the opposite side of the street to be counted if the property on that side of the street does not have the potential for future development. In calculating credit for on-street parking, all fractional spaces are rounded down. 
(f)  Outdoor dining areas. 
(1)  Except as otherwise expressly stated in this ordinance, minimum off-street parking requirements for eating and drinking establishments must be based on the amount of indoor and outdoor floor area. 
(2)  Outdoor dining areas containing up to 24 seats or no more than ten percent of the indoor public floor area devoted to customer seating (whichever amount is less) are not counted in determining minimum off-street parking requirements. All portions of outdoor seating areas that exceed ten percent the indoor public floor area devoted to customer seating and all portions of outdoor dining areas with a capacity of more than 24 seats must be counted in determining minimum off-street parking requirements. 
(g)  Shared parking. 
(1)  Sharing parking among different users can result in overall reductions in the amount of motor vehicle parking required. Shared parking is encouraged as a means of conserving scarce land resources, reducing stormwater runoff, reducing the heat island effect caused by large paved areas and improving community appearance. 
(2)  The community development director is authorized to approve shared parking facilities for mixed-use projects and for arrangements in which multiple uses propose to share the same parking facilities. Applicants proposing to use shared parking as a means of reducing overall motor vehicle parking requirements must submit: 
a.  The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants that are sharing the parking; 
b.  The uses for which shared parking is proposed and the gross floor area occupied by such uses; 
c.  The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared; 
d.  A shared parking analysis supporting the shared parking request; 
e.  A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction guaranteeing access to the parking for the shared parking users. 
(3)  The community development director is authorized to specify the shared parking methodology to be used or to require that the analysis be prepared by registered engineer in the State of Georgia with expertise in parking and transportation. The shared parking analysis must demonstrate that the peak parking demands of the subject uses occur at different times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of all uses. 
(4)  Shared parking may be located off site, provided that at least 75 percent of the required number of parking spaces for the subject use must be located on-site. Off-site parking is subject to the regulations of section 27-206(c). The requirement for 75 percent of required parking spaces to be located on-site does not apply when all uses making use of the shared parking are located within the boundaries of the PC Overlay. 
(5)  Required residential parking and accessible parking spaces (for persons with disabilities) may not be shared and must be located on site. 
(6)  In all cases, the property owner or management company is responsible for ensuring that adequate parking is available and does not impact adjacent property or rights-of-way. 
(h)  Electric vehicle (EV) charging. In off-street parking lots containing 50 or more motor vehicle parking spaces, each parking space equipped with EV charging equipment will be counted as two parking spaces, provided that such double-credit may not be applied to more than two EV charger-equipped spaces per each 50 motor vehicle parking spaces. 
(i)  Alternative compliance. The motor vehicle parking ratios of this division are not intended to prevent development and redevelopment or to make development and redevelopment economically impractical. In order to allow for flexibility in addressing the actual expected parking demand of specific uses, alternative compliance parking ratios may be approved through the special exception process (see article V, division 6) only if the zoning board of appeals determines that the proposed parking reductions are not likely to cause adverse impacts on traffic circulation and safety or on the surrounding area and the applicant provides a parking study or survey or a parking demand management plan in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The applicant submits a parking study or survey, prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia with expertise in parking and transportation demonstrating that the motor vehicle parking ratios of section 27-202 do not accurately reflect the actual parking demand that can reasonably be anticipated for the proposed use; or 
(2)  The applicant submits a parking demand management plan demonstrating a comprehensive and long-term approach to reducing on-site parking demand incorporating at least three of the following techniques: 
a.  Provision of or cost-participation in shuttle services from rail or bus transit or off-site parking facilities owned or leased by the applicant or employers who are tenants of the applicant's project. 
b.  Subsidy of employee use of high-occupancy motor vehicles such as carpools and vanpools; 
c.  Instituting a parking charge and not permitting such charge to be employer-subsidized; 
d.  Provision of subsidized transit passes; 
e.  Provision for bicycle commuters including but not limited to indoor bike storage and shower and changing facilities; 
f.  Other techniques acceptable to the zoning board of appeals and capable of reducing off-street parking demand at the work site. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, adopted April 11, 2017, changed the title of § 27-204 from "Allowed motor vehicle parking reductions" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 27-205. - Bicycle parking. 
(a)  General. This section allows reduction of motor vehicle parking requirements in exchange for providing bicycle parking facilities in excess of minimum bicycle parking requirements. It also establishes location and design requirements for required and non-required bicycle parking facilities. 
(b)  Replacement of motor vehicle parking spaces with additional bicycle parking spaces. Any nonresidential use may convert or substitute up to ten percent of required motor vehicle parking spaces in exchange for providing additional bicycle parking spaces at the following ratios, provided that the total motor vehicle parking reduction does not exceed 25 spaces: 
(1)  A reduction of one motor vehicle parking space is permitted for each six short-term bicycle parking spaces provided. Bicycle parking spaces required under section 27-202 may not be counted in determining allowed vehicle parking reductions. 
(2)  A reduction of one motor vehicle parking space is permitted for each two long-term bicycle parking spaces provided. Bicycle parking spaces required under section 27-202 may not be counted in determining allowed vehicle parking reductions. 
(c)  Location and design. 
(1)  Short-term bicycle parking spaces. 
a.  Location. Off-street bicycle parking spaces required by section 27-202 and short-term bicycle parking spaces provided to receive parking credit in accordance with subsection (b) of this section must be located in highly visible, illuminated areas that do not interfere with pedestrian movements. Such bicycle parking spaces must be located within 100 feet of a customer entrance. 
b.  Design. Off-street bicycle parking spaces required by section 27-202 and short-term bicycle parking spaces provided to receive parking credit in accordance with subsection (b) of this section must: 
1.  Consist of bike racks or lockers that are anchored so that they cannot be easily removed; 
2.  Be of solid construction, resistant to rust, corrosion, hammers, and saws; 
3.  Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked with the bicycle in an upright position using a standard U-lock (See figure 12-1A and PCID public space standards for examples of acceptable and preferred designs); 
Figure 12-1A: Acceptable Bike Rack Designs 

4.  Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle; 
5.  Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to adjacent bicycles; and 
6.  Have minimum dimensions of two feet in width by six feet in length, with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven feet. 
(2)  Long-term bicycle parking and storage spaces. 
a.  Location. Long-term bicycle parking spaces provided to receive parking credit in accordance with subsection (b) of this section must be provided in at least one of the following locations: 
1.  In weather-protected stationary racks or lockers that comply with the short-term bicycle parking location requirements of subsection (c)(1)a. 
2.  In a locked room; 
3.  In a weather-protected locked area that is enclosed by a fence or wall with a minimum height of seven feet; 
4.  In a private garage or private storage space serving an individual dwelling unit within a multi-dwelling (residential) building; 
5.  In a weather-protected area within clear view of an attendant or security personnel; 
6.  In a weather-protected area continuously monitored by security cameras; or 
7.  In a weather-protected area that is visible from employee work areas. 
b.  Design. Long-term bicycle parking spaces provided to receive parking credit in accordance with subsection (b) of this section must: 
1.  Be covered to provide protection from weather and secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons; 
2.  Consist of bike racks or lockers anchored so that they cannot be easily removed; 
3.  Be of solid construction, resistant to rust, corrosion, hammers, and saws; 
4.  Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked with the bicycle in an upright position using a standard U-lock; 
5.  Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle; 
6.  Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to adjacent bicycles; and 
7.  Have minimum dimensions of two feet in width by six feet in length, with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven feet. Bicycle lockers are exempt from overhead clearance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-206. - Location of off-street parking. 
(a)  General. Except as otherwise expressly stated, required off-street parking spaces must be located on the same lot as the building or use they are required to serve. 
(b)  Residential districts. The following standards apply in residential districts: 
(1)  Parking required in driveway. In R districts, parking is prohibited in street yards except on approved driveways. 
(2)  Paved area. No more than 35 percent of the street yard area in an R district may be paved. Circular driveways are allowed only on lots with adequate width to comply with the Institute of Traffic Engineers' geometric design standards. They are subject to the 35 percent paved area limitation. 
(3)  RM district parking. In RM districts, parking is prohibited in required street setbacks. 
(4)  Commercial vehicles prohibited. Only licensed, operable motorcycles and passenger vehicles not operated as a common or contract carrier for hire may be parked outside of an enclosed building in residential zoning districts. This provision is intended to expressly prohibit the parking of commercial motor vehicles (as defined in O.C.G.A § 40-1-1) outside of an enclosed building, except for the immediate loading or unloading of goods or people. It also expressly prohibits the outdoor parking and outdoor storage of construction equipment such as tractors, skid steers, backhoes, forklifts, cement mixers and similar equipment. This prohibition does not apply to construction staging areas. 
(5)  Location of parking for recreational vehicles, trailers, etc. The parking and outdoor storage of trailers, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers, pickup coaches, motorized homes, boat trailers, boats and similar vehicles and equipment is prohibited in street yards and within 20 feet of any lot line 
(c)  Off-site parking. 
(1)  General. Up to 25 percent of the number of off-street parking spaces required for nonresidential uses may be provided off-site, in accordance with the provisions of this section. Off-site parking areas must comply with all applicable parking area design and accessibility standards. Required accessible parking spaces and parking required for residential uses may not be located off site. 
(2)  Location. Off-site parking areas must be located within a 1,500-foot radius of the use served by such parking, measured between the entrance of the use to be served and the outer perimeter of the furthest parking space within the off-site parking lot. Off-site parking lots are allowed as of right only in zoning districts that permit either the principal use to be served by the off-site parking spaces or non-accessory parking uses. Off-site parking in other zoning districts requires review and approval of a special use special land use permit in accordance with the procedures of article V, division 3. 
Figure 12-1: Off-site Parking, Maximum Distance Measurement  
(3)  Control of off-site parking area. The property to be occupied by the off-site parking facilities must be under the same ownership as the lot containing the use to be served by the parking. The off-site parking area may be under separate ownership only if an agreement is provided guaranteeing the long-term availability of the parking, commensurate with the use served by the parking. Off-site parking privileges will continue in effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If an off-site parking agreement lapses or is no longer valid, then parking must be provided as otherwise required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-207. - Use of off-street parking areas. 
(a)  Required off-street parking areas may be used solely for the temporary parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating condition. 
(b)  Required off-street parking spaces may not be used for the display of goods for sale or lease or for storage of building materials. 
(c)  Required off-street parking spaces are intended to serve residents, tenants, patrons, employees, or guests of the principal use. Off-street parking spaces that are required by this zoning ordinance must be maintained for the life of the principal use. 
(d)  No motor vehicle repair work of any kind is permitted in a required parking space except within a zoning district that otherwise permits motor vehicle repair. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-208. - Parking area design. 
(a)  Tandem and valet parking arrangements. Parking areas must be designed and constructed to allow unobstructed movement into and out of required parking spaces without interfering with fixed objects or vehicles except in the case of allowed tandem and valet parking, as follows. 
(1)  Tandem parking. Tandem parking spaces may be used to satisfy residential parking requirements if the tandem spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit. 
(2)  Valet parking. Valet parking may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking requirements for nonresidential uses if an attendant is present during all hours of operation. Valet parking arrangements may involve the stacked parking of vehicles (i.e., requiring one or more vehicles to be moved to obtain access to other parked vehicles). Valet parking is not subject to the maximum 1,500-foot off-site parking limit of subsection 27-206(c)(2). 
(b)  Stall sizes and parking lot geometrics. 
(1)  Stall size. 
a.  Standard spaces. Required parking spaces must have minimum dimensions of 8.5 feet (width) by 18 feet (depth) except as allowed by subsection (b)(1)b. (compact spaces). 
b.  Driveway depth. In no case shall any parking space be less than 20 feet in depth as measured from a garage door or wall, to any "public" or shared sidewalk, drive aisle, or street right-of-way. 
c.  Compact spaces. In parking lots containing 20 or more required parking spaces, up to 40 percent of the required spaces may be compact car spaces. Compact spaces must have minimum dimensions of eight feet (width) by 15 feet (depth). 
(c)  Geometric design. Parking lots must be designed in accordance with the dimensional standards in the following table, which shows minimum dimensions for various parking layouts (angles). Requirements for layouts or angles not shown here may be interpolated from the layouts shown, as approved by the community development director. 

 
A = Stall Angle, B = Stall Width, C = Stall Length, D = Aisle Width (1-way/2-way) 
Figure 12-1B: Parking Area Geometrics 

(d)  Landscaping. See the parking lot landscaping regulations of sections 27-228 and 27-229. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.80), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-209. - Pedestrian circulation. 
An on-site circulation system for pedestrian and non-motorized travel must be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Connection to the street. The on-site pedestrian circulation system must connect all adjacent public rights-of-way to the main building entrance. The connection must follow a direct route and not involve significant out-of-direction travel for system users. 
(2)  Connection to abutting properties. The on-site pedestrian circulation system must provide at least one connection to existing paths and sidewalks on abutting properties or to the likely location of future paths or sidewalks on those properties. When the community development director determines that no paths or sidewalks exist on a neighboring property or it is not possible to determine the likely location of future path or sidewalk connections or extending a connection would create a safety hazard on either property, no such connection is required. 
(3)  Internal connections. The on-site pedestrian circulation system must connect all buildings on the site and provide connections to other areas of the site likely to be used by pedestrians and non-motorized travel, such as parking areas, bicycle parking, recreational areas, common outdoor areas, plazas and similar amenity features. 
Figure 12-2: Pedestrian Connections  
(4)  Design. Required on-site pedestrian circulation facilities must be designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  The on-site pedestrian circulation system must be paved and be at least five feet in width. 
b.  When the on-site pedestrian circulation system crosses driveways, parking areas or loading areas, it must be clearly differentiated through the use of elevation changes, a different paving material or other equally effective methods. Striping does not meet this requirement. 
c.  When the on-site pedestrian circulation system is parallel and adjacent to a motor vehicle travel lane, it must be a raised path at least six inches above the vehicle travel lane surface or be separated from the vehicle travel lane by a raised curb, bollards, landscaping or another physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of the raised portions must be equipped with accessible curb ramps. 
d.  The on-site pedestrian circulation system must be illuminated to ensure that it can be used safely at night by employees, residents, and customers. Lighting must be at height appropriate to a pedestrian pathway system. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-210. - Accessible parking for people with disabilities. 
Accessible parking facilities must be provided in accordance with Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.100), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-211. - Drive-through facilities. 
(a)  Purpose. These regulations of this section are intended to help ensure that: 
(1)  There is adequate on-site maneuvering and circulation area for vehicles and pedestrians; 
(2)  Waiting vehicles do not impede traffic on abutting streets; and 
(3)  Impacts on surrounding uses are minimized. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The regulations of this section apply to all uses that include all drive-through facilities and to all portions of a development that comprise the drive-through facility. They do not apply to accessory facilities where vehicles do not routinely queue up while waiting for service. 
(2)  The regulations apply to new developments, the addition of drive-through facilities to existing developments and the relocation of existing drive-through facilities. 
(c)  Stacking spaces required. Stacking lanes must be provided in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 

 
(d)  Stacking lane dimensions, design and layout. 
(1)  Stacking lanes must be designed so that they do not interfere with parking movements or safe pedestrian circulation. Stacking spaces must be nine feet wide by 20 feet long. 
(2)  All stacking lanes must be clearly identified, through such means as striping, landscaping, pavement design, curbing and/or signs. 
(e)  Setbacks. Stacking lanes must be set back at least 50 feet from any abutting residential zoning districts and at least 25 feet from all other lot lines. 
(f)  Noise—Drive-through facilities. Speakers associated with drive-through facilities may not be audible from abutting R-zoned lots or abutting lots occupied by residential uses. Sound attenuation walls, landscaping or other mitigation measures may be required to ensure that the facility will not have adverse noise-related impacts on nearby residential uses. 
(g)  Site plans. Site plans must show the location of drive-through windows and associated facilities (for example: communications systems and access aisles), as well as adjacent residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.110), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-212. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  Minimum ratios. Off-street loading spaces must be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(b)  Design and location. 
(1)  Off-street loading spaces must be at least 12 feet in width and 35 feet in length unless off-street loading will involve the use of semi-tractor trailer combinations or other vehicles in excess of 35 feet in length, in which case the minimum size of a loading space is 12 feet by 55 feet. All loading spaces must have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. 
(2)  Each loading space must have sufficient maneuvering space on site so as to prevent interference with pedestrian or vehicular circulation on the subject site and on public streets and sidewalks. 
(3)  Plans for location, design and layout of all loading spaces must be indicated on required site plans. 
(4)  All off-street loading areas must be paved. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-12.120), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-213—27-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

Sec. 27-226. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. The landscaping and screening regulations of this division establish minimum requirements for landscaping and screening. The regulations are intended to advance the general purposes of this ordinance and specifically to: 
(1)  Enhance quality of life for residents and visitors; 
(2)  Protect property values; 
(3)  Enhance the quality and appearance new development and redevelopment projects; 
(4)  Mitigate possible adverse impacts of higher intensity land uses abutting lower intensity land uses; 
(5)  Promote the preservation, expansion, protection and proper maintenance of existing trees and landscaping; 
(6)  Help ensure wise use of water resources; 
(7)  Improve air quality; 
(8)  Protect water quality and reduce the negative impacts of stormwater runoff by reducing impervious surface area and providing vegetated areas that filter and retain greater amounts of stormwater on site; 
(9)  Moderate heat by providing shade; 
(10)  Reduce the impacts of noise and glare; and 
(11)  Promote sustainable landscape practices including the use of non-invasive native and regionally adaptable plants. 
(b)  Applicability. The landscaping and screening regulations of this division apply as set forth in the individual sections of these regulations. 
(c)  General exemption. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the landscaping and screening regulations of this division do not apply to the construction or expansion of individual detached houses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-227. - General landscaping of yards and open areas. 
On all lots, required setback areas and areas that are not allowed to be covered (in accordance with lot coverage requirements) must be landscaped. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-228. - Parking lot interior landscaping. 
(a)  Applicability. The parking lot interior landscaping regulations of this section apply to all of the following: 
(1)  The construction or installation of any new surface parking lot containing eight or more parking spaces; and 
(2)  The expansion of any existing surface parking lot if the expansion would result in eight or more new parking spaces, in which case the requirements of this section apply only to the expanded area. 
(b)  Exemptions. Installation of parking lot interior landscaping is not required beneath canopies or other structures that block sunlight or rainfall. 
(c)  Options. Landscaping must be provided in the interior of parking lots in the form of landscape islands or a combination of landscape islands and landscape medians, at the option of the property owner. The two options for satisfying parking lot interior landscaping requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Landscape islands (option 1). Under option 1, landscape terminal islands (end caps) must be provided at the end of each row of parking spaces and interior landscape islands must be provided within each row of parking spaces so that the distance between islands is no greater than ten parking spaces. Under option 1, all landscape islands must have a minimum pervious area of 400 square feet, except when only a single row of parking spaces is provided, the minimum pervious area requirement is 200 square feet. 
Figure 13-1: Landscape Islands (Option 1)  
(2)  Landscape islands and medians (option 2). Under option 2, landscape terminal islands (end caps) must be provided at the end of each row of parking spaces and interior landscape islands must be provided within each row of parking spaces so that the distance between islands is no greater than 20 parking spaces. A landscape divider median with a minimum width of five feet must run continuously between landscape islands and include at least one canopy tree per 30 linear feet of median length. Under option 2, all landscape islands must have a minimum pervious area of 300 square feet except when only a single row of parking spaces is provided, the minimum pervious area requirement is 150 square feet. 
Figure 13-2: Landscape Islands (Option 2)  
(d)  Plant material. 
(1)  Landscape islands abutting a single row of parking spaces must include at least one canopy tree. 
(2)  Landscape islands abutting a double row of parking spaces must include at least two canopy trees. 
(3)  Shrubs must be provided in landscape islands and divider medians at a rate of four shrubs per required canopy tree. 
(4)  Ground cover must be used in areas not covered by trees and shrubs. Turf grass may not be used in landscape islands or divider medians. 
(5)  Landscaping within parking lots may not exceed three feet in height, with the exception of trees. 
(e)  Landscape materials and design. Parking lot interior landscaping is subject to the regulations of section 27-233. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-229. - Parking lot perimeter landscaping. 
(a)  Applicability. The parking lot perimeter landscaping regulations of this section apply to all of the following: 
(1)  The construction or installation of any new surface parking lot or vehicular use area that is adjacent to street right-of-way; and 
(2)  The expansion of any existing surface parking lot or vehicular use area that is adjacent to street right-of-way, in which case the requirements of this section apply only to the expanded area. 
(b)  Exemptions. Installation of parking lot perimeter landscaping is not required when the parking lot or vehicular use area is not visible from adjacent street right-of-way, as determined by the city arborist. 
(c)  Requirements. Parking lot perimeter landscaping must be provided in the form of a landscape strip with a minimum depth of 7.5 feet that includes a hedge, dense shrub planting, masonry wall or combination of such features that results in a continuous visual screen to a height of at least three feet above the grade of the parking lot (or vehicular use area) along the length its frontage. 
Figure 13-3: Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping  
(d)  Plant material. Shrubs used to satisfy parking lot perimeter landscaping requirements must be provided at a rate of 30 shrubs per 100 feet of parking lot (or vehicular use area) frontage. 
(e)  Landscape materials and design. Parking lot perimeter landscaping is subject to the regulations of section 27-233. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-230. - Transition yards. 
(a)  Applicability. The transition yard landscaping regulations of this section apply along interior property lines in those instances expressly identified in this zoning ordinance and only to the following activities: 
(1)  The construction or installation of any new principal building or principal use; and 
(2)  The expansion of any existing principal building or principal use that increases gross floor area or impervious surface area by more than 25 percent or 1,000 square feet, whichever is greater. In the case of expansions triggering transition yard requirements, the transition yard must be placed to provide reasonable screening and buffering of areas visually impacted by the proposed expansion, as determined by the community development director. 
(b)  Transition yard types. 
(1)  Four transition yard types are established in recognition of the different contexts that may exist. They are as follows: 

 
[1] Yard widths calculated on the basis of average per 100 feet, provided that the yard width at any point may not be less than 50 percent of the minimums stated in the table. Required zoning district setbacks may be counted toward satisfying transition yard widths. 
[2] TY2 transition yard must include either (a) a fence/wall or (b) shrubs meeting the minimum requirements of this table. 
Figure 13-4: Transition Yard 1 (TY1)  
Figure 13-5: Transition Yard 2 (TY2)  
Figure 13-6: Transition Yard 3 (TY3)  
Figure 13-7: Transition Yard 4 (TY4)  
(2)  Transition yard requirements are minimum regulations. Property owners who are subject to transition yard requirements may elect to provide a higher level transition yard. 
(3)  The city arborist is authorized to count existing vegetation and structural elements as satisfying all or part of transition yard requirements upon determining that such existing vegetation and structural elements meet the overall intent of these landscaping and screening regulations. 
(4)  No buildings or parking areas may be located in required transition yards. Breaks for motorized and non-motorized transportation access are allowed. 
(c)  Zoning district transition yards. Transition yards are required between zoning districts in accordance with the following minimum requirements. 

 
(d)  Landscape materials and design. Trees species must be selected from the city's approved street tree list, which is available in the community development department; alternative cultivars may be approved on a case-by-case basis with the approval of the city arborist. Transition yard landscaping is subject to the regulations of section 27-233. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-231. - Screening. 
(a)  Features to be screened. The following features must be screened from view of public rights-of-way, public open spaces and from lots used or zoned for residential purposes, as specified in this section. 
(1)  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment. 
(2)  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment. 
(3)  Refuse/recycling containers. 
(4)  Outdoor storage of materials, supplies and equipment. 
(b)  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment over 30 inches in height may not be placed within a required street yard setback and must be screened from view by a solid fence, solid wall, dense hedge, or combination of such features. The hedge, fence or wall must be tall enough to screen the equipment ([see] Figure 13-8). 
Figure 13-8: Screening of Ground-mounted Mechanical Equipment  
(c)  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, cooling, ventilation, exhaust and similar equipment, but not solar panels, wind energy or similar renewable energy devices) shall be screened in all directions by walls or parapets equal in height, or taller than, the mechanical equipment (see Figure 13-9). 
Figure 13-9: Screening of Roof-mounted Mechanical Equipment  
(d)  Refuse/recycling containers. Refuse/recycling containers must be screened from view of streets and all abutting lots with a solid wall or opaque fence at least six feet in height. Refuse/recycling containers may not be located in front or street side setbacks. 
Figure 13-10: Location and Screening of Refuse/Recycling Containers  

(e)  Outdoor storage of materials, supplies and equipment. All stored materials, supplies, merchandise, vehicles, equipment, or other similar materials not on display for direct sale, rental or lease to the ultimate consumer or user must be screened by a fence, wall, dense hedge, or combination of such features with a minimum height of six feet at the time of installation. 
(f)  Landscape materials and design. Landscape material used to satisfying the screening requirements of this section are subject to the regulations of section 27-233. 
(g)  A request to waive or modify the screening requirements for roof-mounted mechanical equipment may be submitted as a design review application to the design review advisory committee according to article V, division 4, design review. The design review advisory committee shall make a recommendation to the community development director who is then authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for alternative screening. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-232. - Landscape plans. 
All applications for development permit activities that are subject to the landscape and screening regulations of this division must be accompanied by a separate landscape plan that has been prepared and sealed by a Georgia-registered landscape architect, certified arborist or registered forester. No certificate of occupancy or similar authorization may be issued unless city arborist determines that the landscaping regulations of this division have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-233. - Landscape material and design. 
(a)  Landscaping with required landscape areas. Required landscaped areas must be covered with biodegradable mulch and ground cover plants. 
(b)  Existing trees and vegetation. Existing non-invasive trees and shrubs count toward satisfying the landscaping and screening regulations of this division if they are located within the subject area and they comply with the plant height and size requirements of this section. 
(c)  Plant selection. 
(1)  Trees and plants selected for required landscape areas must be well-suited to the microclimate and on-site soil conditions. 
(2)  Trees and plant material must comply with the specifications found in American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI). 
(3)  Invasive species may not be used to meet landscape requirements. 
(4)  If more than 30 trees will be used, a mixture of three or more tree species must be used. If more than 50 shrubs will be used, a mixture of three or more shrub species must be used. 
(5)  All plant materials are subject to the approval of the city arborist. 
(d)  Trees. 
(1)  Deciduous. Deciduous trees used to satisfy the requirements of this division must be drought-tolerant, have a minimum caliper size of three inches (measured six inches above the root ball) and a minimum height of ten feet. 
(2)  Evergreen. Evergreen trees used to satisfy the requirements of this division must be drought-tolerant and have a minimum height of six feet at time of planting. 
(e)  Shrubs and ornamental grasses. Shrubs and ornamental grasses used to satisfy the requirements of this division must [be] a minimum one-gallon size. 
(f)  Groundcover plants. Groundcover plants are deciduous or evergreen plants that grow low and spread horizontally, not including turf. Groundcover plants used to satisfy the requirements of this division must be at least one-gallon size. 
(g)  Mulch. All required trees and shrubs must be located within a (biodegradable) mulched area. 
(h)  Curbs and vehicle barriers. Landscaped areas in or abutting parking lots must be protected by concrete curbing, anchored wheel stops, or other durable barriers approved by the city arborist. Alternative barrier designs that provide improved infiltration or storage of stormwater are encouraged. Curbs protecting landscape areas may be perforated, have gaps or otherwise be designed to allow stormwater runoff to pass through them. 
(i)  Installation. 
(1)  All landscaping must be installed in a sound workmanlike manner and in accordance with accepted good landscape planting procedures. 
(2)  Newly planted trees may not be staked or guyed unless they are unable to stand upright without support. Any staking and guying materials must be removed within one year of installation. 
(3)  If the landscape design incorporates plants that require seasonal watering, an automatic irrigation system must be provided to maintain the landscaping in healthy, attractive condition. 
a.  Preserved trees, shrubs, and native plant communities are not required to be irrigated, unless directed by the city arborist. 
b.  Drip irrigation systems must be installed in areas planted with trees, shrubs, perennials and groundcovers. The city arborist may approve an alternate comparable system if it provides irrigation at the ground level rather than an upright spray. 
c.  Turf grass areas must be irrigated on a different zone than trees, shrubs, perennials and groundcovers. 
d.  Moisture sensor and/or rain gauge equipment is required on automatic irrigation systems to avoid irrigation during periods of sufficient rainfall. 
e.  No significant irrigation overthrow is permitted onto impervious surfaces. 
f.  A watering schedule shall be submitted as part of the landscape plan. The schedule shall indicate the different irrigation zones and the frequency and amount of irrigation. Landscape plans must identify methods that will be employed to promote resource-efficient landscaping for the conservation of water and other natural resources, such as: 
1.  Practical turf areas; 
2.  Use of water-conserving plant material; 
3.  Grouping of plants with similar water requirements; 
4.  Installation of pervious paving to encourage groundwater recharge and re-use and to discourage run-off; 
5.  Rainwater harvesting techniques; 
6.  Use of mulches; 
7.  Use of soil amendments based on soil analysis; 
8.  Use of reclaimed water, and 
9.  Other practices and techniques. 
(j)  Maintenance. The property owner, occupant, tenant and respective agent of each, if any, are jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all required landscaping in perpetuity, in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Landscaping must be kept reasonably free of visible signs of insects and disease and appropriately irrigated to enable landscaping to exist in a healthy growing condition; 
(2)  Landscaping must be mowed or trimmed in a manner and at a frequency appropriate to the use made of the material and species on the site so as not to detract from the appearance of the general area. Growth of plant material at maturity must be considered where future conflicts such as view, signage, street lighting, utilities and circulation might arise; 
(3)  All landscaping must be maintained to minimize property damage and public safety hazards, including removal of dead or decaying plant material, and removal of low-hanging branches next to sidewalks and walkways obstructing street lighting; and 
(4)  All pruning must be done in accordance with ANSI A300 (part 1) "Standards for Tree Care Operations-Pruning." Tree topping is prohibited. Crown reduction pruning may be used instead to reduce the height of a tree when necessary. Topped trees may not be counted toward tree planting requirements. 
(5)  The property owner must post a maintenance bond or cash escrow prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy guaranteeing all landscape materials and work for a period of two years. The bond or escrow must be for at least 115 percent of the estimated cost of replacing all required landscaping. An itemized estimate must be provided by the owner and based on the opinion of a landscape contractor and found to be reasonable by the city arborist. The city arborist must make an inspection and notify the owner of any corrections to be made within the two-year guarantee period. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-234. - Alternative compliance. 
In order to encourage creativity in landscape and screening design and to allow for flexibility in addressing atypical, site-specific development/redevelopment challenges, the city arborist is authorized to approve alternative compliance landscape plans when the city arborist determines that one or more of the following conditions are present: 
(1)  The site has space limitations or an unusual shape that makes strict compliance impossible or impractical; 
(2)  Conditions on or adjacent to the site such as topography, soils, vegetation or existing structures or utilities are such that strict compliance is impossible, impractical or of no value in terms of advancing the general purposes of this division; 
(3)  Safety considerations such as intersection visibility, utility locations, etc., make alternative compliance necessary; or 
(4)  Creative, alternative landscape plans will provide an equal or better means of meeting the intent of the landscaping and screening regulations of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-13.90), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-235—27-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 27-246. - Purpose. 
The regulations of this division are intended to: 
(1)  Permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; 
(2)  Curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; 
(3)  Preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; 
(4)  Minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; 
(5)  Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and 
(6)  Help protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from human-made sources. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-247. - Conformance with applicable regulations. 
All outdoor lighting devices must comply with the provisions of this division, the building code and the electrical code, required permits and inspections, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-248. - Prohibited lighting. 
The following are expressly prohibited: 
(1)  Aerial lasers; 
(2)  Searchlight style lights; 
(3)  Light sources that exceed 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2,000,000 candelas or more; 
(4)  Mercury vapor lamps; 
(5)  Low-sodium vapor lamps; and 
(6)  Exposed neon lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-249. - Exempt lighting. 
The following luminaries and lighting systems are expressly exempt from the regulations of this division: 
(1)  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains; 
(2)  Temporary holiday lighting; 
(3)  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other authorized federal, state or local government agency; 
(4)  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
(5)  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline; 
(6)  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of ten minutes or less. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-250. - Regulations. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The regulations of this section apply: 
a.  To all new land uses, new developments and new buildings that require a permit; 
b.  Whenever existing land uses, developments or buildings are expanded by 25 percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, parking spaces or gross floor area, in which case the entire property must be brought into conformance with these regulations; and 
c.  whenever existing outdoor lighting constituting 60 percent or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel is modified or replaced, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on the site. 
(2)  When existing developments or buildings are expanded by less than 25 percent in terms of additional dwelling units, parking spaces or gross floor area and the expansion requires a permit, the applicant must submit a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site must comply with the shielding and lamp type regulations of this division. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Outdoor lighting fixtures must be full cutoff and placed so as to allow no light above the horizontal as measured at the luminaire, except as herein noted in this section (as in the case of period fixtures, cutoff fixtures may be used) and except as allowed in chapter 20 of the Municipal Code (signs). 
(2)  Outdoor lighting fixtures must be located, aimed or shielded to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across lot lines and into the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 

 

 
(4)  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
(5)  Lighting on sites consisting of multiple uses must conform to the standards of the respective uses. 
(6)  Illumination levels are measured from any height and orientation of the measuring device at any location along the property line except the lighting of parking lots must be measured at grade with the meter sensor held horizontally at the surface. 
(c)  Specific uses and activities. This subsection establishes supplemental lighting regulations for specific types of uses and activities. All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below must comply with all other applicable regulations of this division. 
(1)  Outdoor sports, recreation fields and performance areas. Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, outdoor athletic fields, courts, tracks, special event or show areas must comply with the following regulations: 
a.  Facilities designed for municipal leagues, elementary to high school levels of play and training fields for recreational or social levels of play, college play, semi-professional, professional or national levels of play must utilize luminaries with minimal uplight consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. Where fully shielded fixtures are not utilized, acceptable luminaries include only those that: 
1.  Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers or lenses, and are installed so as to minimize uplight and offsite light trespass and glare, and 
2.  All lighting installations must be designed to achieve the illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA RP-6). 

 
E1 = Areas with intrinsically dark landscapes, such as national parks, areas of outstanding natural beauty, etc. 
E2 = Areas of low ambient brightness, including sensitive residential areas. 
E3 = Areas of medium ambient brightness, generally being urban residential areas. 
E4 = Areas of high ambient brightness, which would include dense urban areas with mixed residential and commercial use with high levels of nighttime activity. 
b.  All events must be scheduled so as to complete all activity no later than 10:30 p.m. Illumination of the playing field, court or track is permitted after the curfew only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual circumstances. Field lighting for these facilities must be turned off within 30 minutes of completion of the last event of the night. 
c.  All light poles must be set back a minimum 60 feet from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
(2)  Service station canopies and parking garages. 
a.  All luminaries mounted on or recessed into the lower surface or service station canopies and parking structures must be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses. 
b.  The total light output of luminaries mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, may not exceed 50 footcandles. The total light output of other illuminated areas of a service station may not exceed 15 footcandles. 
c.  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, must conform to IESNA recommendation RP-20. 
d.  Lights may not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy, and the sides of the canopy may not be illuminated. 
(3)  Security lighting. 
a.  Security lighting must be directed towards the targeted area. 
b.  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the system must be designed and maintained so that lights are not activated by activity off of the subject property. 
(4)  Pedestrian path lighting. Lighting posts for pedestrian path lighting may not exceed 16 feet in height from finished grade. 
(5)  Architectural accent lighting. 
a.  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art must be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures must be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
b.  Lighting fixtures may not generate glare, or direct light beyond the façade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
(6)  Temporary lighting permits. Permits for temporary lighting may be granted by the community development department if the total output from the luminaries does not exceed 50 footcandles, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The lighting may not remain for more than 30 days, except that permits for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
b.  The lighting must be designed in such a manner as to minimize light trespass and glare. 
c.  Temporary recreational lighting allowed by permit must be extinguished by 10:30 p.m. 
(7)  Parking areas. 
a.  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots must be directed downward and not towards buildings or other areas. 
b.  Parking lots must be illuminated to a minimum illumination level of 0.4 footcandles at grade level, and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination may not exceed 4:1. 
c.  Light poles used in parking lots with 100 parking spaces or less may not exceed 20 feet in height. Light poles used in parking lots with more than 100 parking spaces may not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(8)  Street lights. Unless street light fixtures are of a period or architecture style as approved by the public works department, all new, repaired or replaced fixtures must be full cutoff fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-251. - Variances. 
Applications for variances from the outdoor lighting regulations of this division must include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer or other commonly recognized authority on outdoor lighting. Applications must also include information concerning the proposed design and appearance of the luminaire and how light trespass and glare will be limited. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-252. - Plans. 
(a)  Applicants for any permit for any residential use required by any provision of the ordinances of the city involving outdoor lighting fixtures must submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with the outdoor lighting regulations of this division. 
(1)  The submission must include the following information with the application for the required permit: 
a.  Description of all proposed outdoor illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
(b)  Applicants for any permit for any commercial use required by any provision of the ordinances of the city involving outdoor lighting fixtures must submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with the outdoor lighting regulations of this division. 
(1)  The submission must include the following information with the application for the required permit: 
a.  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each outdoor illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
b.  Description of all proposed illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
c.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut-off of light emissions. 
d.  Photometric plans must include the maximum and average light layout. 
(2)  The above required plans, descriptions, and data must be complete and accurate so that the community development department is able to readily determine whether the proposal will comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-253. - Certification. 
For all projects, certification that the lighting as installed, conforms to the approved plans must be provided by a licensed professional before the certificate of occupancy is issued. Until this certification is submitted, approval for use by the issuance of the certificate of occupancy may not be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-14.80), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-254—27-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FENCES AND WALLS 

Sec. 27-266. - Applicability. 
The fence and wall regulations of this division govern the design and location of all fences and walls, including retaining walls and wing walls. 
(1)  Building permit required. Walls, fences, and retaining walls constructed in a front yard or a side yard fronting a street must be permitted by the community development department prior to installation. To receive a permit, the applicant must submit a completed application to the community development department. For walls and fences, upon receipt of a completed, compliant application, the community development department shall issue the applicant a permit within one business day of receipt of the completed application at no cost to the property owner. For retaining walls, the applicable fee shall be that which is listed in the community development department fee schedule as adopted by the city council. Permits shall only be issued for walls, fences, and retaining walls that conform to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-15.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 27-267. - Maximum height. 
In residential zoning districts fences and walls located in street yards may not exceed four feet in height. Fences on residential lots adjacent to a collector or arterial street may not exceed eight feet in height within said street yard. Fences on residential lots fronting on a collector or arterial street may not exceed four feet within the front yard. The community development director is authorized to approve an administrative permit (in accordance with article V, division 7) allowing fences in the side yard fronting a street on residential corner lots at a height of up to six feet. Fences shall not obstruct visibility as prescribed in section 27-289 of this article. All other fences and walls are limited to a maximum height of eight feet unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance ([see] Figure 15-1). The height of fences shall be measured from the natural adjacent grade on the lowest side of the fence to the top of the fence. 
Figure 15-1: Maximum Fence and Wall Heights  
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-15.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 27-268. - Required fences and walls. 
When fences or walls are required to be installed, the wall or fence must be in place before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-15.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-269. - Retaining walls in single-dwelling residential districts. 
The regulations of this section apply to retaining walls in single-dwelling residential zoning districts. 
(1)  Newly constructed retaining walls are subject to the following maximum height limits: 

 
(2)  Existing retaining walls may be repaired and replaced if the repair or replacement does not result in an increase in the height of the wall. 
(3)  On lots occupied by a detached house, retaining walls must be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the required building setback. The community development director is authorized to approve an administrative permit (in accordance with article V, division 7) allowing a retaining wall to encroach the setback. 
(4)  A decision to allow an authorized administrative permit or special exception must be based on a determination that exceptional topographical restrictions exist on the lot in context with the adjoining property that were not created by the applicant or owner, and a determination that no practical alternative retaining wall design is feasible. The applicant must submit a site plan or a topographical map certified by an engineer or landscape architect with any exception application for retaining walls. 
(5)  Retaining walls may not exceed 12 inches above grade at the higher side elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-15.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 27-270. - Wing walls in single-dwelling residential districts. 
The regulations of this section apply to wing walls in single-dwelling residential zoning districts. 
(1)  Newly constructed wing walls that are part of the foundation of the principal structure are permitted when exceptional topographical restrictions exist on the subject lot in context with the adjoining properties that were not created by the owner or applicant. 
(2)  Wing walls may not exceed ten feet in height, or the height of the foundation wall to which it is attached, whichever results in a lower wing wall height. Wing walls may not be used to allow a house to exceed the detached house infill regulations of section 27-147. 
(3)  When affixed to a detached house, a wing wall may project into a street setback or rear setback for a distance not to exceed ten feet. The community development director is authorized to approve an administrative permit (in accordance with article V, division 7) allowing a wing wall to project a side setback to a point not closer than five feet from the side lot line. 
(4)  Guardrails must be installed atop all wing walls exceeding 30 inches in height above grade. Guardrails may not be opaque and must be a minimum of 36 inches and a maximum of 48 inches in height. 
(5)  Wing walls may not exceed 12 inches above grade at the higher side elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-15.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 27-271. - Measurement of wing wall and retaining wall height. 
(a)  The height of wing walls is measured from the bottom of the footing or foundation at the base of the wall to the topmost point on the wall. 
(b)  For zoning purposes the height of retaining walls is measured from the natural adjacent grade on the lowest side of the wall to the top of the wall. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-15.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-272. - Fence and wall materials. 
The following standards shall apply to fences and walls. 
(1)  Adjoining right-of-way. In all single-family detached dwelling developments, wire fencing materials, including chain-link fencing with plastic, vinyl, or wooden inserts shall not be used adjoining a street right-of-way. The architectural treatment of poured concrete, common aggregate block or concrete block walls requires review and approval by the community development director. This provision shall not preclude the use of chain link fencing as a security fence around stormwater facilities ([see] Figure 15-2). 
Figure 15-2: Examples of Permissible Fence Types  
(2)  Fences along all property lines. Walls and fences constructed along all property lines shall be constructed with a finished side toward the neighboring property. 
a.  Wall and fences shall be constructed of wood, brick, block, vinyl, PVC, stone, metal, stucco, split rail, or wrought iron. 
b.  Prohibited materials: 
1.  Barbed wire, razor wire, or electrically charged fencing shall not be approved for any single-family dwelling lots. Barbed wire may be used for security strands in all but single-family dwelling districts at a height of at least six feet above grade. 
2.  The use of plywood/sheet goods, canvas, cloth, vinyl sheeting, EFIS, or other nondurable materials is prohibited. 
3.  Chainlink fencing with plastic, vinyl, wooden, or other inserts is prohibited. 
4.  No wall or fence shall be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk, or other discarded materials. 
(c)  Materials not permitted in subsection (a) nor explicitly prohibited in subsection (b) may be utilized upon review and approval by the community development director. 
(d)  Chainlink fencing, where permitted, shall be vinyl coated, black or green. 
(e)  Painted or stained wood shall be maintained. 
(f)  Metal fencing shall be painted or vinyl coated. 
(g)  Fence supports shall face inwards. 
(h)  Posts shall be anchored in concrete. 
(i)  Fences may step down a slope, however supports shall be vertical and plumb. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 27-273. - Setback. 
(a)  Fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of three feet from a public right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the community development director. 
(b)  Fences in front yards exceeding four feet in height must be setback from the leading edge of the primary structure by a minimum of three feet. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-26-2018) 
Secs. 27-274—27-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 27-286. - Outdoor storage. 
(a)  Where allowed. 
(1)  Outdoor storage is prohibited in all zoning districts except the C-2 and M districts. 
(2)  Temporary storage of construction equipment, construction materials, or construction vehicles is permitted on lots that are the subject of a valid development or building permit as long as construction work is actively being undertaken on the lot. 
(b)  Required setbacks and screening. Outdoor storage areas in C-2 and M districts must be set back at least 50 feet from street rights-of-way and screened from view. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-16.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-287. - Street frontage required. 
All buildings must be located on a lot or parcel that abuts a public street or private street. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-16.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-288. - State routes. 
Any applicant for any development or building permit for any lot or parcel of land fronting on any roadway that is classified as a state route by the state department of transportation must obtain the preliminary approval of both the city public works department and the state department of transportation before beginning any construction of any type. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-16.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-289. - Intersection visibility. 
No fence, wall, building, structure, sign, plant material, or other obstruction of any kind may be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way lines of any two streets extended, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-16.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-290. - Right-of-way structures and improvements. 
In no case shall any fence, wall, or other private improvement, encroach into any public right-of-way without the written approval of the appropriate public entity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 27-291—27-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - COMMON (PROCEDURAL) PROVISIONS 

Sec. 27-301. - Applicability. 
The common provisions of this division apply to all of the review and approval procedures (division 2 through division 9) of this zoning ordinance unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-302. - Georgia Zoning Procedures Law. 
(a)  The review and approval procedures of this zoning ordinance are intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66 et seq., which is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this zoning ordinance. If any provision of this zoning ordinance is in conflict with any provision of the zoning procedures law or if this zoning ordinance fails to incorporate a provision required for the implementation of the zoning procedures law, the zoning procedures law controls. 
(b)  This zoning ordinance is also intended to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-67 pertaining to zoning decisions. If any provision of this zoning ordinance is in conflict with any provision of O.C.G.A. § 36-67 or if this zoning ordinance fails to incorporate a provision required for the implementation of O.C.G.A. § 36-67, state law controls. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-303. - Developments of regional impact. 
(a)  Any application for a development permit or building permit that constitutes a development of regional impact must be forwarded to the Atlanta Regional Commission for review. No final local decision may be made on the application until the Atlanta Regional Commission's review is complete, within the time limit specified by state law. 
(b)  Any application for a zoning map amendment or special land use permit that constitutes a development of regional impact must be forwarded to the Atlanta Regional Commission for review. No final local decision may be made on the zoning map amendment or special land use permit until the Atlanta Regional Commission's review is complete, within the time limit specified by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-304. - Summary of review and decision-making authority. 
The following table provides a summary of review and decision-making authority under this zoning ordinance. In the event of conflict between this summary table and the detailed procedures identified in this zoning ordinance, the detailed procedures govern. 

 
[1] Responsible for review and recommendation only where expressly indicated in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-305. - Pre-application conferences. 
(a)  Purpose. Pre-application conferences provide an early opportunity for city staff and applicants to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for development approval under this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Applicability. Pre-application conferences are required whenever the provisions of this zoning ordinance expressly state that they are required. They are encouraged in all cases. 
(c)  Scheduling. Pre-application conferences must be scheduled with community development department staff. 
(d)  Guidelines. The community development director may establish guidelines for pre-application conferences, including information that should be provided and any available alternatives to face-to-face meetings, such as telephone conversations and email correspondence. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-306. - Applicant-initiated meeting. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of applicant-initiated meeting requirements is to help educate applicants for development approvals and neighbors about one another's interests, to attempt to resolve issues in a manner that respects those interests, and to identify unresolved issues. 
(b)  Applicability. Applicant-initiated meetings are required to be held whenever the provisions of this zoning ordinance expressly state that they are required. They are encouraged in all cases. 
(c)  Written notice. The applicant or his/her representative is responsible for completing all requirements of this section. Written notice is required for all applicant-initiated meetings and will be sent via first class mail to the owners of all residentially zoned property within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as those property owners are listed on the tax records of DeKalb County. The notices must be mailed at least 20 days before the date of the applicant-initiated meeting. Written notices must indicate the nature of the application, the street address of the subject property, and the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting. 
In addition to the above notice procedures the following shall be performed: 
(1)  A notice of the meeting shall be sent to the city planner at the current address of Dunwoody City Hall. 
(2)  At least seven days before but not more than 30 days before the date of the applicant-initiated meeting, notice of the meeting must be published in the official legal organ of the city. 
(d)  Scheduling meeting. The applicant initiated meeting must be held between the hours of 6 PM and 8 PM, Monday through Thursday, or between the hours of 12 PM and 9 PM, Saturday and Sunday, for a period of no less than one (1) hour, at a public location within the City of Dunwoody. 
(e)  Summary report. The applicant must submit a summary of the applicant-initiated meeting at the time of application submittal. The summary report must describe: 
(1)  Efforts to notify neighbors about the meeting date, time, and location (how and when notification occurred, and who was notified); 
(2)  Meeting location, date and time; 
(3)  Who was involved in the discussions; 
(4)  Suggestions and concerns raised by neighbors; and 
(5)  What specific changes to the proposal were considered and/or made as a result of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 1, 6-8-2015; Ord. No. 2019-01-03, § III, 1-28-2019) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-06-11, adopted June 8, 2015, changed the title of § 27-306 from "Neighbor communication summary" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 27-307. - Applications and fees. 
(a)  Form of application. 
(1)  Applications required under this zoning ordinance must be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the community development director. 
(2)  The community development director must develop checklists of application submittal requirements and make those checklists available to the public. 
(b)  Application filing fees. Applications must be accompanied by the fee amount indicated in the fee schedule that has been approved by mayor and city council. Application filing fees are nonrefundable once the application has been accepted and determined to be complete. 
(c)  Application completeness, accuracy and sufficiency. 
(1)  An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required information and is accompanied by the required application filing fee. 
(2)  The community development director must make a determination of application completeness in accordance with the schedule established pursuant to section 27-308. 
(3)  If an application is determined to be incomplete, the community development director must provide written notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. 
(4)  No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next processing cycle. 
(5)  Applications deemed complete by the community development director will be considered to be in the processing cycle and will be reviewed by city staff, affected agencies and other review and decision-making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of this zoning ordinance. 
(6)  The community development director may require that applications or plans be revised before being placed on an agenda for possible action if the community development director determines that: 
a.  The application or plan contains one or more significant inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's or application's compliance with applicable regulations; 
b.  The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's/application's compliance with applicable regulations; or 
c.  The decision-making body does not have legal authority to approve the application or plan as submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-308. - Application processing cycles. 
The community development director, after consulting with review and decision-making bodies, is authorized to promulgate reasonable application processing cycles and schedules for processing applications under this zoning ordinance. Processing cycles may establish: 
(1)  Deadlines for receipt of complete applications; 
(2)  Timeframes for determination of application completeness; 
(3)  Dates of regular meetings; 
(4)  Timing of staff reviews and reports; 
(5)  Estimated timeframes for completion of reviews and decision-making; 
(6)  Timelines for consideration of comprehensive plan amendments (e.g., annual or semiannual); and 
(7)  Other information regarding administrative practices and customs that will assist applicants and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-309. - Withdrawal of applications. 
Owner-initiated applications may be withdrawn at the discretion of the applicant without prejudice at any time before the authorized decision-making body votes on the matter. Applications that are withdrawn with prejudice are subject to all applicable limitations on the frequency of filing as if the application had been denied. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-310. - Public hearings. 
(a)  Hearing procedures. Public hearing bodies must adopt and publish written rules governing their hearing procedures, which must be made available to the public at the public hearing. 
(b)  Applicant attendance. Applicants must appear at public hearings in person or be represented in person by their authorized agent. 
(c)  Public notices. The cost of all required and courtesy public notices must be paid by the applicant in addition to all other required application fees. 
(d)  Continuances. A public hearing for which proper notice was given may be continued to a later date without providing additional notice as long as the continuance is set for specified date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.100), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-311. - Action by the planning commission and mayor and city council. 
(a)  The planning commission and mayor and city council may take any action that is consistent with: 
(1)  The regulations of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)  All rules and by-laws that apply to the decision-making body; and 
(3)  The notice that was given. 
(b)  The planning commission and mayor and city council are authorized to defer action or continue a hearing in order to receive additional information or further deliberate. 
(c)  The planning commission and mayor and city council are authorized to refer matters back to a review body for further deliberations or to obtain additional information. 
(d)  The planning commission and mayor and city council are authorized to defer action, continue the hearing or deny an application whenever the applicant fails to appear for a scheduled and advertised hearing or whenever the applicant fails at more than one meeting to provide the information or documentation necessary for a competent evaluation of the plan's or application's compliance with applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.110), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-312. - Conditions of approval. 
When decision-making bodies approve applications with conditions, the conditions must relate to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed use or development and must be roughly proportional to the impacts of the use or development. No condition in the form of a development exaction for other than a project improvement may be imposed within the meaning of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act. Any conditions imposed must comply with the following: 
(1)  Conditions may be imposed to mitigate any possible adverse impacts of the proposal on neighboring persons or properties, consistent with the purposes of this zoning ordinance, the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and state law. 
(2)  Conditions must be of sufficient specificity to allow lawful and consistent application and enforcement. 
(3)  Conditions shall be supported by a record that evidences the relationship between the condition and the impacts of proposed use or development. 
(4)  Once imposed, conditions run with land and will be enforced on all present and future property owners and successors in interest. 
(5)  Excepts as otherwise expressly stated, amendments or changes to approved conditions may be approved only by following the same procedures as the original approval (i.e., conditions attached to a special land use permit or variance require the processing of a new application for a SLUP or variance, in accordance with the procedures of article V, division 3, or article V, division 5, respectively) 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.120), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-313. - Review and decision-making criteria; burden of proof or persuasion. 
Applications must address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application complies with all applicable review or approval criteria. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-17.130), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-314—27-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 27-326. - Applicability. 
The procedures of this division apply to comprehensive plan land use map amendments, zoning map amendments, zoning ordinance text amendments and major amendments to one or more conditions attached to previously approved zoning map amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-327. - Authority to initiate. 
Amendments to the comprehensive plan's land use map, the zoning map and the text of this zoning ordinance may be initiated by mayor following a motion and a second, any member of the city council following a motion and a second, official action of the planning commission or by the community development director acting on behalf of the mayor and city council. In addition, amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map and the zoning map may be initiated upon application by the owner of the subject property or the subject property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-328. - Pre-application conference. 
Pre-application conferences with staff are required for all owner-initiated amendment applications (see the pre-application provisions of section 27-305). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-329. - Applicant-initiated meeting. 
Applicant-initiated meetings are required for all owner-initiated applications for amendments (see the applicant-initiated meeting provisions of section 27-306). If there is no residential zoned property within 500 feet of the property under consideration, the applicant is exempt from applicant-initiated meeting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 1, 6-8-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-06-11, adopted June 8, 2015, changed the title of § 27-329 from "Neighbor communications summary" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 27-330. - Application filing. 
(a)  Owner-initiated applications for comprehensive plan land use map amendments and zoning map amendments must be filed with the community development director. 
(b)  Owner-initiated applications for zoning map amendments may be proposed with or without conditions. Conditions may include: 
(1)  Written conditions; 
(2)  Site plans, architectural renderings, elevations, photographs, or other graphic representations of the proposed use/development; or 
(3)  Any combination of written conditions and graphic representations. 
(c)  Any site plan filed as a proposed condition must be prepared, signed and sealed by a state-licensed architect, landscape architect or engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-331. - Public hearing notices. 
(a)  Published notice. At least 15 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council, notice of the public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This required notice must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. In the case of proposed amendments initiated by a party other than the city, the notice must also identify the location of the subject property and the property's existing and proposed zoning classification. 
(b)  Written (mailed) notice. Written notice is required for all proposed amendments initiated by a party other than the city. The community development director is responsible for sending written notice via first class mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as those property owners are listed on the tax records of the city. The notices must be mailed at least 15 days before the date of the planning commission public hearing and not more than 45 days before the date of the city council public hearing. Written notices must indicate the nature of the proposed amendment and the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(c)  Posted notice. For all proposed amendments initiated by a party other than the city, a public hearing notice sign must be placed in a conspicuous location on the subject property at least 15 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council. This notice sign must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(d)  Special requirements for drug treatment and dependency facilities. When a proposed zoning map amendment relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, all published, written and posted notices of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council must include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning map amendment relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice must be at least six-column inches in size and may not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-332. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-06-11, adopted June 8, 2015, repealed former § 27-332 which pertained to community council meeting and recommendation, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.70), adopted Oct. 14, 2013; and Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2015. 
Sec. 27-333. - Planning commission public hearing and recommendation. 
The planning commission must hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments. Following the close of the hearing, the planning commission must act by simple majority vote to recommend that the proposed amendment be approved, approved with conditions or denied based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-335. Per section 27-311 the planning commission may vote to defer action or continue a hearing in order to receive additional information or deliberate further. The planning commission's recommendation must be transmitted to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.80), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-334. - City council public hearing and decision. 
(a)  Upon receipt of recommendations from the planning commission, the mayor and city council must hold a public hearing on proposed amendments. Following the close of the public hearing, the mayor and city council must act by simple majority vote to approve the proposed amendment, approve the proposed amendment with conditions or deny the proposed amendment based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-335. The mayor and city council are also authorized to defer action on the proposed amendment or allow the applicant to withdraw the proposed amendment without prejudice. 
(b)  When a proposed zoning map amendment relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, the mayor and city council public hearing must be held at least six months before and not more than nine months before the date of final action on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-335. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  Comprehensive plan land use map. The following review and approval criteria must be used in reviewing and taking action on all comprehensive plan land use map amendments: 
(1)  Whether the proposed land use change will permit uses that are suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)  Whether the proposed land use change will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the proposed land use change will result in uses that will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(4)  Whether the amendment is consistent with the written policies in the comprehensive plan text; 
(5)  Whether there are environmental impacts or consequences resulting from the proposed change; 
(6)  Whether there are impacts on properties in an adjoining governmental jurisdiction in cases of proposed changes near city boundary lines; 
(7)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the affected land areas that support either approval or denial of the proposed land use change; and 
(8)  Whether there are impacts on historic buildings, sites, districts or archaeological resources resulting from the proposed change. 
(b)  Zoning map amendments. The following review and approval criteria must be used in reviewing and taking action on all zoning map amendments: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(3)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(4)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(5)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that provide supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
(6)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaeological resources; and 
(7)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
(c)  Zoning ordinance text amendments. The following review and approval criteria must be used in reviewing and taking action on all zoning ordinance text amendments: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  Whether the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment corrects an error or inconsistency in the zoning ordinance, meets the challenge of a changing condition or is necessary to implement established policy. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.100), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-336. - Successive applications. 
An application for a comprehensive plan land use map amendment, zoning map amendment or a major amendment to one or more conditions attached to previously approved zoning map amendments affecting all or a portion of the same property may not be submitted more than once every 24 months measured from the date of final action by the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council are authorized to waive or reduce this 24-month time interval by resolution, except that the time interval between the date of action to deny or the date that the application is withdrawn with prejudice and the date of filing of any subsequent amendment affecting the same property may not be less than six months. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.110), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-337. - Amending conditions of approval. 
(a)  Major changes. 
(1)  Without limiting the meaning of the phrase, modification of any of the following conditions, if attached to an approved amendment, constitute a "major change" for purposes of interpreting this section: 
a.  The movement of any building or structure adjacent to an exterior boundary line, closer to the boundary line of the property to which it is adjacent; 
b.  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or any increase in the total amount of floor space of any nonresidential building; 
c.  Any decrease in the minimum size of residential units; 
d.  Any reduction in any buffer requirement; 
e.  Any increase in building or structure height; or 
f.  Any change in the proportion of floor space devoted to different authorized uses. 
(2)  Any request for major changes to conditions attached to approved amendments must be processed as a new amendment application in accordance with the procedures of this division, including the requirement for fees, notices and hearings. 
(b)  Minor changes. 
(1)  Modification of conditions attached to an approved amendment that are not classified as a major change pursuant to subsection (a)(1), constitute a "minor change" for purposes of interpreting this section. 
(2)  The community development director is authorized to approve minor changes to conditions attached to approved amendments. 
(3)  Any request for minor change of conditions must be made in writing to the community development director. If an approved site plan exists, the request for minor change must be accompanied by copies of the revised site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-18.120), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 27-338—27-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL LAND USE PERMITS 

Sec. 27-351. - Applicability. 
The procedures of this division apply to all special land use permits (also known as "SLUPs") required under this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-352. - Authority to file. 
Applications for special land use permit approval may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-353. - Pre-application conference. 
Pre-application conferences with staff are required for all special land use permits (see the pre-application provisions of section 27-305). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-354. - Applicant-initiated meeting. 
Applicant-initiated meetings are required for all special land use permits (see the applicant-initiated meeting provisions of section 27-306). If there is no residential zoned property within 500 feet of the property under consideration, the applicant is exempt from applicant-initiated meeting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 1, 6-8-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-06-11, adopted June 8, 2015, changed the title of § 27-354 from "Neighbor communications summary" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 27-355. - Application filing. 
Special land use permit applications must be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-356. - Public hearing notices. 
(a)  Published notice. At least 15 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council, notice of the public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This required notice must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing; the location of the subject property; and the property's existing and proposed zoning and use. 
(b)  Written (mailed) notice. The community development director is responsible for sending written notice via first class mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as those property owners are listed on the tax records of the city. The notices must be mailed at least 15 days before the date of the planning commission public hearing and not more than 45 days before the date of the city council public hearing. Written notices must indicate the nature of the proposed use or activity and the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(c)  Posted notice. A public hearing notice sign must be placed in a conspicuous location on the subject property at least 15 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council. This notice sign must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(d)  Special requirements for drug treatment and dependency facilities. When a proposed special land use permit relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, all published and posted notices of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council must include a prominent statement that the proposed special land use permit relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice must be at least six-column inches in size and may not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-357. - Planning commission public hearing and recommendation. 
The planning commission must hold a public hearing on the special land use permit application. Following the close of the hearing, the planning commission must act by simple majority vote to recommend that the special land use permit be approved, approved with conditions or denied based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-359. Per section 27-311 the planning commission may vote to defer action or continue a hearing in order to receive additional information or deliberate further. The planning commission's recommendation must be transmitted to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-358. - City council public hearing and decision. 
(a)  Upon receipt of recommendations from the planning commission, the mayor and city council must hold a public hearing on the special land use permit application. Following the close of the public hearing, the mayor and city council must act by simple majority vote to approve the special land use permit, approve the special land use permit with conditions or deny the special land use permit based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-359. The mayor and city council are also authorized to defer action on the special land use permit or allow the applicant to withdraw the special land use permit without prejudice. 
(b)  When a proposed special land use permit relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, the mayor and city council public hearing must be held at least six months before and not more than nine months before the date of final action on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-359. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  General. Except as otherwise stated in this ordinance, the following review and approval criteria must be used in reviewing and taking action on all special land use permit applications: 
(1)  Whether the proposed use is consistent with the policies of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Whether the proposed use complies with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
(3)  Whether the proposed site provides adequate land area for the proposed use, including provision of all required open space, off-street parking and all other applicable requirements of the subject zoning district; 
(4)  Whether the proposed use is compatible with adjacent properties and land uses, including consideration of: 
a.  Whether the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust or vibration generated by the proposed use; 
b.  Whether the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the hours of operation of the proposed use; 
c.  Whether the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the manner of operation of the proposed use; 
d.  Whether the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the character of vehicles or the volume of traffic generated by the proposed use; 
e.  Whether the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings are appropriate in relation to the size of the subject property and in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings; and 
f.  Whether the proposed plan will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaeological resources. 
(5)  Whether public services, public facilities and utilities—including motorized and nonmotorized transportation facilities—are adequate to serve the proposed use; 
(6)  Whether adequate means of ingress and egress are proposed, with particular reference to nonmotorized and motorized traffic safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and emergency vehicle access; 
(7)  Whether adequate provision has been made for refuse and service areas; and 
(8)  Whether the proposed building as a result of its proposed height will create a negative shadow impact on any adjoining lot or building. 
(b)  Major exceptions to perimeter center regulations. The general criteria of subsection (a) do not apply to special land use permit requests for major exceptions to Perimeter Center Overlay and Perimeter Center zoning district regulations. In reviewing and taking action on special land use permit requests for major exceptions to Perimeter Center Overlay and Perimeter Center zoning district regulations, review and decision-making bodies must consider the following three criteria: 
(1)  Whether the major exception request, if granted, will result in development that is inconsistent with the stated intent of the regulations; 
(2)  Whether the major exception request, if granted, will result in development that is in keeping with the overall character of the surrounding area; and 
(3)  Whether any negative impacts resulting from the granting of the major exception will be mitigated to the maximum practical extent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.90), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-360. - Successive applications. 
If a special land use permit application is denied, an application for a special land use permit affecting all or a portion of the same property may not be resubmitted for 24 months from the date of the denial. The mayor and city council are authorized to waive or reduce this 24-month time interval by resolution, except that the time interval between the date of action to deny the application or the date that the application is withdrawn with prejudice and the date of filing of a subsequent special land use permit application affecting the same property may not be less than six months. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.100), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-361. - Amending conditions of approval. 
(a)  Major changes. 
(1)  Without limiting the meaning of the phrase, modification of any of the following conditions, if attached to an approved special land use permit, constitute a "major change" for purposes of interpreting this section: 
a.  The movement of any building or structure adjacent to an exterior boundary line, closer to the boundary line of the property to which it is adjacent; 
b.  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or any increase in the total amount of floor space of any nonresidential building; 
c.  Any decrease in the minimum size of residential units; 
d.  Any reduction in any buffer requirement; 
e.  Any increase in building or structure height; or 
f.  Any change in the proportion of floor space devoted to different authorized uses. 
(2)  Any request for major changes to conditions attached to approved amendments must be processed as a new amendment application in accordance with the procedures of this division, including the requirement for fees, notices and hearings. 
(b)  Minor changes. 
(1)  Modification of conditions attached to an approved special land use permit that are not classified as a major change pursuant to subsection (a)(1), constitute a "minor change" for purposes of interpreting this section. 
(2)  The community development director is authorized to approve minor changes to approved special land use permits. 
(3)  Any request for minor change of conditions must be made in writing to the community development director. If an approved site plan exists, the request for minor change must be accompanied by copies of the revised site plan. 
(c)  A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved special land use permit must be processed as a new special land use permit application in accordance with the procedures of this division, including the requirements for fees, notices and hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.120), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-05, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, repealed former § 27-361 which pertained to transfer of special land use permits, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-19.110), adopted Oct. 14, 2013. Said ordinance subsequently amended and renumbered former § 27-362 as § 27-361. 
Secs. 27-362—27-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN REVIEW 

Sec. 27-376. - Applicability. 
The procedures of this division apply whenever design review is expressly required by this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-20.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-377. - Authority to file. 
Applications for design review may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-20.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-378. - Application filing. 
Design review applications must be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-20.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-379. - Meeting notice. 
The design review advisory committee meets as new business requires, As such, their meetings are special-called meetings. Public notice of meetings must be provided at least 24 hours in advance by posting notice within city hall and on the city's official website. Courtesy notice may also be provided by other means. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-20.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-380. - Design review advisory committee meeting and recommendation. 
The design review advisory committee must consider proposed design review applications in a public meeting and within 14 days of receipt of a complete application act by simple majority vote to recommend that the application be approved, approved with conditions or denied based on the plan's compliance with all applicable regulations If no recommendation is received within 14 days, the community development director is authorized to proceed without a recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-20.50), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-381—27-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 27-391. - Applicability. 
Except as expressly authorized under the special exception procedures of article V, division 6, or the administrative permit procedures of article V, division 7, all variances to strict compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance require review and approval by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the variance procedures of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-392. - Prohibited variances. 
The variance procedures of this zoning ordinance may not be used to: 
(1)  Allow a structure or use not authorized in the subject zoning district or a residential density of development that is not authorized within the subject district; 
(2)  Allow an increase in maximum building height; 
(3)  Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a site plan or condition of approval attached to an amendment, special land use permit or other development approval under this zoning ordinance; 
(4)  Reduce, waive or modify in any manner the minimum lot area established for any use permitted by special land use permit or by special exception; 
(5)  Permit the expansion or enlargement of any nonconforming use; 
(6)  Permit the reestablishment of any nonconforming use that has been abandoned or lost its nonconforming rights; or 
(7)  Vary the home occupation regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-393. - Authority to file. 
Applications for approval of variances may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-394. - Application filing. 
Variance applications must be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-395. - Public hearing notices. 
(a)  Published notice. At least 30 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the board of appeals, notice of the public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This required notice must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(b)  Written (mailed) notice. The community development director is responsible for sending written notice via first class mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as those property owners are listed on the tax records of the city. The notices must be mailed at least 30 days before the public hearing to be held by the board of appeals. Written notices must indicate the nature of the proposed use or activity and the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(c)  Posted notice. A public hearing notice sign must be placed in a conspicuous location on the subject property at least 30 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by board of appeals. This notice sign must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-396. - Zoning board of appeals public hearing and decision. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals must hold a public hearing to consider all variance applications. 
(b)  Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the zoning board of appeals must act by simple majority vote of board members present and voting to approve the variance, approve the variance with conditions or deny the requested variance. The zoning board of appeals is also authorized to defer action on the variance or allow the applicant to withdraw the variance without prejudice. The board's final decision must be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-397. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals may authorize variances from the provisions of this zoning ordinance only after making all of the following findings: 
(1)  The grant of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to property or improvements; 
(2)  The variance request is based on conditions that (1) are unique to the subject property (2) are not generally applicable to other properties in the same zoning district and (3) were not created by the owner or applicant; 
(3)  Because of the particular conditions, shape, size, orientation or topographic conditions, the strict application of the requirements of this zoning ordinance would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other similarly situated property owners; 
(4)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other similarly situated properties; 
(5)  The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this zoning ordinance would cause undue hardship or practical difficulty, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience; and 
(6)  The requested variance would be consistent with the spirit and purpose of this zoning ordinance and the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals may authorize variances from the provisions of the noise ordinance only after making all of the following findings: 
(1)  Because of the existence of exceptional conditions that were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of the noise ordinance would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other similarly situated property owners; 
(2)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and the applicant has exhausted the best practical noise control measures, such as those promulgated by INCE, without being able to conform to the noise levels established in the noise ordinance; 
(3)  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
(4)  The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of the noise ordinance would cause undue and unnecessary hardship; and 
(5)  The requested variance would be consistent with the purposes of the noise ordinance and would not allow noise to exceed: 
a.  Ten dB(A) above what is allowed by the noise ordinance during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; and 
b.  Five dB(A) above what is allowed by the noise ordinance during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-398. - Successive applications. 
If a variance application is denied, an application to vary the same zoning ordinance provision for the same portion of the subject property may not be resubmitted for 24 months from the date of the denial. The zoning board of appeals is authorized to waive or reduce this 24-month time interval, provided that the time interval between the date of action to deny the application or the date that the application is withdrawn with prejudice and the date of filing of a subsequent variance application affecting the same property may not be less than six months. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-399. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a final variance decision of the zoning board of appeals, including any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court for a writ of certiorari, setting forth the alleged errors. The petition must be filed within 30 days of the date that the zoning board of appeals renders its final decision. 
(b)  When a petition is for a writ of certiorari is filed, the zoning board of appeals must be designated the respondent in certiorari and the city the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the zoning board of appeals is authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ on behalf of the zoning board of appeals, as respondent. Service upon the city as defendant must be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-400. - Transfer of variances. 
Approved variances, and any attached conditions, run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.100), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-401. - Amending conditions of approval. 
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved variance must be processed as a new variance application in accordance with the procedures of this division, including the requirements for fees, notices and hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-21.110), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-402—27-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 27-416. - Applicability. 
The zoning board of appeals is authorized to approve the following as special exceptions in accordance with the procedures of this division: 
(1)  Any use or activity expressly authorized to be approved as a special exception pursuant to the provisions of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Reduction of minimum off-street parking and loading ratios by more than allowed as an administrative permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-417. - Authority to file. 
Applications for approval of special exceptions may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-418. - Application filing. 
Special exception applications must be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-419. - Public hearing notices. 
(a)  Published notice. At least 30 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the board of appeals, notice of the public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This required notice must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(b)  Written (mailed) notice. The community development director is responsible for sending written notice via first class mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as those property owners are listed on the tax records of the city. The notices must be mailed at least 30 days before the public hearing to be held by the board of appeals. Written notices must indicate the nature of the proposed use or activity and the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(c)  Posted notice. A public hearing notice sign must be placed in a conspicuous location on the subject property at least 30 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by board of appeals. This notice sign must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-420. - Zoning board of appeals public hearing and decision. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals must hold a public hearing to consider all special exception applications. 
(b)  Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the zoning board of appeals must act by simple majority vote of board members present and voting to approve the special exception, approve the special exception with conditions or deny the requested special exception. The zoning board of appeals is also authorized to defer action on the special exception or allow the applicant to withdraw the variance without prejudice. The board's final decision must be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing. 
(c)  The zoning board of appeals decision to approve or deny must be based on the approval criteria of section 27-421. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-421. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  Parking and loading reductions. The zoning board or appeals may waive or reduce the required number of parking spaces or the required number of loading spaces in any district upon an expressed finding that: 
(1)  The character of the use makes the full provision of parking or loading spaces unnecessary; 
(2)  Alternative transportation or transit options exist that make the full provision of parking or loading spaces unnecessary; or 
(3)  The provision of the full number of parking or loading spaces would have a deleterious effect on a historic building, site, district or archaeological resource. 
(b)  Other authorized special exceptions. Special exceptions for matters other than parking or loading space reductions may be approved by the zoning board of appeals only when the zoning board of appeals determines that any specific approval criteria associated with the authorized special exception and the following general approval criteria have been met: 
(1)  The grant of the special exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the public or injurious to the property or improvements; 
(2)  The requested special exception does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other similarly situated properties; and 
(3)  The requested special exception is consistent with all relevant purpose and intent statements of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-422. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a final variance decision of the zoning board of appeals, including any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court for a writ of certiorari, setting forth the alleged errors. The petition must be filed within 30 days of the date that the zoning board of appeals renders its final decision. 
(b)  When a petition is for a writ of certiorari is filed, the zoning board of appeals must be designated the respondent in certiorari and the city the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the zoning board of appeals is authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ on behalf of the zoning board of appeals, as respondent. Service upon the city as defendant must be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-423. - Transfer of special exceptions. 
Approved special exceptions, and any attached conditions, run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-424. - Amending conditions of approval. 
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved special exception must be processed as a new special exception application in accordance with the procedures of this division, including the requirements for fees, notices and hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-22.90), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-425—27-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-05, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, changed the title of div. 7 from "Administrative Permits" to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 27-436. - Applicability. 
The community development director is authorized to approve the following as special administrative permits in accordance with the procedures of this division: 
(1)  Any use or activity expressly authorized to be approved by special administrative permit pursuant to the provisions of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Reductions in minimum off-street motor vehicle parking and loading ratios by up to one space or ten percent, whichever is greater and reductions in minimum bicycle parking ratios by up to two spaces or ten percent, whichever is greater; 
(3)  Minor exceptions to those Perimeter Center Overlay and Perimeter Center zoning district regulations expressly identified in section 27-98(a)(7)a. and section 27-104(a)(5)a.; 
(4)  Reduction of any zoning district building setback requirements by up to ten percent; 
(5)  Reduction of any rear building setback, greater than ten percent, but no more than ten feet, for building additions not exceeding one story or 18 feet in height; 
(6)  Type B home occupations that are solely teaching-related and conducted entirely within the principal dwelling; 
(7)  Relatives residences; 
(8)  Antennas that project more than ten feet above the height of the structure to which they are a attached; 
(9)  Reduction of minimum building spacing requirements for multiple buildings on a single lot by up to ten percent; 
(10)  Increase in the maximum front door threshold height allowed by section 27-147. 
(11)  Increase in the maximum retaining wall height, as allowed by section 27-269. 
(12)  Reduction of the minimum retaining wall setback requirement, as allowed by section 27-269; 
(13)  Reduction of the minimum wing wall side setback requirement, as allowed by section 27-270; and 
(14)  Increase in maximum fence height on residential corner lots, as allowed by section 27-267. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § II, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 27-437. - Authority to file. 
Applications for approval of special administrative permits may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-438. - Application filing. 
Special administrative permit applications must be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-439. - Posted notice. 
A sign must be placed in a conspicuous location on the subject property at least 30 days before the date of the community development director's decision on the special administrative permit request. This required notice must indicate the earliest date that a decision on the administrative permit will be made and indicate the nature of the request and a contact where additional information can be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-440. - Community development director's decision. 
(a)  The community development director must review each application for a special administrative permit and act to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, deny the application, or refer the application to the zoning board of appeals for consideration as a special exception (if related to parking) or a variance. 
(b)  The community development director may not take final action to approve or deny a special administrative permit application until at least 30 days after the date that posted notice was provided. All decisions must be made in writing within 60 days of the date that the application was filed, or if heard before the zoning board of appeals, as required in section 27-396. 
(c)  The community development director's decision to approve or deny must be based on the approval criteria of section 27-441. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-441. - Review and approval criteria. 
Special administrative permits may be approved by the community development director only when the community development director determines that any specific approval criteria associated with the authorized administrative permit and the following general approval criteria have been met: 
(1)  The grant of the administrative permit will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the public or injurious to the property or improvements; 
(2)  The requested administrative permit does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief; and 
(3)  The requested administrative permit is consistent with all relevant purpose and intent statements of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.60), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-442. - Appeals. 
Decisions by the community development director made pursuant to this division may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals (ZBA) by filing a request with the community development director within 30 days of the community development director's decision. Decisions will be posted on the city's web page and in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Appeal shall be in accordance with procedures and conditions in chapter 27, article V, division 8. If no appeal is made within the 30-day period, the decision of the community development director is final. If an appeal is made to the ZBA, the ZBA must set a hearing date for the appeal within 30 days of the appeal being requested and the decision of the ZBA is final. The ZBA decision may be appealed only by a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-443. - Amending conditions of approval. 
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved special administrative permit must be processed as a new special administrative permit application in accordance with the procedures of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.90), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-01-05, adopted Jan. 26, 2015, repealed former § 27-443, which pertained to transfer of administrative permit, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.80), adopted Oct. 14, 2013. Said ordinance subsequently amended and renumbered former §§ 27-444 and 27-445 as §§ 27-443 and 27-444. 
Sec. 27-444. - Reporting. 
The community development director must maintain records of all special administrative permits that have been approved or denied and provide a summary of such actions to the city council and planning commission at least four times per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-23.100), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 27-443. 
Secs. 27-445—27-455. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS 

Sec. 27-456. - Applicability. 
The procedures of this division apply to appeals of administrative decisions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-457. - Authority to file. 
Any person or entity (i.e., an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor, or a neighbor whose property is within 1,500 feet of the nearest property line aggrieved by an administrative decision may appeal the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.20), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-458. - Application filing. 
Decisions by the community development director made pursuant to this division may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals (ZBA) by filing a request with the community development director within 30 days of the community development director's decision. Appeal shall be in accordance with procedures and conditions of this division. If no appeal is made within the 30-day period, the decision of the community development director is final. If an appeal is made to the ZBA, the ZBA must set a hearing date for the appeal within 30 days of the appeal being requested and the decision of the ZBA is final. The 30-day appeal deadline may be waived by the ZBA if the appellant can show evidence that the appeal was filed within 30 days of their actual or constructive notice of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.30), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-459. - Effect of appeal. 
The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the official whose decision is being appealed certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court on notice to the official whose decision is being appealed and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-460. - Record of decision. 
Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal, the community development director or other administrative official whose decision is being appealed must transmit to the zoning board of appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-461. - Hearing notice. 
Mailed notice of the zoning board of appeals hearing must be provided to the appellant at least 30 days before the date of the zoning board of appeals hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-462. - Hearing and decision. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals must hold a hearing to consider all appeals of administrative decisions. 
(b)  Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the zoning board of appeals must make a decision. The decision must be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing. Final action on an appeal requires a simple majority vote of the board of appeals members present and voting. 
(c)  In exercising its powers, the zoning board of appeal may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. To that end the board of appeals has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-463. - Review and approval criteria. 
An appeal shall be sustained only upon a finding by the zoning board of appeals that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-464. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person or entity authorized by section 27-457 may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court for a writ of certiorari, setting forth the alleged errors. The petition must be filed within 30 days of the date that the zoning board of appeals renders its final decision. 
(b)  When a petition is for a writ of certiorari is filed, the zoning board of appeals must be designated the respondent in certiorari and the city the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the zoning board of appeals is authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ on behalf of the zoning board of appeals, as respondent. Service upon the city as defendant must be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-24.90), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 27-465—27-475. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 27-476. - Applicability. 
Development permits are required in order to ensure compliance with all provisions of this zoning ordinance and all other city ordinances and regulations. Unless otherwise expressly exempted under this zoning ordinance, a development permit must be obtained for any proposed use of land or buildings before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading or alteration of land or buildings commences. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-25.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-477. - Applications. 
All applications for development permits must be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-25.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-478. - Determination of compliance and issuance of permits. 
No development permits or building permits may be issued until the community development director determines the application complies with all applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance, including any conditions of imposed by an authorized decision-making body as part of an approval (e.g., conditional zoning, special land use permit, variance). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-25.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-479. - Permit expiration. 
A development permit is valid for two years from its date of issuance, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  If the work authorized in any development permit has not begun within 180 days from the date of permit issuance, the permit expires and has no further effect. 
(2)  If the work described in any development permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of permit issuance, the permit expires and has no further effect. 
(3)  Written notice of the permit expiration must be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the expired permit may not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-25.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - SITE PLAN REVIEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, adopted April 11, 2017, enacted provisions designated as div. 10, §§ 27-485—27-493. Inasmuch as §§ 27-491—27-493 already exist within the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as div. 10, §§ 27-481—27-485, at the editor's discretion in order to avoid duplication. 

Sec. 27-481. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Site plan review and approval, in accordance with the procedures of this division, is required before a land development permit may be issued. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Site plan review requirements do not apply to detached houses. 
(2)  The community development director is authorized to waive or modify the site plan review requirements for proposed construction activities and changes of use that will result in no significant exterior changes or site modifications. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-482. - Authority to file. 
Applications and site plans may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-483. - Application filing. 
Site plans must be filed with the community development director. The site plan must include at least the following information, unless waived by the community development director: 
(1)  Site location map. Location of site within a half mile context of streets, rail lines, stations, and notable sites. 
(2)  Site data table. Tabular summary comparing zoning requirements with proposed plans, including lot, building and site regulations and parking requirements, 
(3)  Survey plat. Location and dimensions of property lines, easements, rights-of-way and a legal description of the site. 
(4)  Boundaries. Development boundaries and proposed phasing (as applicable). 
(5)  Existing conditions plan. Existing on-site and adjacent off-site structures, driveways, sidewalks, streets, utilities (underground and above ground), easements, and pavement noted either on an aerial photograph or site survey. Identify all structures proposed for demolition. 
(6)  Construction staging plan. Plans for deliveries and storage of construction materials, location of employee parking and work areas, plans for site and adjacent right-of-way clean-up. 
(7)  Existing natural resources plan. Existing topography, trees, vegetation, drainageways, floodplain/way, or other unique features including plans for removal or modifications of existing natural resource areas. 
(8)  Grading plan and site plan. A preliminary grading plan and site plan delineating all proposed structures and surfaces, including parking, pavement, sidewalks, patios, landscape areas, retaining walls and any freestanding signs. 
(9)  Building plans. Floor plans illustrating compliance with all applicable requirements of the Perimeter Center Overlay and Perimeter Center zoning district. 
(10)  Use requirements. A table of uses is required on the building plan delineating locations and floor area of proposed uses, illustrating compliance with applicable use regulations. 
(11)  Building elevations. Building elevations of all façades, rendered to illustrate compliance with the general building design criteria of the Perimeter Center Overlay (see section 27-98(d) and all applicable building type and design regulations of the underlying Perimeter Center zoning district (see section 27-105). Include information on colors and building materials. 
(12)  Landscape plan. Plans illustrating compliance with all applicable landscaping, screening and transition regulations, including a tabular summary identifying all plant materials, sizes and graphic symbols used on the landscape plan. 
(13)  Parking plan. Parking layout plan, including driveway and drive aisle location and design. 
(14)  Other information. Any other information deemed necessary by the community development director to allow for competent review of the site plan or to demonstrate compliance with applicable regulations, expressly including Perimeter Center Overlay and Perimeter Center zoning district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-484. - Community development director's decision 
(a)  The community development director must review each site plan and act to approve the site plan, approve the site plan with conditions, or deny site plan approval. 
(b)  The community development director's decision must be based on the approval criteria of section 27-485. 
(c)  Decisions to deny site plan approval must be accompanied by a written explanation of the reasons for denial. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-485. - Review criteria. 
Special administrative permits may be approved by the community development director, after consulting with other city departments and affected agencies, only when the community development director determines that the proposed plan complies with all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-486. - Appeals. 
Final decisions of the community development director may be appealed by any person aggrieved by the decision in accordance with the appeal procedures of article V, division 8. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-487. - Transfer of site plan approval. 
Approved site plans, and any attached conditions, run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-488. - Amending conditions of approval. 
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved site plan must be processed as a new site plan application in accordance with the procedures of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-489. - Lapse of approval. 
An approved site plan lapses and has no further validity or effect 12 months after the date of its approval unless a land development permit is issued for construction pursuant to the approved site plan. The community development director is authorized to grant up to two successive 12-month extensions if the community development director determines that there have been no changes to the zoning ordinance or land development regulations that would significantly affect the approved site plan. Site plan extension requests must be filed before the site plan lapses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES 

Sec. 27-491. - Planning commission. 
A seven-member planning commission is established, as authorized in chapter 2 of the Municipal Code. The planning commission has those powers and duties expressly identified in this zoning ordinance and in chapter 2. If the regulations of this zoning ordinance conflict with those in chapter 2, the regulations of this zoning ordinance govern. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-26.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-492. - Zoning board of appeals. 
A seven-member zoning board of appeals is established, as authorized in chapter 2 of the Municipal Code. The zoning board of appeals has those powers and duties expressly identified in this zoning ordinance and in chapter 2. If the regulations of this zoning ordinance conflict with those in chapter 2, the regulations of this zoning ordinance govern. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-26.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-493. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2015-06-11, adopted June 8, 2015, repealed former § 27-493 which pertained to community council, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-26.30), adopted Oct. 14, 2013. 
Sec. 27-494. - Community development director. 
(a)  The community development director has those powers and duties expressly identified in this zoning ordinance. In addition, the community development director serves as secretary of the planning commission and zoning board of appeals and performs other duties assigned by the city manager. 
(b)  The community development director's building inspection duties include: 
(1)  Issuance of building permits in accordance with all provisions of this zoning ordinance and only after issuance of a development permit. 
(2)  Making field inspections to determine that the building or structure being constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered or used is being pursued in accordance with the site plan for which a development and building permit has been issued. These inspections and reports of findings must be made within two working days of the date that an inspection is requested by the developer. 
(3)  Ensuring that all construction has been completed in accordance with all applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance and the Municipal Code prior to allowing occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-26.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-495. - Design review advisory committee. 
(a)  A seven-member design review advisory committee is established, as authorized in chapter 2 of the Municipal Code. If the regulations of this zoning ordinance conflict with those in chapter 2, the regulations of this zoning ordinance govern. 
(b)  Committee members are appointed for three-year terms. 
(c)  The design review advisory committee is authorized to make recommendations to the community development director, as expressly stated by individual provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-26.50), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-496—27-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 27-511. - Right of entry. 
Upon the consent of the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, city employees authorized by the community development director may enter during all reasonable hours any property for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
Additionally, any property owner submitting an application to the City of Dunwoody for any of the processes as stated in article V of this ordinance, including the provisions of chapter 16, land development regulations, or any similar request that may require the inspection of the property to provide this service, shall by their request convey to authorized representatives of the City of Dunwoody the right of entry during all reasonable hours to conduct said inspection outside of any enclosed structures on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-27.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-512. - Warrants. 
The community development director, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant must authorize the community development director to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court of the city when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity or circumstance that legally justifies such an inspection. 
b.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this section. 
(2)  All inspection warrants must meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  The warrant must be attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.  The warrant must describe, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and must be sufficiently accurate to allow the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property to reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.  The warrant must indicate the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances that the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.  The warrant must refer, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-27.20), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-513—27-525. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 27-526. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The community development director is responsible for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-527. - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or use any land in the city, or cause any of these actions, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance. Any violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance, including but not limited to all of the following, may be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this zoning ordinance. 
(1)  To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)  To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
(3)  To engage in the use of a building or land or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning ordinance without obtaining such required permits or approvals; 
(4)  To engage in the use of a building or land or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning ordinance in any way inconsistent with any such permit or approval or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval; 
(5)  To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this zoning ordinance or any condition imposed on the permit or approval; 
(6)  To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or otherwise given under this zoning ordinance; 
(7)  To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this zoning ordinance; or 
(8)  To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-528. - Continuing violations. 
Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the violation from the city constitutes a separate violation of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-529. - Remedies and enforcement powers. 
The city has all remedies and enforcement powers allowed by law, including the following: 
(1)  Withhold permit. 
a.  The community development director may deny or withhold permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the city. This enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in question. 
b.  The community development director may deny or withhold permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements owned by or being developed by a person who owns, developed or otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the city. This enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether the property for which the permit or other approval is sought is the property in violation. 
(2)  Permits approved with conditions. Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization, the community development director may grant such authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected. 
(3)  Revoke permits. 
a.  Any permit, certificate or other form of authorization required under this zoning ordinance may be revoked by the community development director when the community development director determines: 
1.  That there is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit; 
2.  That the development permit was procured by false representation or was issued by mistake; or 
3.  That any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance are being violated. 
b.  Written notice of revocation must be served upon the owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or structure for which such permit was issued. If no persons can reasonably be served with notice, the notice must be posted in a prominent location. After delivery or posting of notice, no construction or development may proceed. 
(4)  Stop-work. With or without revoking permits, the community development director may stop-work on any building or structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a permit or other form of authorization issued under the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Revoke plan or other approval. Where a violation of this zoning ordinance involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to which the approval of such plans was made subject, the community development director may, upon notice to the applicant and other known interested parties (including any holders of building permits affected) (a) revoke the plan or other approval or (b) condition its continuance on strict compliance with this zoning ordinance or the provision of security to ensure that construction is completed in compliance with approved plans, or such other conditions as the community development director may reasonably impose. 
(6)  Injunctive relief. The city may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this zoning ordinance or of a permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted under the zoning ordinance. 
(7)  Abatement. The city may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to the violation. 
(8)  Other penalties, remedies and powers. In addition to all other actions and penalties authorized in this division, the city attorney is authorized to institute injunctive, abatement or any other appropriate judicial or administrative actions or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of this zoning ordinance. The city may also, after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this zoning ordinance requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-530. - Continuation of previous enforcement actions. 
Nothing in this zoning ordinance prohibits the continuation of previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the city pursuant to previous valid ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-531. - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this zoning ordinance are cumulative, and the city may exercise them in any combination or order. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-532. - Persons subject to penalties. 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, or agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violations may each be found guilty of a separate offense and be subject to penalties, remedies and enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-533. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Non-emergency matters. In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention, the community development director must give notice of the nature of the violation to the property owner or to any other person who is party to the agreement or to any applicant for any relevant permit in the manner stated in this section, after which the persons receiving notice have ten days to correct the violation before further enforcement action may be taken. Notice must be given in person, by U.S. Mail, or by posting notice on the premises. Notices of violation must state the nature of the violation and the time period for compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected. 
(b)  Emergency matters. In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that constitute an emergency situation as a result of public health or safety concerns or violations that will create increased problems or costs if not remedied immediately, the city may use the enforcement powers available under this zoning ordinance without prior notice, but the community development director must attempt to give notice simultaneously with beginning enforcement action. Notice may be provided to the property owner, to any other person who is party to the agreement and to applicants for any relevant permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-28.80), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-534—27-550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 27-551. - General. 
(a)  Scope. The regulations of this division govern nonconformities, which are lots, uses and structures that were lawfully established but—because of the adoption of new or amended regulations—no longer comply with one or more requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Intent. Occasionally, lots, uses, and structures that were lawfully established (i.e., in compliance with all regulations in effect at the time of their establishment) are made nonconforming because of changes in the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property (e.g., through zoning map changes or amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance). The regulations of this division are intended to clarify the effect of this nonconforming status and avoid confusion with "illegal" buildings and uses (i.e., those established in violation of applicable zoning regulations). The regulations of this division are also intended to: 
(1)  Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their property for uses and activities that were lawfully established; 
(2)  Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings; and 
(3)  Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential to adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(c)  Authority to continue. Any nonconformity that existed on the effective date specified in section 27-4 or any situation that becomes nonconforming upon adoption of any amendment to this zoning ordinance may be continued in accordance with the regulations of this division unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(d)  Determination of nonconformity status. 
(1)  The burden of proving a nonconformity was lawfully established rests entirely with the subject landowner. 
(2)  A preponderance of evidence must be provided by the subject landowner and be sufficient to show that the nonconformity was lawfully established before adoption of the subject regulations. Evidence must also indicate that the nonconformity has been continuous and that the situation has not lost its nonconforming status. Examples of reliable evidence include: business licenses; building permits; zoning compliance permits; city/county billing records; utility billing records; assessment, tax or rent records; and directory listings. 
(3)  The community development director is authorized to determine whether adequate proof of nonconforming status has been provided by the subject landowner. 
(4)  Appeals of the community development director's decision on nonconforming status determinations may be appealed in accordance with the appeal procedures of article V, division 8. 
(e)  Repairs and maintenance. 
(1)  Nonconformities must be maintained to be safe and in good repair. 
(2)  Repairs and normal maintenance that do not increase the extent of nonconformity and that are necessary to keep a nonconformity in sound condition are permitted unless otherwise expressly prohibited by this zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Nothing in this division is intended to prevent nonconformities from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance with an order from a duly authorized city official. 
(f)  Change of tenancy or ownership. Nonconforming status runs with the land and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership or management. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-29.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-552. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Description. A nonconforming lot is a lawfully created lot recorded in the office of the clerk of county superior court that does not comply with all applicable minimum lot area or lot frontage regulations of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Use of nonconforming lots. 
(1)  Any nonconforming lot in a residential zoning district may be used as a building site for a single detached house. 
(2)  In mixed-use, nonresidential and special purpose zoning districts, a nonconforming lot may be used as a building site and developed with a use allowed in the subject zoning district. 
(c)  Lot and building regulations. 
(1)  Development on nonconforming lots must comply with the lot and building regulations of the subject zoning district unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(2)  Nonconforming lots may not be adjusted in size or shape to create nonconformity or increase the degree of nonconformity for lot area, lot frontage, setbacks or other applicable lot and building regulations. Lot area or shape adjustments that decrease the extent of nonconformity are allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-29.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-553. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)  Description. A nonconforming structure is any building or structure, other than a sign, that was lawfully established but no longer complies with the lot and building regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  General. Nonconforming structures may remain, subject to the regulations of this section. 
(c)  Alterations and expansions. Alterations, including enlargements and expansions, are permitted if the proposed alteration or expansion complies with all applicable lot and building regulations, and does not increase the extent of nonconformity. A building with a nonconforming front setback, for example, may be expanded to the rear as long as the rear expansion complies with applicable rear setback standards and all other applicable lot and building regulations. On the other hand, a multi-dwelling building that is nonconforming with regard to density (i.e., contains more dwelling units than allowed by the underlying zoning) may not be expanded to add additional dwelling units. 
(d)  Use. A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
(e)  Moving. A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to another location only if the movement or relocation eliminates or reduces the extent of nonconformity. A nonconforming structure may be moved to another lot only if the structure would comply with the zoning regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot. 
(f)  Loss of nonconforming status. 
(1)  Intentional damage or destruction. When a nonconforming structure is intentionally destroyed, razed or dismantled by a deliberate act of the owner or the owner's agent, all nonconforming structure rights are lost and reconstruction of the nonconforming structure is prohibited. 
(2)  Accidental damage or destruction. Unless a nonconforming structure loses its nonconforming structure rights pursuant to subsection (f)(1), the structure may be restored or repaired as long as no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within two years of the date of occurrence of the damage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-29.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-554. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Description. A nonconforming use is a land use that was lawfully established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the zoning district in which the use is now located. Lawfully established uses that do not comply with any applicable separation (or spacing) distance requirements (e.g., those that require one land use to be located a certain minimum distance from another land use) are also deemed nonconforming uses. 
(b)  Change of use. A nonconforming use may be changed to any other use that is allowed in the subject zoning district. Once changed to a conforming use, a nonconforming use may not be re-established. 
(c)  Expansion of use. A nonconforming use may not be expanded in any way that increases the extent of nonconformity. 
(d)  Remodeling and improvements. A building in which a nonconforming use is located may be remodeled or otherwise improved as long as the remodeling or improvements do not violate the other regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Moving. 
(1)  A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation eliminates or reduces the extent of nonconformity. 
(2)  A nonconforming use may be moved to another lot only if the use is allowed under the zoning regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot. 
(f)  Loss of nonconforming status. 
(1)  Abandonment. 
a.  Once a nonconforming use is abandoned, its nonconforming status is lost and any new, replacement use must comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
b.  A nonconforming use is presumed abandoned when the use is discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of six months or more. 
c.  A nonconforming open-air use of land is presumed abandoned when the use is discontinued for a continuous period of three months or more. 
d.  The presumption of abandonment may be rebutted upon showing, to the satisfaction of the community development director, that during such period the owner of the land or structure has been: 
1.  Maintaining the land and structure in accordance with all applicable Municipal Code requirements and did not intend to discontinue the use; 
2.  Actively and continuously marketing the land or structure for sale or lease for that particular nonconforming use; or 
3.  Engaged in other activities that affirmatively prove there was not intent to abandon. 
e.  Any period of discontinued use caused by government action, unintended fire or natural disaster will not be counted in calculating the length of discontinuance. 
(2)  Change to conforming use. If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, no matter how short the period of time, all nonconforming use rights are lost and re-establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited. 
(3)  Destruction. 
a.  Intentional destruction. When a building containing a nonconforming use is intentionally destroyed, razed or dismantled by a deliberate act of the owner or the owner's agent, re-establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited. 
b.  Accidental destruction. Unless a building containing a nonconforming use is loses its nonconforming use rights pursuant to subsection (f)(3)a., the building and use may be restored or repaired provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged building must be obtained within two years of the date of occurrence of such damage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-29.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-555. - Nonconforming development features. 
(a)  Description. A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a development—other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming structure or nonconforming sign—that was lawfully established, in accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that no longer complies with one or more regulations of this zoning ordinance. Common examples of nonconforming development features are off-street parking or loading areas that contain fewer spaces than required by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current landscaping or screening requirements. 
(b)  General. Nonconforming development features may remain except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, but the nature and extent of nonconforming site features may not be increased except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-29.50), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-556—27-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MEASUREMENTS, LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS 
DIVISION 1. - MEASUREMENTS 

Sec. 27-571. - Lot area. 
Lot area is a measure of the total ground-level surface area contained within the property lines of a lot. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-30.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-572. - Lot frontage. 
Lot frontage is measured along the front property line adjacent to the street. On a corner lot the side of the lot having the least amount of street frontage is the front property line. For purposes of measuring lot frontage on corner lots with a radius return, the measurement must be taken from the point of intersection of an imaginary extension of the street property lines. For lots with other irregular geometric shapes, lot frontage is measured along an imaginary line located at the building line or the required street setback line, whichever is closer to the street. 
Figure 30-1: Measurement of Lot Frontage  

(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-30.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-573. - Density. 
Density is a measure of the number of dwelling units per acre (43,560 sq. ft.) of land area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-30.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-574. - Floor area and gross floor area. 
Except as otherwise expressly stated, a building's "floor area" is calculated on the basis of "gross floor area," and is measured as follows: 
(1)  For purposes of calculating the floor area ratio of buildings in the PC-1 district, gross floor area is measured as the sum of all the space within all floors of a building located above ground level, as measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls. Calculations shall include all space regardless of whether it is intended for human occupancy or whether it is heated or un-heated, including garages, stairwells, hallways, storage areas, elevator shafts, mechanical rooms, all above-ground floors of parking decks and other enclosed spaces. 
(2)  The gross floor area of an accessory building is measured as the sum of all the space within all floors in the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. 
(3)  For all purposes other than calculating FAR in the PC-1 district or measuring the floor area of an accessory building, gross floor area is measured as the sum of all heated space within all floors of a building located above ground level, as measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-30.40), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 5, 4-11-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 5, adopted April 11, 2017, changed the title of § 27-574 from "Floor area" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 27-574.5. - Floor area ratio (FAR). 
A building's floor area ratio (FAR) is calculated by dividing the total floor area of all buildings on a lot by total area of the lot on which the buildings are located. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 5, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 27-575. - Lot coverage. 
Lot coverage is measured as the area or percentage of a lot that is covered by buildings, structures, swimming pools, streets, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking areas and other impervious surfaces, often expressed as impervious surface ratio (ISR). Permeable decks shall not be included in the lot coverage calculation. However, impermeable surfaces under a deck shall be included. Trail improvements that are part of a city council-approved plan are not counted as part of a site's impervious surface area for purposes of site development-related calculations and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-30.50), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-576. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Measurement. 
(1)  Setbacks are measured from the referenced lot line to the closest point of the building or structure. 
(2)  Street setbacks are measured from the property line that abuts a street. 
(3)  Side (interior) setbacks are measured from a side lot line that does not abut a street. 
(4)  Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line. On double-frontage lots, street setbacks apply from both opposing property lines that abut the street, Rear setback standards do not apply. 
(b)  Permitted obstructions. Setbacks must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky except as expressly allowed in subsection (d). 
(c)  Setback averaging. 
(1)  Applicability . When existing buildings on one or more abutting lots are closer to the street (front or street side) property line than the otherwise required setback, additions to existing buildings or construction of new buildings on the subject lot may comply with the average street yard depth that exists on the nearest two lots on either side of the subject lot instead of complying with the zoning district's minimum street setback requirement. Detached houses constructed on infill lots are subject to the contextual street setback regulations of subsection 27-147(2), which will govern in the case of conflict with the setback averaging provisions of this section. 
(2)  Calculation of "average setback." 
a.  The average setback is based on the average (arithmetic mean) street yard depth that exists on the nearest two lots on either side of the subject lot. 
b.  If one or more of the lots that are required to be included in the averaging calculation is vacant, that vacant lot will be deemed to have a street yard depth equal to the minimum street setback requirement of the subject zoning district. 

c.  Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot or that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in computing the average. 

d.  When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average street yard depth will be computed on the basis of the nearest two lots with frontage on the same street as the subject lot. 

e.  When the subject lot abuts a corner lot with frontage on the same street, the average front yard depth will be computed on the basis of the abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots with frontage on the same street as the subject lot. 
f.  These setback averaging provisions may not be used to reduce the setback of a street-facing garage door to less than 20 feet. 
(d)  Features allowed to encroach in required setbacks. Building and site features are allowed to obstruct or encroach into required setbacks to the extent indicated in the following table: 

 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-30.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-577. - Building height. 
(a)  Measurement. 
(1)  Detached houses. The building height of a detached house is measured as the vertical distance from the front door threshold elevation to the highest point of the roof ([see] Figure 30-2). 
Figure 30-2: Building Height Measurement, Detached Houses  
(2)  Other buildings. For all buildings except detached houses, building height is measured as the vertical distance from finished grade along the exterior building wall to the top of the highest roof beams or top of parapet (whichever is greater) on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs ([see] Figure 30-3). 
Figure 30-3: Building Height Measurement, Other Buildings  
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Farm buildings and farm-related structures are not subject to building height limits when located on bona fide farms. 
(2)  Belfries, clock towers, cupolas, domes, flag poles and spires may exceed maximum building limits, provided they are not intended for human occupancy. 
(3)  Bulkheads, elevator and equipment penthouses, chimneys, water tanks and similar structures may exceed maximum height limits, provided they do not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which they are located. 
(4)  Telecommunications towers and antennas are subject to their own special height limits (see section 27-150). 
(5)  Building-mounted solar energy systems may extend up to three feet above the applicable maximum zoning district height limit, provided they do not extend more than five feet above the roof line (see also subsection 27-173(b)). 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-30.70), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 27-578. - Lot width. 
Lot width is measured as the distance between the side lot lines, measured along a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance from the front lot line equal to the minimum street yard setback. For lots with curvilinear frontage and setback lines (e.g.: cul-de-sac lots), the width shall be measured as a straight line through the points that intersect the side lot lines at a distance from the front lot line equal to the minimum street yard setback. 

(Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015) 
Secs. 27-579—27-590. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF LANGUAGE AND INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 27-591. - Meanings and intent. 
The language of the zoning ordinance must be read literally. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance (see, for example, article VII, division 3) have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.10), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-592. - Tenses and usage. 
(a)  Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true. 
(b)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true. 
(c)  The words "must," "will," "shall" and "may not" are mandatory. 
(d)  The word "may" is permissive, and "should" is advisory, not mandatory or required. 
(e)  When used with numbers, "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum of x" all include "x." 
(f)  The word "lot" includes the word "plot." 
(g)  The word "used" is deemed to also include "designed, intended, or arranged to be used." 
(h)  The word "erected" is deemed to also include "constructed," "reconstructed," "altered," "placed," "relocated" or "removed." 
(i)  The terms "land use" and "use of land" are deemed to also include "building use" and "use of building." 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.20), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-593. - Conjunctions. 
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, conjunctions have the following meanings: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or in combination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.30), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-594. - Computation of time. 
(a)  References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly stated. References to "business days" are references to regular city government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by the city. 
(b)  The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, that day is excluded. 
(c)  A day concludes at the close of business of city hall, and any materials received after that time will be considered to have been received the following day. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.40), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-595. - Headings and illustrations. 
Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this zoning ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text governs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.50), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-596. - References to other regulations. 
All references in this zoning ordinance to other city, state or federal regulations are for informational purposes only, and do not constitute a complete list of such regulations. These references do not imply any responsibility by the city for enforcement of state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.60), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-597. - Current versions and citations. 
All references to other city, state or federal regulations in this zoning ordinance refer to the most current version and citation for those regulations, unless otherwise expressly indicated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.70), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-598. - Lists and examples. 
Lists of items or examples that use "including," "such as" or similar terms are intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.80), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-599. - Delegation of authority. 
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, that department head, officer or employee is authorized to delegate the assigned responsibility to other individuals over whom they have authority. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.90), 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 27-600. - Public officials and agencies. 
All employees, public officials, bodies and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Dunwoody unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-31.100), 10-14-2013) 
Secs. 27-601—27-620. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 27-621. - Terms defined. 
The words and terms expressly defined in this division have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined have the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. 
(a)  Terms beginning with "A." 
Accessory building means a building detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. See also the accessory use regulations of article III, division 3. 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. See also the accessory use regulations of article III, division 3. 
Accessory use means a use of land or building or structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. See also the accessory use regulations of article III, division 3. 
Agent means a person duly authorized to act on behalf of the subject property owner. 
Amateur radio service antenna structure means a tower and antenna for radio transmission and reception that is maintained by a licensed amateur radio operator as an accessory structure. 
American Main Street Commercial style means buildings designed in the one-part commercial block and two-part commercial block styles. 
Amplified sound reproduction device means any device capable of producing, reproducing or emitting sounds by means of any loudspeaker or amplifier. 
Animal, companion means animals that are commonly kept by persons as a pet or for companionship. Companion animals have the following characteristics: have a special and close relationship with humans; are partially or totally dependent on people; commonly live inside a residence in close proximity with humans; form bonds with people; and interact with their human companions. Dogs and cats are common companion animals. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
Antenna means telecommunications antenna. 
Archaeological resource means any material remains of past human culture or activities that are of archaeological interest, including, but not limited to the following: basketry, bottles, carvings, graves, human skeletal materials, pit houses, pottery, rock intaglios, rock paintings, soapstone quarries, structures or portions of structures, tools, weapons, weapon projectiles, or any portion or piece of any of the foregoing items. Nonfossilized and fossilized paleontological specimens, or any portion or piece thereof, are not considered archaeological resources under the regulations of this zoning ordinance, unless found in archaeological context. No item may be deemed to be an archaeological resource under regulations of to this zoning ordinance unless the item is at least 200 years of age. 
Authorized use means any use allowed by right in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Automobile means a self-propelled, free-moving vehicle, with not more than six wheels, typically used to transport no more than eight passengers and licensed by the appropriate state agency as a passenger vehicle. 
(b)  Terms beginning with "B." 
Base (zoning) district means any zoning district that is not an overlay district. 
Basement means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of no less than 6.5 feet. 
Battery charging station means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles. 
Battery exchange station means a facility designed to enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive land and exchange the depleted battery for a more fully charged battery through an automated process. 
Bedroom means a private room planned and intended for sleeping, separated from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom. 
Bicycle parking, long-term means bicycle parking spaces provided to meet the needs of residents, employees or occupants of a site who leave bicycles unattended overnight, during the workday or other long periods of time. 
Bicycle parking, short-term, means bicycle parking spaces provided to meet the needs of customers and other short-term visitors to a site. 
Biomass energy means energy produced from the biological breakdown of organic matter. 
Block face means all parcels abutting one side of a street between the two nearest intersecting streets. 
Buildable area means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum setbacks and open space requirements of this zoning ordinance have been met. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building line means an imaginary line representing the vertical projection (or plumb line) of an exterior building wall that encloses interior floor space. 
Building, accessory. See "Accessory building." 
Building footprint means the outline of the total area covered by a building's perimeter at the ground level. 
Building mass means the overall visual impact of a structure's volume; a combination of height and width, and the relationship of the heights and widths of the building's components. 
Building, principal. See "Principal building." 
Building scale means the relationships of the size of the parts of a structure to one another and to humans. 
Building type, civic has the meaning ascribed in [section] 27-105(b)(2)e. 
Building type, detached house has the meaning ascribed in section 27-105(b)(2)d. 
Building type, general has the meaning ascribed in [section] 27-105(b)(2)b. 
Building type, shopfront has the meaning ascribed in [section] 27-105(b)(2)a. 
Building type, townhouse has the meaning ascribed in [section] 27-105(b)(2)c. 
(c)  Terms beginning with "C." 
Car-share program means a system in which a fleet of cars (or other motor vehicles) is made available for use by members of the car-share program and that exhibit all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Members are permitted to use vehicles from the car-share program fleet on an hourly basis; 
(2)  Car-share vehicles are generally available 24 hours a day and seven days a week to members in parking spaces at dispersed locations or facilities; and 
(3)  No separate written agreement is required each time a member reserves and uses a car-share vehicle. 
Car-share vehicle means a motor vehicle from a car-share program fleet. 
City manager means the person hired and designated as such by the mayor and city council. 
City solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from household living uses, hotel and motels, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Collector street means a street or road designated as a collector street in the transportation plan. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Common open space means that open space that is owned in common by all property owners within the development. 
Compatible means land development that is consistent with existing, identified physical elements in proximity to that land development, such as architectural style, building mass, building scale, land uses, and landscape architecture. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan adopted by the mayor and city council, as it may be amended from time to time, that divides areas of the city into land use categories and that constitutes the official policy of the city regarding long-term planning and use of land. 
Conditional approval or conditions means the imposition of special requirements, whether expressed in written form or as a site plan or other graphic representation, made a requirement of development permission associated with a particular parcel or parcels of land and imposed in accordance with the terms of this zoning ordinance. 
Condominium means a building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units, offices, or floor area are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis in compliance with Georgia Law. 
Conservation easement means a restriction or limitation on the use of real property that is expressly recited in any deed or other instrument of grant or conveyance executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein and whose purpose is to preserve land or water areas predominantly in their natural scenic landscape or open condition or in an agricultural farming, forest or open space use. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures. 
Construction staging area means temporary storage of construction equipment and building materials on sites (1) for which a valid land-disturbance permit or valid building permit exists and (2) on which development or construction is being diligently pursued. 
Courtyard means an outdoor area enclosed by a building façade on at least three sides and open to the sky. 
Cutoff fixture means a luminaire light distribution where the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 25 (2.5 percent) at or above a vertical angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and 100 (ten percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
(d)  Terms beginning with "D." 
Demolition means any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings, structures, or roadways whether manmade or natural occurring both above and below ground. 
Demolition of an infill building means the destruction and removal of an existing building or structure in whole or in part whether such destruction and removal involves removal of all or part of the prior foundation. 
Density. See section 27-573. 
Development permit means any permit that authorizes land-disturbance for the use, construction thereon or alteration of any real property within the city. 
Diameter-at-breast height (DBH) means tree trunk diameter measured at a height of 4.5 feet above grade level at the base of a tree. 
Dripline means a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single household. 
Dwelling unit, efficiency, or studio means a self-contained residential unit consisting of not more than one room together with a private bath and kitchen facilities. 
(e)  Terms beginning with "E." 
Easement means authorization by a property owner for use of all or a designated portion of the subject property by another property owner or entity. 
Electric vehicle means any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets; either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid or an off-board source, that is stored on-board via a battery. "Electric vehicle" includes: (1) battery electric vehicles; and (2) plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. 
Electric vehicle (EV) charging station means a public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment. 
Electric vehicle charging station, private (restricted-access) means an EV charging station that is not available for use by the general public. Examples include electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet parking areas. 
Electric vehicle charging station, public means an EV charging station that is accessible to and available for use by the general public. 
Electric vehicle parking space means any parking space that is clearly identified to be used exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle. 
Emergency work means any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions. 
Expression line means an architectural feature consisting of a decorative, three-dimensional, linear element, horizontal or vertical, protruding or indented at least 1.25 inches from the exterior façade of a building. It is typically utilized to delineate the top or bottom of floors or stories of a building. 
(f)  Terms beginning with "F." 
Façade means all the wall planes of a building seen from one side or view. 
Fence means a structure designed to provide separation and security, constructed of materials including chain link, wire, metal, artistic wrought iron, vinyl, plastic and other such materials as may be approved by the community development director. 
Fenestration means the arrangement, proportioning, and design of windows and doors in a building. For purposes of administering and interpreting the Perimeter Center districts and overlay only, said term means a measurement of the percentage of a façade that has highly transparent, low-reflectance windows, not including mirrored glass. 
Flood hazard district. See chapter 16 of the Municipal Code (land development). 
Flood lamp means a form of lighting designed to direct its output in a specific direction with a reflector formed from the glass envelope of the lamp itself. Such lamps are so designated by the manufacturers and are typically used in residential outdoor area lighting. 
Flood light means a form of lighting designed to direct its output in a diffuse, more or less specific direction, with reflecting or refracting elements located external to the lamp. 
Floodplain means 100-year floodplain. 
Floodplain, 100-year, means land within the 100-year flood elevation as is defined in the city's land development code (chapter 16). 
Floodway. See chapter 16 of the Municipal Code (land development). 
Floor area ratio. See section 27-574.5. 
Floor area ratio means the gross floor area of all heated floor space in all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. 
Footcandle means a unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. 
Freeway means a multiple-lane roadway carrying local, regional, and interstate traffic of relatively high volumes that permits access only at designated interchanges and is so designated in the comprehensive plan. 
Front door means the door located closest to the front of the dwelling that provides the most direct access to that level of the dwelling that contains the main kitchen of the dwelling. 
Frontage. See section 27-572. Frontage also means, for purposes of administering and interpreting the Perimeter Center districts and overlay only, required pedestrian and bicyclist accommodations within the space between the building and the existing curb for all street types within the Perimeter Center Overlay. Street types are identified in figure 27-98-2. 
Full cutoff means a luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at or above an angle of 90 degrees above nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (ten percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
Full cutoff fixture means an outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that it emits no light above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
(g)  Terms beginning with "G." 
Geothermal heat exchange system means equipment that exchanges thermal energy between the ground (or a water source) and a building. This includes vertical closed loop, horizontal closed loop, water body closed loop system and open loop systems. Also known as ground source heat pumps and geothermal heat pumps. 
Glare means the sensation produced within the visual field by luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Grade, average, means the mean elevation of the ground along a line determined by dividing the sum of the elevation of the highest point on the line and the elevation of the lowest point on the line by two. 
Grade, existing, means the elevation of the ground surface before development. 
Grade, finished, means the final grade of the ground surface after development. 
Greenhouse means a temporary or permanent structure that is primarily used for the cultivation of plants. 
Greenspace means undeveloped land that has been designated, dedicated, reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from further development and that is not a part of an individual residential lot. 
(h)  Terms beginning with "H." 
Home occupation [means] an accessory use of a dwelling unit for limited commercial purposes. Home occupations are subject to the regulations of section 27-168. 
Hoop house means a temporary or permanent structure typically made of flexible pipe or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a "half-round" or "hoop" shape, for the purposes of protecting and cultivating plants. A hoop house is considered more temporary than a greenhouse. 
Household means a group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other custodial relationship, or not more than four persons not so related, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. This definition specifically includes four or fewer persons with mental, developmental, or other disabilities as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC 3601 et seq., living as a housekeeping unit and otherwise meeting this definition of "household." 
(i)  Terms beginning with "I." 
IESNA means the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a non-profit professional organization of lighting specialists that has established recommended design standards for various lighting applications. 
Illuminance means the quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the areas of the illuminated surface measured in footcandles. Horizontal illuminance applies to a horizontal surface; vertical illuminance applies to a vertical surface. Average illuminance is the level of illuminance over an entire illuminated target area. Maximum illuminance is the highest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area; minimum illuminance is the lowest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. 
Illuminance levels and footcandles noted in this zoning ordinance mean the maintained illuminance levels, the illuminance levels occurring just prior to lamp replacement and luminaire cleaning. The average illuminance level applies to an entire illuminated target area. Minimum and maximum illuminance levels apply to small areas within the entire illuminated target area. Unless otherwise noted, illuminance levels refer to horizontal illuminance levels. 
Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste as defined herein. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component of a building that is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation-site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Infill building means any building built or proposed to be built on an infill lot. 
Infill lot means: (1) a conforming lot or a nonconforming lot of record created by the demolition of an existing residential structure for the replacement of that structure with new construction; (2) any lot intended for use as a site for a detached house that is created by act of subdivision; or (3) any lot that has no principal building and that is subsequently proposed as a site for a detached house. 
Interim development control means an ordinance that temporarily imposes developmental regulations when existing regulations do not adequately protect the public's health, safety and welfare in accordance with the standards specified in this zoning ordinance. 
Interior lot façade means any façade that does not face a street, faces the interior of the lot, or is located such that a parking lot is between the building and the street. 
Invasive (plant) species: means any plant species, including its seeds, spores or other biological material capable of propagating that species, that is not native to that ecosystem; and whose introduction does or is likely to cause environmental harm. 
(j)  Terms beginning with "J." 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle that is inoperable or any vehicle that does not bear a current, valid license plate. 
(k)  Terms beginning with "K." 
Kiosk means a freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or posters, notices, and announcements are posted. 
Kitchen facilities means a room used to prepare food containing, at a minimum, a sink and a stove or oven. 
(l)  Terms beginning with "L." 
Landscape/landscaping means the act of enhancing the appearance of the land by altering its contours and planting trees, shrubs, vines, flowers, turf, groundcover and other plant materials for aesthetic effect. 
Land use means a description of how land is occupied or utilized. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate that may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot area. See section 27-571. 
Lot, buildable area of, means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Lot coverage. See section 27-575. 
Lot, double-frontage, means a lot that abuts two parallel streets or that abuts two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. Double-frontage lots are sometimes referred to as "through lots." 
Lot, interior, means a lot, other than a corner lot, abutting only one street. 
Lot, nonconforming. See [subsection] 27-552(a). 
Luminaire means a complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps and the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamp, and to connect the lamp to the power supply. These parts include the lamp, reflector, ballast, socket, wiring, diffuser and housing. 
(m)  Terms beginning with "M." 
Main parking lot means a parking lot that contains more than 50 percent of the parking designated for a particular building. 
Mixed-use development means a development that includes primary residential uses and primary nonresidential uses that are part of the same integrated development, whether within the same building or on the same walkable, interconnected site. 
Multiuse property means any distinct parcel of land that is being used for more than one land use purpose. 
(n)  Terms beginning with "N." 
New construction on an infill lot means the replacement of an existing residential building or structure with a new building, structure or an addition that increases the usable square footage in the building, structure or addition. 
Node means a concentration of population, retail, and employment within a well-defined area that has a diverse mix of land uses and a pedestrian and transit orientation. 
Nonconforming use. See subsection 27-554(a). 
Nonresidential development means any development that does not include residential uses. 
(o)  Terms beginning with "O." 
Occupied space means interior building space regularly occupied by the building users. It does not include storage areas, utility space, or parking, but includes hallways, stairwells, and elevators. 
One-part commercial block style means a single-story building that has a flat roof, a façade that is rectangular in shape, and in which the fenestration in the façade is equal to 75 percent of the width of the front façade of the building. 
Open-air uses means storage yards, construction debris sites, used vehicle sales lots, vehicle impound yards, auto wrecking, junkyards, and similar open-air uses when the only buildings on the parcel are incidental and accessory to the open-air use of the lot. 
Open water means a pond, lake, reservoir, or other water feature holding water at all times with the water surface fully exposed. 
Outdoor lighting fixture means outdoor artificial illuminating device, lamp, and other similar device used for flood lighting, security, and/or general illumination. Such devices include: outdoor lighting of buildings and structures, including building overhands and canopies; outdoor lighting of recreational areas or parking lots; security lighting; street lighting; landscape lighting; building-mounted area lighting; product display area lighting; and building façade lighting. 
Outdoor storage means the keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
(p)  Terms beginning with "P." 
Parking garage means a covered or sheltered structure designed, constructed and used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Parking lot means any area designed for temporary storage of motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating condition, whether for a fee or as a service. 
Paved means an improved area, covered by asphalt, concrete, or other hard surface material, that may or may not be impervious. "Paved" specifically excludes dry gravel and similar materials as a finished product. 
Pedestrianway means a pathway designed for use by pedestrians; it can be located mid-block allowing pedestrian movement from one street to another without traveling along the block's perimeter. 
Pervious paving or pavement means a ground covering of hard-surfaced material that is designed and installed to allow percolation or infiltration of stormwater into the soil below. Pervious paving or pavement systems include but are not limited to porous concrete and modular porous paver systems that are designed to allow infiltration of stormwater. Pervious paving or pavement areas are not considered "impervious surface areas" for the purposes of calculating impervious surface coverage. 
Photovoltaic cell means a semiconductor device that converts solar energy into electricity. Pitch of roof lines means the ratio of the rise to the run in the slope of a roof. 
Principal building means the building occupied by the principal use of the subject lot. 
Principal use means the primary or predominant use of the subject lot. 
Private restrictive covenants means private restrictions on the use of land or structures imposed by private contract, such as subdivision covenants. 
Private right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is not owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public uses means land or structures owned by a federal, state or local government, including a board of education, and used by the respective unit of government for a necessary governmental function. 
(q)  Terms beginning with "Q." 
RESERVED 
(r)  Terms beginning with "R." 
Real property line means (1) the imaginary line, including vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another; (2) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multi-unit residential building; or (3) on a multiuse property, the dividing lines that separate various portions of the property used for different purposes. 
Real property owners within a proposed or enacted residential infill overlay district means the homeowners or other real property owners of land within the residential infill overlay district as indicated in the tax records maintained by the county board of tax assessors. 
Recovered materials means those materials that have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty vehicle; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Renewable energy means energy from resources that are quickly replenished, such as sunlight, wind, water, biomass, geothermal resources. 
Residential district. See article II, division 1. 
Residential use means the occupation of a building and land for human habitation. 
Retaining wall means a structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent erosion. A retaining wall is not a wing wall or an areaway. See also article IV, division 4. 
(s)  Terms beginning with "S." 
Satellite television antenna means an apparatus capable of receiving but not transmitting television, radio, or cable communications from a central device transmitting said communications. 
Semi-nude means the exposure of one or more, but not all, of the following: human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Semi-pervious surface means, for purposes of administering and interpreting the Perimeter Center districts and overlay only, either a material covering a surface that allows for at least 40 percent absorption of water into the ground or plant material, such as pervious pavers, permeable asphalt and concrete, or gravel, or a vegetated roof. 
Setback. See section 27-576. 
Sexually oriented business. See subsection 27-114(1)a. 
Shopping center means a group of retail and other commercial establishments that is planned, developed, owned and/or managed as a single property, typically with collective parking, shared driveways, common signage and other shared features. 
Site plan means that plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit that shows the means by which the developer will conform with applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances. 
Solar energy system means a system intended to convert solar energy into thermal, mechanical or electrical energy, 
Solar energy system, building-integrated means a solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural part of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and similar architectural components. 
Solar energy system, structure-mounted means a solar energy system that is mounted on the façade or roof of either a principal or accessory structure. 
Solar energy system, flush-mounted means a solar energy system that is mounted flush with a finished building surface, at no more than six inches in height above that surface. 
Solar energy system, ground-mounted means a solar energy system mounted on the ground and not attached to any other structure other than structural supports. 
Solar panel means a group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. Panels are assembled onsite into solar arrays. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Spill light means the light that illuminates surfaces beyond the intended area of illumination caused by the uncontrolled direct light component from the luminaires. 
Stoop means a platform entranceway at the door to a building, providing a transition between the interior of the building and the sidewalk outside the building. The stoop may be elevated or at grade, and may be covered by a canopy or awning. 
Stormwater management facility means those structures and facilities that are designed for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of storm water runoff into and through the drainage system. 
Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Each floor or level in a multistory building used for parking, excluding a basement, is classified as a story. 
Story, ground (or ground floor) means the first floor of a building on any street façade that is level to or elevated above the finished grade on any street façade. 
Story, half means a story either in the basement of the building, partially below grade and partially above grade, or a story fully within the roof structure with windows facing the street. 
Story, upper (or upper floor) means all floors located above the ground story of a building. Upper stories may be half stories. 
Street façade means the façade of a building that faces a street right-of-way. 
Street, private, means any street that provides vehicular or pedestrian access within a development that is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the city, and that is not maintained by the city. 
Street, public, means any right-of-way set aside for public travel deeded to the city and any right-of-way that has been accepted for maintenance as a street by the city. 
Street right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. This does not include telephone poles and utility boxes. 
Structure, accessory. See "Accessory structure." 
Subdivision means as set forth in the city development code (chapter 16). ;l0; (t)\ Terms beginning with "T." 
Telecommunications tower or antenna height means the vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the telecommunications tower, grade being the average level of the pre-existing or finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior of the tower, whichever is lower. When referring to a telecommunications antenna alone, it means the vertical distance from the base of the antenna to its highest point. Where telecommunications towers and antennae are used in combination, height means the vertical distance from grade to the highest point of either the tower or antenna, whichever is highest. 
Threshold means the top of the subfloor in the opening that is designated as the front door of a dwelling. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody plant that usually provides one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with branches. 
Tree canopy means the area directly beneath the crown and within the outermost edges of the branches and leaves of a tree. 
Trespass light means the offsite spill light that illuminates beyond the property boundaries in which the light fixture is installed, where it is neither wanted nor needed. 
Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Two-part commercial block style means a building of two stories or greater in height that has a flat roof and is characterized by a horizontal division of the building façade into two distinct zones. These zones may be similar in design but must be clearly separated from one another. The ground floor level of the building must contain fenestration equal to 75 percent of the width of the front façade of the building. 
(u)  Terms beginning with "U." 
Usable satellite signals means satellite signals from all major communications satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations by way of cable television. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
Utility-scale energy production means an energy production facility that produces electric energy for widespread distribution through the electric power grid. 
(v)  Terms beginning with "V." 
Vacant and undeveloped means the comprehensive plan land use category that includes forested areas, undeveloped land and land not used for any other identified purpose. 
Van service means a commercial or not-for-profit service in which the provider offers transportation service to clients from their home to another destination, such as a medical service facility or other destination, and in which service is usually provided in a closed vehicle with a capacity of eight to 12 passengers. 
Vegetated roof means that portion of a building roof covered with vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. It may also include additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems. 
Vehicular use area means any area on a parcel that is not located within any enclosed or partially enclosed building and that is devoted to a use by or for motor vehicles including parking; storage of automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; gas stations; car washes; vehicle repair establishments; loading areas; drive-through service areas; and access drives and driveways. 
Viewshed means the total visible area from an identified observation position or positions. 
Visible basement means a half story or basement partially below grade and exposed above grade a minimum of one-half the minimum floor-to-floor height. 
(w)  Terms beginning with "W." 
Wall means a solid retaining or security barrier constructed of materials including brick, stone, concrete, concrete block, ceramic tile or other aggregate materials and other such materials as may be approved by the community development director. See also article IV, division 4. 
Water collection cistern means a barrel or similar container that collects and stores rainwater or other water that would otherwise be lost as runoff or diverted into a storm drain. 
Weekday means the time period of the week that begins at 7:00 a.m. on each Monday and ends at 6:00 p.m. on each Friday. 
Weekends means the time period of each week that begins at 6:00 p.m. on each Friday and ends at 7:00 a.m. on each Monday. 
Wetlands means an area of land meeting the definition of "wetlands" set forth in 33 CFR 328.3(b), as amended, and that is subject to federal, state or local regulations governing land meeting that definition. 
Wing wall means a wall that is constructed and poured at the same time as the building foundation, and is structurally a part of the building foundation. A wing wall is not a retaining wall or an areaway. See also article IV, division 4. 
(x)  Terms beginning with "X." 
RESERVED 
(y)  Terms beginning with "Y." 
Yard means the actual area of a lot between the principal building and adjoining lot lines. Note: "setback" refers to the minimum distance that buildings are required to be set back from property lines. 
(z)  Terms beginning with "Z." 
Zoning decision means final legislative action by a local government that results in: (1) the adoption of a zoning ordinance; (2) the adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance that changes the text of the zoning ordinance; (3) the adoption of any amendment to a zoning ordinance that rezones the property from one zoning classification to another; (4) the grant of a permit relating to a special use of property, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-3, and as may hereafter be amended by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10-15, § 1(Exh. A § 27-32.10), 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01-05, § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-04-07, § 5, 4-11-2017) 
Chapter 28 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; miscellaneous local administration provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-380, 48-8-110 et seq.; taxes on tobacco products, O.C.G.A. § 48-11-1 et seq.; levy of occupation taxes by counties and municipalities on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 28-19. - Annually set. 
The ad valorem tax rate for each year shall be established annually by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 28-20. - Maximum rate. 
Except as otherwise allowed by law, for all years, the millage rate imposed for ad valorem taxes on real property shall not exceed 3.04, unless a higher millage rate is recommended by resolution of the city council and subsequently approved by a majority of the eligible voters in the city by referendum. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 28-21. - Fines for delinquent returns. 
Any person failing to properly return his real property tax on or before March 1 of each year shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of taxes due the city. Said penalty shall be in addition to the amount of ad valorem taxes due the city and also in addition to any costs and interest permitted by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 28-22. - Due date. 
(a)  The ad valorem taxes due the city for the first installment shall become due and payable on July 1 and shall be delinquent after August 15; taxes for the second installment are due October 1 and shall be delinquent after November 15 of each tax year. 
(b)  Any installment of ad valorem taxes due to the city that is not paid on or before the delinquency date shall be in default, and shall bear interest and penalties, now or hereafter, as provided by law for taxes which are delinquent or in default, and executions shall be issued therefore, at such time the city has met the legal requirements of all state and local laws. 
(c)  In addition, interest shall accrue on such unpaid taxes at the rate of one percent per month beginning on January 2 following the November when such taxes were due and continuing thereafter until paid in full. All interest shall be computed at the rate of one percent per month or for any fraction thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 28-23. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
(a)  The duty to collect by levy and sale, or otherwise, for delinquent taxes is hereby imposed upon the city tax collector or his designee as issuing officer, and the county sheriff as execution officer. All levies of execution for delinquent taxes shall be in the name of the city. This duty may be contracted by the city council to a third party. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city tax collector or his designee to comply with all provisions of state law for issuing, sale and transfer of tax executions and laws governing judicial sales and to: 
(1)  Keep a file of all newspapers in which an official advertisement appears; 
(2)  Keep an execution docket in which shall be entered a full description of all executions; 
(3)  Maintain a book of all sales; 
(4)  Maintain an index to the sales and executions. 
(c)  The city tax collector shall sign all levies, notices, advertisements, and the like in his name for the city. 
(d)  Execution issued in the name of the city for delinquent ad valorem taxes shall be directed and delivered to the county sheriff, who shall enter the execution upon the docket to be kept in his office, and he shall proceed to enforce the collection of the execution in the manner prescribed by law. 
(e)  The city tax collector will issue all fieri facias (fi. fas.) for delinquent taxes and the county sheriff shall execute such fi. fas. under the same procedures provided by law governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal process and remedies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 28-24. - Assessment of property for ad valorem taxes. 
(a)  The county board of tax assessors is hereby designated to have the responsibility for assessment and valuation of property within the city limits. The city council shall adopt the assessments and valuations made by the board of tax assessors of the county for all property located within the city limits, as may be established from year to year by the county board of tax assessors. 
(b)  The city council authorizes the county tax commissioner to make such adjustments in the collection of individual items of tax, and to make such refunds as may be proper and necessary, by adding to or deducting from the distribution due the city at the next period of accounting, along with a stated explanation of the correction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 1, § 6) 
Secs. 28-25—28-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX 

Sec. 28-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guest room means a room, lodging, or accommodation occupied or intended for occupancy by one or more occupants but does not mean a meeting room which is intended, designed, or used for meetings. 
Hotel means a structure or any portion of a structure, including, but not limited to, roominghouses or lodginghouses, inns, motels, motor hotels and courts, hotels, cabins, public or private clubs, and tourist camps which contain guest rooms which are regularly furnished for value to the public. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishing of services or accommodations which accompany the use or possession of a guest room in a hotel. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses or possesses or has the right to use or possess a guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, contract, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or other entity operating the premises. 
Rent means the consideration received for the occupancy of a guest room in a hotel whether received in money, property, services, or credits. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 28-53. - Penalties. 
Any operator or person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 9) 
Sec. 28-54. - Delinquent penalty. 
Any operator who fails to pay the tax to the city on or before the due date shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax not paid plus interest on the unpaid tax at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 7) 
Sec. 28-55. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  The city tax collector shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city tax collector, in conjunction with the city finance director, shall have the power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws or ordinances for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the tax. 
(c)  Every operator renting guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or his designee may require. 
(d)  The city tax collector or any person authorized in writing by the city manager may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, and facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of and return made or to ascertain and determine the amount of tax which should be paid. 
(e)  In administering this article, the city tax collector may require the filing by operators of reports relating to the rental of guest rooms. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 8) 
Sec. 28-56. - Tax imposed; exceptions. 
(a)  Commencing on the first day of January, 2018, there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid to the city an excise tax in the amount of eight percent of the gross rental charge for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2). 
(b)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(2)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(3)  Any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this subsection. For purpose of the exemption provided under this subsection, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts; or 
(4)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 2; Ord. No. 2017-12-21, § 2, 12-11-2017) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2017-12-21, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, states "this ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2018. At such time this ordinance becomes effective, the excise tax previously levied in the City of Dunwoody under O.C.G.A. 48-13-51(a)(4) shall cease; provided, however, taxes collected and any liabilities or debts otherwise incurred prior to said date shall be paid over in the manner provided by law and continue to be due and owing until the duty to pay, collect and remit the tax has been fully satisfied." 
Sec. 28-57. - Liability for payment. 
Every person occupying a guest room in a hotel in the city is liable for the tax imposed by this article. The liability for the tax is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city; however, the occupant is relieved from further liability upon the payment of the rent to the operator. Additionally, any operator who neglects, fails, or refuses to collect the tax from the occupant shall be liable for and shall pay the tax and any interest and penalties assessed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 28-58. - Operator registration; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaged in or about to engage in the operating as an operator of a hotel in the city shall register on a form provided by the city. The failure to register shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the tax. 
(b)  The registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places or business, and other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner, if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or a partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. 
(c)  The city shall, after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and to come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
(d)  The certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the city manager or his designee, upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 28-59. - Filing return; payment; collector reimbursement. 
(a)  The tax shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city. All such taxes collected by the operator shall be due and payable to the city on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding the month in which the occupancy occurs. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of every month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the city by every operator liable for the collection and payment of the tax imposed by this article. The return shall be in such form as the city shall prescribe, and shall show the gross rent, the taxable rent, the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for such month, and such other information as the city may require. 
(c)  The person required to file the return shall deliver the return and, at the same time, deliver the remittance of the net amount of the tax due to the city. 
(d)  If the amount of the tax due is not delinquent at the time of payment to the city, the operator may deduct three percent of the amount of the tax due as reimbursement for collecting the tax. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 5) 
Sec. 28-60. - Disposition of revenue. 
All revenue collected by the city pursuant to this article shall be expended in a manner consistent with state law codified at O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 2, § 6) 
Secs. 28-61—28-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 28-79. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Month or monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease of 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 28-80. - Penalty for violation. 
In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article, any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in this Code. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 11) 
Sec. 28-81. - Authority and records. 
(a)  The city tax collector shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city tax collector may require. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 2) 
Sec. 28-82. - Excise tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. on any motor vehicle rental charge made in the city. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the city, and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(c)  The council declares that the proceeds received from the excise tax levied by this article are to be used in public safety facilities, including pedestrian sidewalks, installation of traffic lights, street lighting for public safety purposes, and for the maintenance of such systems of traffic lights and streets lights within the territorial city limits, or public improvements for sports and recreational facilities within the territorial city limits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 3) 
Sec. 28-83. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the state and returns it within the state; or 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the state and returns it outside the state. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 4) 
Sec. 28-84. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 5) 
Sec. 28-85. - Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month, the motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the city a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected through authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the motor vehicle concern shall submit the net taxes due for each particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and, in addition to such penalty, interest thereon the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 6) 
Sec. 28-86. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by the city manager, or his designee, during business hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 7) 
Sec. 28-87. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the city tax collector is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax provided for herein, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any rental vehicle concern, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon use of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. Deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the city tax collector shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found due by him. 
(c)  The city tax collector or his designee shall give to the rental vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be made personally or by mail and, if by mail service, shall be addressed to the operator of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the city tax collector as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service shall be complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return was filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 8) 
Sec. 28-88. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized representatives of the city, upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours, may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 9) 
Sec. 28-89. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city tax collector or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 3, § 10) 
Secs. 28-90—28-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 28-107. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bank means any financial institution chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a corporate structure authorizing the issuance of capital stock. 
Depository financial institution means a bank or a savings and loan association. 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Savings and loan association means any financial institution, other than a credit union, chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a mutual corporate form. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 28-108. - Tax levied; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 28-109. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a) shall be $1,000.00. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 28-110. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a), each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of the gross receipts with the city tax collector's office on or before March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue, based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The return shall provide the information necessary to determine the portion of the taxpayer's state gross receipts to be allocated to each taxing jurisdiction in which such institution has an office. The city tax collector's office shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in said return. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 4, § 4) 
Sec. 28-111. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the tax collector at the time of filing the return. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 4, § 5) 
Sec. 28-112. - Administrative provisions. 
The city tax collector is hereby authorized and directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution located in the city and to the home office of each such depository financial institution that does business in the city, if located outside the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 4, § 6) 
Sec. 28-113. - Relation of tax to other business licenses. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be in lieu of any other business license upon depository financial institutions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 4, § 7) 
Secs. 28-114—28-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE FEES ON INSURERS 

Sec. 28-140. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums. 
(1)  The term "gross direct premiums" means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, which provides all foreign, alien, and domestic insurance companies doing business in this state shall pay a tax of 2¼ percent upon the gross direct premiums received by them on and after July 1, 1955. The tax shall be levied upon persons, property, or risks in the state, from January 1 to December 31, both inclusive, of each year without regard to business ceded to or assumed from other companies. The tax shall be imposed upon gross premiums received from direct writings without any deductions allowed for premium abatements of any kind or character or for reinsurance or for cash surrender values paid, or for losses or expenses of any kind; provided, however, deductions shall be allowed for premiums returned on change of rate or canceled policies; provided, further, that deductions may be permitted for return premiums or assessments, including all policy dividends, refunds, or other similar returns paid or credited to policyholders and not reapplied as premiums for additional or extended life insurance. 
(2)  The term "gross direct premiums" shall not include annuity considerations. Further, for purposes of this article, annuity considerations received by nonprofit corporations licensed to do business in this state issuing annuities to fund retirement benefits for teachers and staff personnel of private secondary schools and colleges and universities shall not be considered gross direct premiums. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 5, § 2) 
Sec. 28-141. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $100.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 28-124, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 5, § 3) 
Sec. 28-142. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee in the amount $35.00 per location. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 5, § 4) 
Sec. 28-143. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 28-123. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 5, § 5) 
Sec. 28-144. - Gross premiums tax; all other insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 28-123. 
Sec. 28-145. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed by sections 28-123 and 28-124 shall be due and payable on January 1 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 5, § 7) 
Sec. 28-146. - Administrative proceedings. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the state insurance commissioner within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 5, § 8) 
Secs. 28-147—28-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROVISION FOR TRANSITION PERIOD 

Sec. 28-176. - Positions not yet established. 
During the period of transition and start-up of the city, any duties required by this chapter to be fulfilled by an employee or officer of the city who has not been appointed or such position or agency not yet established shall be fulfilled by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 24, art. 6, § 1) 
Chapter 30 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; cities and counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Adoption of state and federal laws. 
(a)  For the purpose of regulating vehicles and traffic in the city, there are hereby adopted the following federal regulations. These provisions are adopted as fully as if set out at length herein: 
(1)  Parts 382, 383, 390, 391, 392, 393, 395, 396, and 397 of Title 49 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR 382, 383, 390, 391, 392, 393, 395, 396, 397), The Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986; and 
(2)  The federal out-of-service criteria as amended from time to time. 
(b)  The following state law is adopted by reference: 
(1)  Pursuant to chapter 6 of title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. 
(2)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by law, every person convicted of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-6. 
(c)  Any ordinance and/or part of this chapter which specifically designates the speed limits on the public streets of the city and/or which designates one way streets, are not affected by the adoption of the Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(d)  The police department is hereby empowered and authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter upon all roads in the city. 
(e)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13 are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters, and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable for that violation as for other violations of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Funeral processions. 
(a)  A funeral procession is a group of vehicles traveling from a funeral home or similar business to a cemetery or other proper burial site. Funeral processions shall be lead by a funeral vehicle such as a hearse, and all cars in the procession shall burn regular headlights and stay in close formation. 
(b)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided such vehicles shall identify themselves by burning regular headlights and shall keep in close formation. When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Speed limits on certain streets; violations. 
(a)  Speed limits enumerated. The maximum speed limits on the public streets or parts of the public streets are set forth in exhibit A, identified as Dunwoody Speed Limits, and by this reference incorporated herein. Exhibit A establishes speed limits for all roadways currently within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Driving in excess of speed limit unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon any of the streets in the city at a rate of speed in excess of the speed limit as listed for such street in exhibit A and as posted on each such street. 
(c)  Amendment to exhibit A. The city may add to or amend the list of roadways designated in exhibit A from time to time pursuant to the statutes and regulations governing the establishment or alteration of speed limits and zones in the state. 
(d)  Exhibit A incorporated by reference. Exhibit A referenced in this section, as amended from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference as if set out in its entirety, and the original shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, and a copy shall be maintained in the office of the public works director, and available for inspection by the public during city business hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Skateboards and bicycles. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle or propel rollerskates, skateboards, or other similar devices upon a public street, highway, or sidewalk in a manner which would constitute an unreasonable danger to the public or which would disrupt the public's ordinary and customary use of such street, highway or sidewalk. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle or propel rollerskates, skateboards, or other similar devices on sidewalks which are properly designated for pedestrians only. The chief of police and the department of public works, after approval of the public works director, are authorized to erect or have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles or propelling of rollerskates, skateboards, or other similar devices. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the signs. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skating upon a sidewalk, that person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a violation of this Code; provided, however, that any offender under the age of 17 years shall be treated as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit that child or ward to violate any provision of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Private residential property trespass and private residential property trespass towing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park means to park unattended or abandon a vehicle on private residential property without authority or permission of the owner or occupant of the private residential property. 
Private residential property means residential property within the city which is privately owned and which contains not more than four residential units thereon. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Wrecker or wrecker service means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing vehicles which meets the qualifications imposed by the state public service commission and the city for nonconsensual towing pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13, as may be amended from time to time, and chapter 11 of the transportation rules of the state public service commission, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Prohibited on private residential property without invitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon private residential property in the city without invitation or permission from the owner or person in legal possession of the premises. Any person or his authorized agent entitled to the possession of any parcel or space of private residential property shall have the right to remove or cause to be removed from the private residential property any vehicle thereon which is not authorized to be at the place where it is found and to store or cause to be stored such vehicle. 
(c)  Removal and storage. Upon notification by a person entitled to the possession of private residential property that a vehicle is trespassing thereon, the city police department shall provide such person with the name and telephone number of the city's authorized wrecker service for nonconsensual towing, as determined by resolution of the city council of the city. The city police department shall not contact the wrecker service directly for the removal of the trespassing vehicle from the private residential property, but shall assist the person owning the private residential property by providing the name and telephone number of the city's authorized wrecker service for nonconsensual towing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Vehicles propelled by human or animal power prohibited on limited-access highways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to push or drive any vehicle upon the limited-access highways of the city which is propelled by human or animal power, including any bicycle, tricycle, pushcart, animal-drawn vehicle of any kind and any vehicle incapable of a speed of at least 45 miles per hour. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Sanitation vehicles. 
All employees and vehicles of the city, when engaged or used in performance of sanitation or solid waste collection and disposal service, shall have the right-of-way in the use of the streets, and may use any part thereof in cleaning up and washing streets. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 8) 
Sec. 30-9. - Limitation on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn that vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, or upon any street between intersections. These turns may be made outside of a business district at intersections not controlled by a traffic signal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 1, § 9) 
Secs. 30-10—30-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS 

Sec. 30-37. - Removal of signs from public right-of-way. 
The public works department may remove any signs located in public rights-of-way. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 30-38. - Installation. 
The public works department shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this article and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and those ordinances. The public works department may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as deemed necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 30-39. - Designation of crosswalks; establishment of safety zones; marking of traffic lanes. 
The public works department may: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as deemed necessary. The city may make proper studies of all existing crosswalks not at roadway intersections and shall abolish those which are unnecessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at places consistent with this article and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 30-40. - Specifications of traffic control devices. 
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 2, § 4) 
Secs. 30-41—30-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 30-69. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city council of Dunwoody, Georgia, and where delegated by the mayor and council, the city police department and/or any other city personnel. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is self-propelled. 
Operator means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
Owner means a person, other than a lienholder or security interest holder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in or lien by another person but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area, and residential or farm properties, timberland or forest. 
Roadway means that portion of a street, road, or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Tractor means any self-propelled vehicle designed for use as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles but having no provision for carrying loads independently. 
Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Truck means any motor vehicle having a gross weight of 18,000 pounds or over which is designed and used for the transportation of merchandise or freight. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 3; Ord. No. 2011-07-24, § 1, 7-25-2011) 
Sec. 30-70. - Penalties; enforcement generally. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not more than $1,000.00 or no more than 60 days in jail or both for each occurrence, and each occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the mayor and city council, the enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the city's police department and any other city officer authorized by the state to make misdemeanor criminal arrests. Persons designated by the governing authority are hereby authorized to issue citations or summons or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to a court or courts having jurisdiction over state traffic offenses or other courts having jurisdiction over violations of city ordinances. 
(c)  For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article, any city court having jurisdiction over state traffic offenses or other courts having jurisdiction over violations of city ordinances shall be entitled to take such action to ensure compliance, and the person convicted shall reimburse the city for any cost or expense associated with such compliance efforts, and the city shall be entitled to place a lien on the property or require a bond from the person to secure payment and reimbursement for these expenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 13) 
Sec. 30-71. - Restrictive vehicles required to use truck routes; exceptions. 
All trucks are prohibited from using roadways within the city limits, except those roadways authorized by this article as truck routes, including any amendments hereof, or as may be further designated by the governing authority as truck routes, except when: 
(1)  The terminal, parking lot, repair garage, or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from those places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route; 
(2)  A delivery or pickup is to be made at a location which is not on a designated truck route; ingress to and egress from that location shall be made by the most direct route available between that location and the nearest designated truck route; 
(3)  A delivery or pickup is to be made by a truck, road tractor, combination road tractor-trailer within any area which is not on a designated truck route; such delivery or pickup shall not be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 4) 
Sec. 30-72. - Truck routes; posted regulatory signs. 
A list and map of approved truck routes shall be kept on file with the city police department and the city clerk. The list of truck routes may be revised as deemed necessary by the city police department with the approval of the governing authority, with the entire list renewed in concurrence with Comprehensive Transportation Plan updates. All listed routes will be further identified by posted regulatory signs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 5; Ord. No. 2011-07-24, § 2, 7-25-2011) 
Sec. 30-73. - Use of temporary truck routes by restricted vehicles. 
If a designated truck route, or any portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles, as defined in this article, shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the governing authority and further identified by the posting of the regulatory traffic control sign. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 6) 
Sec. 30-74. - Evidence required for restricted vehicle to be off truck route. 
When upon roadways other than those designated as truck routes, any person driving or in charge or control of any of the motor vehicles restricted by this article shall be prepared to present for inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a roadway other than a designated truck route. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 7) 
Sec. 30-75. - Weight of vehicle and loads. 
No vehicle shall be operated on any roadway within the city limits, designated as a truck route, with a total gross weight in excess of 56,000 pounds unless the vehicle is making a pickup or delivery on such road. The maximum gross weight of any vehicle operating on any roadway within the city limits shall not exceed 80,000 pounds. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 8) 
Sec. 30-76. - Weight limitations on streets, bridges and culverts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street within the city limits where the weight of such motor vehicle, with or without load, is in excess of the weight as limited by this article and where signs indicating such limitations are posted. Further, it shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle over a bridge or culvert within the city limits over the weight capacity shown on said bridge and/or culvert. 
(b)  The driver and/or owner shall be liable to the city for any and all damages caused by driving an overweight motor vehicle over any street, bridge and/or culvert with a posted sign. These damages are in addition to any fine or punishment that may be assessed for violation of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 9) 
Sec. 30-77. - Enforcement of weight and load limitations. 
(a)  Any person who violates the load limitations provisions of this article shall be conclusively presumed to have damaged the public roads, including bridges within the city limits by reason of such overloading and shall, in addition to any other penalty at law, recompense the city for such damages in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27, as same may be amended. 
(b)  Any owner or operator of a vehicle which is operated on the public roads within the city limits in violation of the weight limits provided in this article shall be required, in addition to paying the monies provided in subsection (a) of this section, to unload all gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds over the legal weight limit before being allowed to move the vehicle. 
(c)  Any person authorized by state law and this article to enforce this article may seize the offending vehicle of an owner who fails or whose operator has failed to pay the monies proscribed in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27(a) and hold such vehicle until the proscribed moneys are paid. Any authorized person seizing such vehicle under this subsection or subsection (b) of this section may, when necessary, store the vehicle, and the owner thereof shall be responsible for all reasonable storage charges thereon. When any vehicle is seized, held, unloaded or partially unloaded under this section, the load or any part thereof shall be removed or cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle without any liability on the part of the authorized person or the city because of damage to or loss of such load or any part thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 10) 
Sec. 30-78. - Parking of trucks and trailers. 
It shall be unlawful to park any truck or any trailer which is designated by the department of public safety for a license tag in a weight category heavier than 6,000 pounds on the right-of-way of any residential street or upon residential zoned property, unless said vehicle is making a delivery to said residential property. School buses shall not fall under this section. This section shall not apply to construction vehicles, trailers, or equipment temporarily located within a construction area, provided such vehicles, trailers or equipment are used in connection with dwelling units under construction within such construction area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 11) 
Sec. 30-79. - Parking or storage of unlicensed, inoperable vehicles, trailers or equipment. 
Vehicles and trailers of any kind without current license plates, or vehicles, trailers or equipment permitted to remain in an inoperable condition for more than 30 days, shall not be parked or stored on or about any property within a residential zoned district; provided, however, this section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or equipment stored in an enclosed structure or appropriately covered and located in the rear yard area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 3, § 12) 
Secs. 30-80—30-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 30-102. - Signs required for enforcement. 
When by this chapter or any other ordinance or order of the public works department any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the public works department to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no regulations shall be effective unless these signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. At least one sign shall be erected in each block on each side of the street where parking is either prohibited or restricted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 30-103. - Emergency parking restrictions. 
When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the chief of police has authority in an emergency to prohibit the parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street or to close a street to traffic. All these orders shall be temporary only. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 30-104. - Authority to prohibit parking on certain streets. 
When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the chief of police may prohibit parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street when traffic and engineering surveys indicate that stopping or parking may impede the free flow of traffic on the street. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 30-105. - Loading and unloading at angle to curb; permit. 
The chief of police may issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms or conditions of these permits. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to that person the privilege as therein stated in this section. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of the permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 4) 
Sec. 30-106. - Leaving vehicle unattended; setting brakes, stopping motor. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of the vehicle and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of this vehicle to the curb or the side of the street or highway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 5) 
Sec. 30-107. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic control device, at any place prohibited by ordinance and indicated by official signs or markings. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle, not lawfully under such person's control, either into any prohibited area or move and leave such vehicle away from a curb such distance as is prohibited by this chapter or other ordinance. 
(c)  At the locations designated by the public works department or, if no such designation has been made by the public works department, by county ordinances, as indicated by official signs or markings, parking is prohibited as indicated. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 6) 
Sec. 30-108. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 7) 
Sec. 30-109. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying the vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in such emergency the vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 8) 
Sec. 30-110. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The public works department may erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 9) 
Sec. 30-111. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The public works department may erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, no person shall park a vehicle upon such streets in violation of the sign. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 10) 
Sec. 30-112. - Parking on one-way streets. 
The public works department may erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When these signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 11) 
Sec. 30-113. - Parking on one-way roadways. 
If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The public works department may determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway and erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 12) 
Sec. 30-114. - Hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The public works department may determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 13) 
Sec. 30-115. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
The public works department may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating them and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 14) 
Sec. 30-116. - Freight curb loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a truck for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to these zones are in effect, nor stop, stand or park any other vehicle for the unloading or loading of materials. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 15) 
Sec. 30-117. - Parking of taxicabs and buses regulated. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers, and except for making emergency repairs. The provisions of this section shall not apply to common carriers stopping at regular designated passing or layover locations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 16) 
Sec. 30-118. - Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 17) 
Sec. 30-119. - Bus stops. 
(a)  A no parking zone of 80 feet shall be created at all bus stops for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
(b)  These no parking zones shall be marked by signs and, in addition, these zones in all congested areas shall have the curbs painted yellow. This proper marking of zones shall be maintained by the companies operating buses in and out of these zones. 
(c)  Buses or any vehicles parked in these zones for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers shall pull as close to the curb as possible. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit buses from loading and unloading at platforms at loading zones where they are provided for that purpose in the street. 
Sec. 30-120. - Restrictions on parking heavy or oversized vehicles, campers, boats, etc., on residential streets. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand any bus, truck or other freight- or passenger-carrying vehicle in excess of one-half-ton capacity upon any public street or highway for a period longer than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(b)  No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet (or 2.4384 m) wide or ten feet (or 3.048 m) high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(c)  No person shall park or stand any truck camper, camper trailer, motor home, boat, boat trailer or other recreational vehicle on any residential street or public place for more than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 18) 
Sec. 30-121. - Fire zones. 
The fire chief may designate any area on public property or private property used for public purposes as restricted areas to be known as fire zones in accordance with International Fire Code and state law. Standing or parking a vehicle in a fire zone shall be a violation of this section and the city may enforce this section by the issuance of a citation and the immediate removal of the vehicle to an impound lot. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 19) 
Sec. 30-122. - Use of parking facilities on city property. 
The city manager may designate certain spaces or areas as reserved for all elected officials, designated administrative officials whose position responsibilities require the provision of a reserved parking space for efficiently discharging those responsibilities and for other general purposes such as court and visitor parking. Occupancy of these reserved spaces or areas by other than those individuals assigned to use the spaces or areas shall be deemed a violation of this section. The public works department shall be responsible for posting of signs to ensure effective notice to parking facility users as to the regulations governing and limitations on the use thereof. It shall be unlawful to park any private vehicle in any city parking facility for a period of more than 12 hours in any one day or to park a commercial or freight-carrying vehicle or trailer in these lots except by written permission of the city manager. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 20) 
Sec. 30-123. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  When prohibited by this article or any other ordinance or by order of the city, no person shall park a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by official signs. 
(b)  When so indicated as provided in subsection (a) of this section, parking is prohibited on the streets or portions designated by the public works department or, if such designation has not been made, as designated by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 4, § 21) 
Secs. 30-124—30-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC CALMING MEASURES 

Sec. 30-145. - Program established. 
There is established a traffic calming program whereby eligible neighborhoods may petition the city to authorize installation of traffic calming measures within their neighborhood. The public works department shall create and maintain a policy that the city council shall approve by resolution, for establishment of traffic calming districts and the implementation of traffic calming measures. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 5, § 13; Ord. No. 2009-09-41, § 1, 9-28-2009) 
Sec. 30-146. - Council approval. 
Prior to the installation of any traffic calming measures, the city council shall approve by resolution the establishment of each such traffic calming district, pursuant to the policy created by the public works department and approved by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 5, § 13; Ord. No. 2009-09-41, § 1, 9-28-2009) 
Secs. 30-147—30-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 30-176. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle, or combination of such, designed or used to transport passengers or property and satisfies all or one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating of 10,001 or more pounds; 
(2)  Is designed or used to transport more than eight passengers, including the driver, for compensation; 
(3)  Is designed or used to transport more than 15 passengers, including the driver, and is not for compensation; or 
(4)  Is used in transporting hazardous material in a quantity requiring placards in accordance with the motor carrier safety rules prescribed by the United States Department of Transportation, 49 CFR 172.500—172.560. 
Recreational vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle, or combination of such, used for leisure time activities or as a dwelling unit while traveling. Examples include a camper, a motor home and a travel trailer. 
Trailer means any nonautomotive vehicle designed to be towed for the purpose of transporting or carrying objects or persons. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 6, § 1) 
Sec. 30-177. - Parking or abandonment prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to park or abandon a commercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or trailer upon the streets or upon the rights-of-way of the streets and allow said commercial motor vehicle to remain parked or abandoned for more than 72 consecutive hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 30-178. - Removal and storage. 
Should any sworn police officer find any motor vehicle that has been parked or abandoned as aforesaid, he shall have the right to impound the vehicle and to have same removed from the streets at the expense of the owner, and charge the owner storage. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 17, art. 6, § 3) 
Chapter 32 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq.; municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; public water systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.; water supply, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-470; sewage and waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 et seq.; refusal by city or county to supply water because of indebtedness of prior owner, occupant, or lessee prohibited and limited liens for unpaid utility charges, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEKALB COUNTY WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement means a contract for water service between the county and the city. 
Approved means accepted in writing for planning, installation or activation by the director. 
Appurtenance means an item attached to or made part of a water main to divert or control flow, excluding taps and waterlines. 
As-built design means a graphical presentation of the characteristics and scope of work performed which has been prepared by the engineer and approved by the county. 
Authorized person means a regular and designated employee of the city or its legal agent. 
Back pressure means a form of backflow due to a negative pressure within a potable water system. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, gases or other substances into the distributing pipes of the potable water supply from any source or sources. 
Backflow prevention device means any effective device, method or construction approved by the county, used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of device used should be based on the degree of hazard, either existing or potential. 
Backsiphonage means a form of backflow due to a negative pressure within a potable water system. 
Billing period means the time interval between issuance of statements for service. 
Commercial customer means a person receiving service at premises where such person engages in nonmanufacturing business operations, as licensed by the city. 
Commodity charge means a billing to a customer reflecting the volume of water delivered. 
Comprehensive plan means the currently adopted future land use plan for the city. 
Construction cost means the contractor's expense in constructing any additions or modifications to the water system. 
Contractor means a person with whom the county, the city, or a developer contracts for execution of work. 
Cross connection means any actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between the public potable water system or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross connections. 
Customer means a person receiving water service from the county. 
Department means the county department of watershed management or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce this article. 
Developer means a person engaged in building residential subdivisions, commercial or industrial complexes. 
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. This definition shall not apply to individual single-family dwelling unit construction within a subdivision recorded subsequent to July 28, 1970, or to alteration, modification or additions to single-family dwelling units except for, in either case, individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional floodplain. 
Director means the department of watershed management director of the county, or when a department other than the county department of watershed management is designated to enforce provisions of this article, the director of such department. 
Dwelling means a domicile intended for one or more families. 
Dwelling unit means that portion of a dwelling in which only one family resides. 
Engineer means a professional engineer practicing civil-sanitary engineering who is licensed by the state. 
Extension means an addition to the water system consisting of mains six inches or larger in diameter and all appurtenances required or accepted by the county. 
Fire hydrant means a system appurtenance for connection and flow control to temporary fire lines. 
Fire line service means an unmetered or metered permanent connection to the system restricted to fire control use. 
Guarantee deposit means a sum of money specified by the county deposited by a prospective customer as a guarantee that bills for service will be paid. 
Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination, or pollution of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system to such a degree of intensity that there would be a danger to health. 
Hearing means a public meeting called at the discretion of the city or the county with appropriate public notice to evaluate merits of a system extension or modification. 
Industrial customer means a person engaged in manufacture or processing of goods or materials, as licensed by the city. 
Inspection means an action by an authorized person who may enter a customer's premises to inspect the water system and any plumbing connected thereto for their compliance with this article. 
Inspection fee means a charge to a customer, contractor, developer or other person for inspecting extensions or existing or new connections to the water system for their compliance with this article. 
Leak means an unintended hole, crack, or failure of plumbing components, through which potable water, enters or escapes from the water system, service line or plumbing. 
Meter means a manufactured unit which is part of the system, used to measure and totalize volume of water flowing from the system into a customer's piping system. 
Miscellaneous service means any noncontinuous service for which charges are set. 
Off-site mains means system water mains installed outside of private property or tracts planned for development. 
On-site mains means system water mains installed in easements or dedicated rights-of-way within private property or tracts planned for development. 
Oversized mains means water mains sized for capacity in excess of that required to meet the shortterm needs that prompted extension. 
Planned extension means an extension of the water system by the county done as a programmed fulfillment of a step in its long range planning process. 
Plans means engineering drawings and specifications for extension of the system or for connections thereto, prepared by an engineer or by the county. 
Plumber means a person licensed to render plumbing services in the state. 
Plumbing means piping and associated fixtures on a premises that are connected in any way to the water system. 
Plumbing fee means that fee paid for the issuance of a plumbing permit. 
Potable water means water meeting the requirements of the latest United States Public Health Service set of regulations, Drinking Water Standards, for use in control of water quality for interstate carriers. 
Premises means building, house, store, plant or any other place where people live, work or congregate. 
Private water system includes the water source, delivery piping and all appurtenances, excluding building plumbing, that serve more than one dwelling unit or a commercial or industrial premises as a potable water supply. 
Property owner means a person holding legal title to a premises or an authorized representative thereof. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries sanitary sewage and excludes groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters. 
Service means the acts and procedures of supplying water to system customers. 
Service charge means billing for recurring service that is provided, whether service is used or not. 
Service cock means the valve placed on the service connection which is used to turn on and turn off the flow of water from the water main to the premises. 
Service connection means the procedure of making service available to a customer, which includes the service line, water meter, service cock and the tap on initial installation; subsequent service connections will normally only require a water meter. 
Service connection charge means a charge made by the county for the service connection including the tap fee when performed. 
Service line means the waterline from a tap to and including meter and service cock if they are required. 
Standard methods refers to Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition, published by APHA, AWWA, and WPCF. 
Sterilize or sterilization means the procedure of disinfecting water mains, service lines, plumbing and appurtenances by county-approved methods. 
Subdivision means any tract of land, divided, planned or developed as a subdevelopment with two or more residences, buildings or building sites. 
Surge means a sudden pressure change in the water system caused by rapid valve operation. 
Tap means the procedure and result of connecting a service line or water main to an existing or new water main. 
Tap fee means a charge made by the county for making a tap on its water main. 
Unsanitary means unclean, unhealthy or harmful to the public health. 
Valve means a plumbing appurtenance used to control flow in a water main or service line. 
Water main or line means a pipeline in the water system. 
Water system or system means the interrelated network for purification and delivery of drinking water owned by the county, including all water mains, service lines and appurtenances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 32-20. - Cross connection survey team. 
(a)  The cross connection survey team shall work under the direction of the department and shall have authority for implementation of the cross connection requirements of the county. It shall have responsibility to see that backflow prevention devices are installed where required, tested for proper functioning upon completion of installation, and periodically tested for proper functioning after installation. 
(b)  Leaks on a service line and plumbing shall be eliminated by the customer, at the customer's expense. Penalties for noncompliance shall be as stated in section 32-24. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 32-21. - Feasibility of providing service. 
Water service and fire protection shall be provided in the order of application, and only if determined to be feasible and consistent with sound system operation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 32-22. - Water quality standards; inspection; record of treatment operations. 
The system shall supply potable water meeting current drinking water standards established by federal, state and local authorities. The system shall be open to inspection and tests by such authorities upon reasonable notice. Per the agreement, the county will maintain a record of water treatment operations available for public inspection by appointment with the director. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 32-23. - Continuity of service; consistency of quality. 
Per the agreement, the city and the county shall make every reasonable effort to provide continuous service and potable water. The city does not warrant that system malfunctions will not result in service interruptions or pressure changes, nor does it guarantee that water quality will not vary, nor does it guarantee that it will be directly suitable for special commercial or industrial processes. The city does not assume any liability for damages caused by varying pressure, interrupted service or water quality changes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 32-24. - Emergency restriction of service. 
(a)  The city and the county reserve the right to shut off or diminish flow in system mains due to repairs, emergencies or water shortage. Notice shall be given in the event of water shortage or prolonged routine maintenance interruptions of service. Notice is not required for emergency diversions of water or emergency repairs. 
(b)  During periods of dry weather, upon determination by the county that a water shortage or potential water shortage exists to the extent that the county water system may not have sufficient flows for domestic service and fire protection, the city or the county may issue such warning to the public as appropriate to effect conservation measures or the city may by order or ordinance direct that unessential water usages, such as lawn watering and automobile washing, may be restricted to certain hours of the day or not permitted at all until the shortage or potential shortage no longer exists. Persons shall not violate such an order or ordinance. 
(c)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required either by this section or by an order or ordinance of the city, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, including the city municipal court, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with this section and section 1-6. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  For a first violation of the provisions of this section or of an order or ordinance of the city pursuant to this section, the county director of watershed management or designee or the city shall issue a written warning of the violation and if the violation is not corrected immediately, a notice of violation shall be issued. If the first violation presents an imminent threat to public health or safety, the county director of watershed management, his designee or the city code enforcement shall issue an immediate citation in lieu of a written warning. 
(e)  Upon conviction of any violation of this section or of an order or ordinance of the city pursuant to this section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $250.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(f)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of this section or of an order or ordinance of the city pursuant to this section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(g)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of this section or of an order or ordinance of the city pursuant to this section, the court shall terminate water service to the property where the violation occurred for a period of time to be determined in the discretion of the court, impose a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and impose a minimum jail sentence of 24 hours. 
(h)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code, the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances, or state or federal law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 6) 
Sec. 32-25. - Enlargement, improvement of water supply. 
Per the agreement, the county may contract for additional water sources to enlarge and improve the water supply. A public evaluation study prior to contracting shall be made to determine cost effectiveness and to assess the impact of substantial improvements. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 7) 
Sec. 32-26. - System financing. 
Per the agreement, the system shall be self-sustaining from its revenues, grants and other incomes. Expansions and improvements of service shall be effected using funds in system accounts or by sale of system revenue certificates. Per the agreement, the county department of watershed management will prepare annual reports of planned expansion and improvement for review by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 8) 
Sec. 32-27. - General maintenance and protection of service policy. 
Per the agreement, the county will take all reasonable and necessary measures to protect the water system from contamination and to ensure a continuous supply of potable water. Customers and other persons shall observe all procedures promulgated by the county to meet the above objectives with particular reference to the maintenance and protection procedures contained in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 9) 
Sec. 32-28. - Protection of water sources, storage facilities. 
No person shall enter the premises of water storage facilities or reservoirs without authorization from the department. No person shall place any contaminating substances in water sources or water storage facilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 10) 
Sec. 32-29. - Connections, taps, etc., by authorized persons only. 
Waterlines shall not be uncovered or tampered with unless authorized by the county, nor shall any appurtenance of the system be operated except by an authorized person. No service connection shall be made except by an authorized person. No contractor, plumber or other person shall tap any water main without written permission from the department. Service cocks shall be operated only by a contractor or plumber making repairs on plumbing or waterlines or by an authorized person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 11) 
Sec. 32-30. - Proximity of water lines to sanitary sewers. 
No sanitary sewer shall be placed within ten feet horizontally of a waterline nor less than three feet above or below a waterline without special protection approved by the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 12) 
Sec. 32-31. - Fire hydrant use. 
Fire hydrants shall not be operated without authorization from the county, except in case of fire. Use of fire hydrants is classified as temporary service and is subject to all procedures set forth by the county for such use. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 13) 
Sec. 32-32. - Surge protection. 
Customers shall not employ fast-acting valves on any line or connection thereto without surge protection approved by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 14) 
Sec. 32-33. - Electrical grounding. 
No new or revamped wiring systems or electrical appliances that may induce shock shall be grounded to the water system or connected thereto. Grounding rods or other devices will be employed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 15) 
Sec. 32-34. - Covering of appurtenances. 
Pavement or earthwork shall not be placed over any valve or box cover nor shall such appurtenances to the system be rendered inaccessible to the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 16) 
Sec. 32-35. - Location, ownership of facilities. 
Per the agreement, the entire water system up to and including meters is the property of the county, except for other water systems connected by agreement. In no case shall mains or appurtenances be placed outside of public rights-of-way or appropriate easements. Title shall not be conveyed to the county for mains or appurtenances without simultaneous conveyance of necessary easements or rights-of-way. Title to any water system property or components shall not be conveyed to any person unless the county approves such to be obsolete, surplus, and not needed in long range system plans and further provided that the county receives compensation or credit in amount of fair market value. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 17) 
Sec. 32-36. - Inspection of premises; right of entry. 
(a)  Application for water service shall constitute agreement that a customer shall allow the county and its authorized agents inspection of the premises for violation of this article, maintenance of the system, meter reading, testing, surveys, and inspection of waterline construction. Entry to premises for any purpose other than routine and agreed-upon operations shall be preceded by due notice served as provided in this section. 
(b)  Due notice shall consist of a certified letter, return receipt requested, being mailed to the person refusing to allow entry. This notice shall require acknowledgement and agreement of that person to allow entry, giving ten days' time after receipt of due notice for this to be made. When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten days, and no offense is presumed. Thereafter, the county and its authorized agents may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined in this subsection. 
(c)  The county and its authorized agents and employees may enter upon any lands in the city for the purpose of making such surveys, soundings, drillings, and examinations as the county may deem necessary or desirable to accomplish the purposes of planning and engineering water system improvements; and such entry shall not be deemed a trespass nor shall it be deemed an entry which would constitute a taking in a condemnation proceeding, providing that reasonable notice of such entry shall be done in a reasonable manner with as little inconvenience as possible to the owner or occupant of the property, and per the agreement, the county will make reimbursement for any actual damages resulting from such entry or indemnify the city for same to the extent permitted by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 1, § 18) 
Secs. 32-37—32-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE 

Sec. 32-61. - Planned extensions to developed areas. 
The county may, as part of its continuing service to residents, extend water service without petition to developed areas presently obtaining service from other sources. In such cases, a property owner must tie onto the county system if service is available within 300 feet of the premises' property line after due notice from the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 32-62. - Planned extensions to developing areas. 
The county may, as part of its continuing service to residents, extend water service to areas planned for development or in the course of development, provided that cost benefits analysis shows projected revenues or cost participation to be sufficient to warrant extension. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 32-63. - Incorporation of private systems. 
Existing water systems in apartment and condominium developments, office complexes and similar developments including subdivision water mains may be incorporated into the county water system on approval by the county. System water mains and appurtenances must meet the county standards for materials and design. Remedial work costs to meet standards shall be borne by developers, owners or customers using or administering the system prior to conveyance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 32-64. - Requests for installation of water mains on existing city roads. 
(a)  A request for the installation of a water main by city residents who live on existing city roads not serviced by the water system shall be presented to the city council and the board of commissioners of the county through the department on petition forms provided by the department. The petitioner shall agree to pay the service connection charge for each residence prior to installation of the new main for use when the main is complete. This purchase will not be required if the petitioner has previously purchased a meter for the address in the petition. 
(b)  A maximum of 100 linear feet of water main will be installed by the county for each petitioner without charge. If additional footage is required to serve all petitioners, the petitioners shall reimburse the county for any excess footage at the per-linear-foot charge of an eight-inch line based upon the actual estimated cost of construction. This sum shall be on a pro rata basis or in a specified amount for each petitioner listed on the petition with the total of the amounts specified equaling the total reimbursable cost. Pro rata costs shall be equally divided based on the total number of petitioners rather than on the length required to cover the frontage of each petitioner. 
(c)  Prior to submission of the petition, the petitioner shall be provided with cost data by the county for the total length of water main installation required. The petition shall be presented to the county at which time a preliminary design will be prepared by the county for the water main as submitted. If a water main larger than eight inches is required to conform with plans for future water service, cost data shall be prepared for both the eight-inch and larger mains and per the agreement, the county will bear the difference in cost at that time. 
(d)  The department shall, before placing the petition on the agenda, coordinate with the county board of health to ascertain whether any health hazards exist in the petition area that may be alleviated or corrected by the installation of the requested water main. 
(e)  This information shall be presented for consideration by the city council and the county board of commissioners together with the petition and estimate of cost for review and decision. 
(f)  The city council may waive the provisions of this section at its discretion, particularly in those instances where the board of health has determined that a health hazard exists as a consequence of the use of private water supply systems. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 32-65. - Developer requests for extension or replacement of water mains on existing roads. 
Developer requests for the extension or replacement of water mains on existing city roads shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  In the event the county's plans for future water service call for a main to be installed larger than the size of the main required to supply the development, then, per the agreement, the county may pay the difference in cost of the materials to install the size main required by the county. The comparison of material costs will be based upon the county's material cost for the larger pipe. Per the agreement, payment by the county will be made upon completion and satisfactory inspection of the work by the county and upon receipt of a maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the cost of the construction of the water to ten percent of the cost of the construction of the water facility. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the county in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. An eight-inch main will be considered as the minimum sized main required to supply a development of any size. 
(2)  Water main design shall be accomplished by the county water system engineers unless otherwise authorized by the county. 
(3)  When the developer completes his work in accordance with the county specifications, and the work has been duly inspected by the water and sewer division of public works, the developer shall provide as-built drawings in accordance with section 32-66 and any required easements for the water main installation to the county and the city. 
(4)  After the work has been completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the county, the developer shall provide a maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the costs of the construction of such facilities. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the county in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. 
(5)  The developer shall be required to maintain the water lines for a period of 12 months. During this developer maintenance period, the county shall make inspections and instruct the developer by letter as to what corrections must be made, if any. 
(6)  At the end of the 12-month developer maintenance period, the county shall make a final inspection and notify the developer and the bonding company, if any, of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable at this time, the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit shall be released. 
(7)  If required corrections are not made within 30 days of notice, the county shall have the authority to make these corrections at the expense of the bonding company. In cases where funds are being held under letter of credit or letter of escrow, the cost of making these corrections shall be drawn by the county from these funds, and the developer charged with any costs above the amount of such funds. 
(8)  Per the agreement, the county shall have full authority to inspect, test and sterilize all water mains installed under this section. 
(9)  No use shall be made of such systems nor shall the county accept such systems until the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section and until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 5) 
Sec. 32-66. - Installation of water mains in residential subdivisions. 
Water mains installed in residential subdivisions shall be installed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Water mains shall be designed by the county. 
(2)  Installation shall be accomplished by a qualified contractor and shall be in accordance with latest county and city specifications. Upon completion of the water line construction, an engineer, registered in the state must provide a statement that the system, as installed, is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(3)  The county shall have full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such systems until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(4)  If it is necessary to route the proposed water main through private property of the developer for circulation or supply purposes, the developer will provide the county with the required easements. Requests for water mains should be submitted to the county department of watershed management after the preliminary plat has been approved by the city community development department. A sepia drawing of the proposed development and a properly executed request form should be submitted in order that a layout and estimate of the cost may be prepared by the county. All known requirements for water to satisfy the underwriters, as well as the needs of the prospective occupants, should be stated to assist in the preparation of the layout and estimate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 6) 
Sec. 32-67. - Installation of water mains in dedicated streets of residential, commercial, industrial developments. 
(a)  Installation of water mains in dedicated streets of residential, commercial and industrial developments shall be installed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Per the agreement, water mains to serve the development will be designed by the county. 
(2)  Installation shall be accomplished by a qualified contractor approved by the county and shall be in accordance with latest county and city specifications. 
(3)  Per the agreement, the county shall have full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such systems until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(b)  Installation of water mains in commercial/industrial developments in other than dedicated streets shall be in accordance with the policy concerning shopping centers and other similar developments. 
(c)  Requests for water mains should be submitted to the department after the preliminary plat has been approved by the city community development department. A sepia drawing of the proposed development and properly executed request form should be submitted in order that a layout and estimate of the cost may be prepared by the county. All known requirements for water to satisfy the underwriters, as well as the needs of the prospective occupants, should be stated to assist in the preparation of the layout and estimate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 7) 
Sec. 32-68. - Installation of water mains in shopping centers, certain apartment and condominium developments and developments not dedicating streets to city. 
(a)  Shopping centers, apartment and condominium developments of R-A5 or greater density, and similar developments which do not dedicate streets to the city, shall be served by a master meter. In cases where fire protection is required to be installed, an eight-inch or larger fire line main may be served through an eight-inch or larger master meter and potable water service taken from the fire line main within the development. As an alternate to this, an unmetered fire line may be installed with a separate master-metered potable water service line. Exception to the requirement for the master meter may be made when, in the opinion of the county, conditions are such that the installation of individual meters within the development would prove more feasible than serving the development by a master meter. 
(b)  Installation of an eight-inch or larger water main within developments shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Design of all lines six inches and larger shall be approved by the county, and all materials used in construction of the water main shall be in accordance with county and city specifications. 
(2)  All water main materials and labor shall be paid for by the developer, and installation shall be in accordance with county and city specifications and by a qualified contractor. 
(3)  Per the agreement, the county shall have the full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such water mains until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 8) 
Sec. 32-69. - Purchase of materials for water system construction on private property. 
(a)  A water system constructed on private property will not be accepted for maintenance by the county unless all water line and appurtenant materials required for the installation are inspected by the county prior to construction and are found to meet the material specifications published by the county department of watershed management. 
(b)  All water system construction on private property must be inspected by the county during construction before maintenance acceptance will be considered. 
(c)  Any planned water system construction considered as private by the owner during the permitting and development review stage of plans review by the city and the county will remain private unless subsections (a) and (b) of this section are complied with. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 2, § 9) 
Secs. 32-70—32-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INITIATION, CONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE 

Sec. 32-97. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Whenever the director determines that a violation of this division has occurred, the director shall serve upon the violator a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this division which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in the city municipal court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)  If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the director shall issue a summons to the violator to appear in municipal court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this division which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the violator is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may issue a summons to appear in municipal court or terminate connection to the water system without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the director, the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or to the water system. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action to terminate connection to the water system or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(d)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a violation of this division and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-6. Each day of violation is considered a separate offense and is subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-6. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 11) 
Sec. 32-98. - Authority to write summons. 
The director may designate authorized personnel of the department to write summons to appear before a court pertaining to violations of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 12) 
Sec. 32-99. - Application for service for all classifications. 
Persons desiring water service shall file application with the department and sign a standard contract form prior to receiving service. Application shall be made in person by customer or agent. A prospective customer will be assigned to the proper user classification. Separate application is required for each classification of service desired. A completed application in the form prescribed by the county shall be received at least ten days prior to service connection availability. The use of water service binds a person as if such person had signed a contract. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 32-100. - Application for miscellaneous services. 
Written application for miscellaneous services shall be made to the department, which shall prescribe uniform procedures and guidelines for initiation of such services. Miscellaneous services shall be scheduled in the order of approved application except in cases of emergency or requirement for financial participation by the county or the city requiring approval of the county board of commissioners and/or the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 2) 
Sec. 32-101. - New service connections. 
Where a service line does not exist to premises, the county shall tap the water main and install a service line, including meter, meter box and service cock. Service connection shall be made only by an authorized person. No contractor, plumber or other person shall tap any water main without written permission from the county. The customer at this point shall connect the plumbing to the water system. Only one service line shall be provided per application. Service cocks shall be operated only by an authorized contractor or plumber making repairs on plumbing or waterlines or by an authorized person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 3) 
Sec. 32-102. - Existing connections. 
Where a service line exists, the county shall determine whether this service line is to be used or requires replacement. Where service line replacement is required, the applicant shall be charged as though it were a new service connection. Service connection shall be made as provided for a new service connection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 4) 
Sec. 32-103. - Metering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment means one or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained residential unit in a building. 
Condominium is defined in the same manner as it is defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
Master meter means a utility-owned meter that measures and totalizes the volume of water flowing from the water distribution system into a multifamily dwelling unit as that term is defined in the city zoning ordinance, building piping system. 
Newly constructed apartment means any structure for which a building permit for construction of an apartment is issued after June 1, 2008. 
Newly constructed single-family dwelling or condominium means any structure for which a building permit for construction of a single-family dwelling or condominium is issued after June 1, 2008. 
Separate water meter means a utility-owned meter that measures and totalizes the volume of water flowing from the water distribution system into a single family dwelling or a condominium's piping system. 
Single-family dwelling is defined in the same manner as it is defined in the city zoning ordinance, but also includes dwelling units on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit by a common party wall, commonly referred to as a townhouse or townhome. 
Sub-unit water meter means water meters owned and managed by the property owner with a utility-owned master meter that bills for water service based on volume of use. Sub-unit water meters shall allow for the water use in each apartment to be tracked separately. 
(b)  Meters. All users except those classified as fire line users shall be metered. All meters shall be sized on the basis of expected volume of water usage. All meters, except sub meters, are part of the service line provided by the county and are the property of the county. 
(c)  Sub-unit water meters for newly constructed apartments. No water shall be furnished to any newly constructed apartment except through sub-unit water meters so that the water use in each apartment can be accurately tracked. Sub-unit water meters allow tenants to know how much water they use and may encourage wiser use of water. Water service, however, shall be billed by the county on a master meter basis, and the property owner and/or landlord is responsible for paying the county for all charges contained in such bills. The enactment of this section in no way prevents property owners and/or landlords from using sub-unit water meters to bill each tenant for actual water usage which will encourage wiser use of water by tenants in apartments. 
(d)  Separate water meters for single-family dwellings and condominiums. No water shall be furnished to any newly constructed single-family dwelling or condominium except through separate water meters. Water service shall be billed by the county to the property owner based on individual unit water meters, and each property owner is responsible for paying the county for all charges contained in such bills. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 5) 
Sec. 32-104. - Inspection of service connections. 
All plumbing or yard piping connections to a service line shall be subject to inspection by an authorized person prior to service connection. Refusal to allow inspection shall result in refusal of service until inspection is permitted. Inspection may include requirement that plumbing and piping plans be submitted where, in the director's opinion, possibility of system contamination or cross connection may result from service connection. In no case shall service connection be made until all inspection requirements are met. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 6) 
Sec. 32-105. - Refusal of service. 
Water service may be refused only for the following justifications; reapplication may be made where reasons are rectified: 
(1)  Refusal to allow entry. Where admittance to property for necessary work or inspection is not allowed, the county may refuse service. 
(2)  Damage to system by connection. Where, in the opinion of the county, connection will seriously reduce system pressure and fire protection, the county may refuse service. 
(3)  Remoteness from system. Where connection requires investment in transmission mains that would not be justified by likely revenues, the county may refuse service or require substantial cost sharing by the customer. 
(4)  Technical infeasibility. Where connection would require special pumps or other devices to effect service, the county may refuse service or require substantial cost sharing by the customer. 
(5)  Health hazard. Where connection could cause contamination of the system, the county may refuse service. 
(6)  Unpaid water bills. New connections or reconnections shall not be made until all previous financial obligations to the system have been met or resolved. This subsection only applies to owner-occupied property. 
(7)  Fraudulent misrepresentation in application. If water service has been approved for a location, and thereafter it is determined that the application for the water service contained false or misleading information or omitted material facts, or that the water is being used in or upon the premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for the water service, then the water shall be shut off by the county, and shall remain shutoff by the county until the application for water service has been corrected to the satisfaction of the county or until all unauthorized use of water has ceased, and any past due sums payable for the water service account have been fully paid to the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 7) 
Sec. 32-106. - Customer-requested termination. 
A customer shall give at least ten days' notice of the desire to terminate service to the county finance director, who will advise the customer of the approximate date. However, the county is not bound to terminate on a certain date. Service turnoff shall be done only by an authorized person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 8) 
Sec. 32-107. - Termination due to violation of operation and maintenance procedures. 
(a)  If the county determines that procedures established by the county for operating and maintaining the system are being violated by a user or other person, the county will give due notice as provided herein. If such violation continues, service to the responsible person shall be terminated and penal actions as provided herein may be taken. 
(b)  Assessments of all penalties shall be preceded by due notice, except in case of an emergency requiring termination of service. Due notice shall be given by a certified letter, return receipt requested, mailed to the person presumed to be violating a section of this division. This notice shall set forth remedial action required of that person, giving ten days' time after receipt of due notice for remedial action to be completed. If the county determines after this period that the violation continues unremedied, the director may recommend to the proper authorities that the presumed violator be cited for each day that the violation continues unresolved, not including the ten-day period. 
(c)  When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter, the county and its authorized agents may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 9) 
Sec. 32-108. - Termination due to improper usage. 
(a)  The making of improper connections to the system endangering system integrity or possibly leading to system contamination shall be cause for immediate termination of service. Restoration of service after rectification of improper connection shall be treated as a reconnection. Improper usage not determined by the county to be of emergency potential shall result in termination after due notice is given. 
(b)  Assessments of all penalties shall be preceded by due notice, except in case of emergency requiring termination of service. Due notice shall be given by a certified letter, return receipt requested, mailed to the person presumed to be violating a section of this division. This notice shall set forth remedial action required of that person, giving ten days' time after receipt of due notice for remedial action to be completed. If the county determines after this period that the violation continues unremedied, the county may recommend to the proper authorities that the presumed violator be cited for each day that the violation continues unresolved, not including the ten-day period. 
(c)  When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter, the county and its authorized agents may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Any person or user of the system who has been found to be in violation of mandatory water restrictions or mandatory water conservation policies as imposed by the director shall first be issued a notice of violation. If the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in the city municipal court. If the person or user of the system continues to be in violation of mandatory water restrictions or mandatory water conservation policies thereafter, the continuing violation shall be cause for immediate termination of service. Restoration of service after rectification shall be treated as a reconnection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 3, § 10) 
Secs. 32-109—32-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 32-130. - County agreement; revenue collection. 
(a)  Per the agreement, all water system rates and charges will be as established by the county, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the county board of commissioners, upon recommendation by the director. 
(b)  Procedures for revenue collection will be established by the county finance director. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 32-131. - Classification of users. 
The following list of system users establishes classifications of service as a basis of charges: 
(1)  Single. All dwelling, commercial and industrial customers are in this classification who use all of the water supplied through a connection for any use besides fire protection. 
(2)  Fire line. A customer shall only use the connection applied for under this classification for fire protection. 
(3)  Combined potable and fire line. Any shopping center and/or other development served by a combination potable and fire line located outside the public right-of-way shall be classified as a combined potable and fire line user, where either of the following exists: 
a.  A fire line main is served through a master meter with potable water service taken from that fire line main within the development. 
b.  Potable water is taken from the fire line through multiple meters. 
(4)  Multiple. No multiple dwelling, commercial or industrial customers shall be on one meter, except in case of apartments, shopping centers and office parks, where, in the judgment of the director, multiple meters are impractical. Approved multiple category customers shall have one meter per premises and shall be charged as single category users. 
(5)  Temporary. Temporary use permits shall be granted for periods not exceeding 30 days. After permit expiration the county may, at its option, renew the permit or assign the customer to a permanent classification. This service shall not be used for permanent installation. 
(6)  Flat rate. Any existing flat rate customers shall be changed to single or fire line as appropriate. There shall be no unmetered or flat rate customers except as provided under temporary and fire line classifications. 
(7)  Illegal. Any user who has not made application for service and received a service connection or whose service has been terminated or who uses a connection for purposes other than as provided in the user's assigned classification is an illegal user. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 32-132. - Recurring charges. 
The following charges are set by the county and shall be billed on a recurring basis as continuing charges: 
(1)  Service. All classifications of users except fire line shall be billed a base charge for service availability, whether service is used or not. This charge shall be fixed on the basis of meter size. For combined potable and fire line users who provide a specific means of determining the requirements of the development, such as by the installation of private meters by the owner, the service charge shall be based on the number and size of private meters installed. 
(2)  Commodity. All classifications of users except fire line shall be billed a commodity charge in addition to a service charge on the basis of actual volume of water delivered at the single unit volume rate set by the county. 
(3)  Fire line. Fire line customers shall be billed for service availability on the basis of the diameter of connection to system mains and the number of fire hydrants on the premises. If a building complex has establishments each with different owners, then the fire line charges will be prorated by the director based on square footage protected. For combined potable and fire line users: 
a.  Where fire hydrants are installed on private lines served through a master meter and/or where such lines serve building sprinkler systems, the owner will be billed for fire service availability on the basis of the diameter of connection required to the system mains for fire protection only and on the number of hydrants. There will be no charge, however, for any hydrant which is determined by the county to be adjacent to and available to a public roadway. In addition, potable water readiness-to-serve charge will be based on the size line required for estimated average flow based on commodity billing as determined by the county. 
b.  Where an owner elects to dedicate lines and rights-of-way outside the public road right-of-way in order to utilize multiple meters and where such lines have hydrants installed or serve building sprinkler systems, the owner will be billed for fire service availability on the basis of the diameter of connection required to the system mains for fire protection only and on the number of fire hydrants. There will be no charge, however, for any hydrant which is determined by the county to be adjacent to and available to a public roadway. If a building complex has establishments each with different owners, then the fire line charges will be prorated by the county based on square footage protected. 
(4)  Contract. Contract service is only by agreement. Billing shall be on the basis of a service charge plus metered volume of water delivered at the unit volume rate set by the county. Billing shall be at equal periods set by the county and not less than semiannually. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 32-133. - Miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  Certain noncontinuous services provided by the county water system have set charges as designated by the county. Charges shall be reviewed from time to time to ensure that they cover the cost of services. 
(b)  A charge shall be set by the county for installing a service line and meter based on the size of the meter. This charge shall apply to all classifications except fire line users. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 4, § 4) 
Sec. 32-134. - Special assessments. 
The following charges must be ascertained by the director on a case-by-case basis reflecting exigencies involved: 
(1)  Damage. The county shall determine charges to be assessed against any person causing damage to any part of the water system. 
(2)  Unauthorized activity. Such actions include any connection to or tampering with the system without prior approval of the county. Charges assessed shall reflect the county's assessment of costs involved in inspecting such work or in taking remedial action. Additionally, persons involved shall be assessed such charges as would apply were the work preauthorized and shall be subject to other penalties. 
(3)  Replacement of improvements. Persons engaged in work affecting or connecting to the system shall bear the total cost of replacement of any improvements or for making such improvements whole again. These include, but are not limited to, grassing, embankments, pavement and base curbing to city standards. After due notice, the city may elect to proceed with restorative work and charge the damaging person on a materials and force account basis. 
(4)  Service termination. A single charge shall be set for termination of service whether initiated by the customer or by the county. Customers relocating within the system service area must terminate old service and make new application. 
(5)  Reconnection fee. A charge shall be set for resumption of service to a customer where termination was due to failure to pay bills. New or relocated customers using an existing service line are charged under this subsection. All previous bills shall be paid before a service reconnection will be made. This subsection only applies to owner-occupied property. 
(6)  Meter testing. The county may periodically test all meters on its system. A customer may request a test to be made without charge. 
(7)  Tap fee. A fee shall be set by the county for providing a connection for a service line or water main to an existing or new water main. Fees shall be based on diameter of service line or water main to be connected to the tap. 
(8)  Inspection and sterilization. The county shall establish a list of charges for inspection and line sterilization which shall apply to various categories of construction, duly reflecting force and material requirements. 
(9)  Temporary use. Temporary use charges shall be set by the county on a case-by-case basis; such fees shall be no less than the sum of appropriate recurring charges and miscellaneous charges. Such temporary uses, whether connected to mains or fire hydrants, shall be metered. Fire hydrant connections shall also be approved by the county department of fire and rescue services or, if the city has its own fire department, the city fire department. 
(10)  Other services. For any services not falling within these definitions, the county or the city may fix a charge on the basis of cost of labor and materials required. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 4, § 5) 
Sec. 32-135. - Revenue collections. 
(a)  Payment. A meter reading of all water meters and fire line checks shall be made by the county on a regular basis. All bills are issued by and shall be paid to the county finance department. Payment is due within ten days of issuance and may be made by mail or in person at the address noted on the statement. Failure to receive the bill shall not relieve the customer of payment responsibility. 
(b)  Delinquent payment. Notice of delinquent payment shall require payment within ten days of the date due. Service will be terminated after that period without notice. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve a customer of payment responsibility. 
(c)  Excess payments and refunds. Excess payments for all customers shall be credited to the next billing unless service is terminated or written refund request is made. 
(d)  Liability of owner. When service is terminated to a rented premises, service may be restored to the premises upon request of a party, renter or owner, who is not personally liable for or who did not personally apply for water service previously and who was previously not delinquent in payment of the water bill at these premises. 
(e)  Estimated bills. The county may estimate bills in the case of a broken, inaccurate or inaccessible meter on the basis of previous billings, adding retroactive charges where appropriate. 
(f)  Contested charges. A customer may make written notice of an error in charges. In such cases the customer shall make payment equal to that portion of charges uncontested or equal to previous billing, whichever is larger, by payment due date. The county finance director will review contested charges and adjust the next billing as appropriate. The customer may make written request for a hearing with the director or the director's representative if the review is unsatisfactory. Payment must be made for reviewed contested charges when due. Credit shall be made if findings are reversed by the director, whose decision is final. 
(g)  Discounts. No discounts shall be made for payments due or for large volume use. Discounts in the form of credits or refunds may be made for change in meter sizes or charged materials returned to the county in satisfactory condition. 
(h)  Application fee. Any applicant for water or sewer service shall complete an application for service, shall provide the county with identification for billing purposes, and shall pay an application fee to the county. Application fees shall be set by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. I, div. 4, § 6) 
Secs. 32-136—32-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 32-154. - Private water systems and vendors governed by chapter, licensed by county. 
Private water systems and vendors shall be governed by all criteria in this chapter relating to water purity, protection of supply and system sanitation, and shall be licensed by the county or its designee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 32-155. - Approval of plans. 
All plans for private water systems shall be prepared by the county engineer and approved by the county prior to construction. Materials of construction shall meet minimum standards set by the county for the public water system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 32-156. - Connection to public water system. 
No connection shall be made between the county water system and a private water system except by approval of the county. Such approved connections shall be metered and equipped with backflow prevention devices approved by the county and subject to all conditions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. II, § 3) 
Sec. 32-157. - No county or city warranty. 
By its regulation of private water systems and suppliers, neither the county nor the city assumes any liability for the purity of such water or for damages caused by operators of private facilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. II, § 4) 
Secs. 32-158—32-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-183. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approval authority means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, municipal permitting program. 
Authorized person means a regular employee of the county or the city authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. Authorized representatives of the user are: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars, as adjusted for inflation), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local government facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility or his designee. 
The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the department. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 200 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge of wastes from the drainage pipes within the walls of a building and conveys this discharge to the building sewer beginning ten feet outside the inner face of the building. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sanitary sewer system or other place of disposal. 
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits, promulgated by the federal EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c)) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR 405—471. 
Categorical user means any significant industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the amount of oxygen equivalent that the organic matter in a sample utilizes in the presence of a strong chemical oxidant (expressed in milligrams per liter). 
Combined sewer means a sewer intentionally receiving groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters together with sewage. 
Constituents means the combination of particles or pollutants which exist in wastes. 
Control manhole means a manhole on or near a user's property used for sampling purposes through which the user's discharge to the sanitary sewer passes. 
Department means the county department of watershed management or, where applicable, of the city. 
Designated area means any tract of land, parcel of land, subdivision or section of the city which, by virtue of its topography or existing sanitary sewer facilities, can be treated as a unit. The director shall be the sole judge as to the boundaries, limits, and extent of these areas, whether or not these areas abut present public roads. 
Director means the director of watershed management or any of that person's authorized representatives. 
Environmental Protection Agency or Federal EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the federal EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, presently codified at 33 USC 1250 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Flammable means any material which is easily ignited and burns with unusual rapidity as defined by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
Georgia EPD or EPD means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c), (d)). 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes and solid and gaseous materials contained therein, of whatever nature, arising out of any manufacturing, processing, fabricating, treating, renovating or any other commercial operation. 
Inspection fee means the amount of money charged to the contractor or plumber for each inspection. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate of the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore is a cause of violation of the county's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or thereunder, stringent regulations: permits issued or any more state or local section 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Lot of land means the smallest unit, owned by the same party or parties, into which any tract or parcel of land has been divided either by deed, plat or any other means of subdivision. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)a or (1)b of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program by: 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Objectionable means unacceptable, unsatisfactory or displeasing to the physical senses. 
Outlet means point of discharge into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, stream or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Plumbing fee means that fee paid to the county for the issuance of a plumbing permit. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
Premises means building, house, store, plant or any other place where people live, work or congregate. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment on a user other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
Priority pollutant means any contaminant in water which is identified as being toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic or is chemically similar to compounds identified as such, by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. The list includes 129 compounds and such other compounds as may be added from time to time, less any compound which may be deleted by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means the absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods, which have been cut in such a way that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particle larger than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sanitary sewer directly controlled by the county and approved by the county for use as a sanitary sewer. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the county. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries sewage and by design excludes groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with the following: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with unperforated pipe, with sealed joints, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub-out. 
(2)  A subsurface drainage field system consisting of piping and other materials producing drainage of the clarified discharge from the tank while distributing it underground to be filtered or absorbed. 
Sewage means the water-carried wastes, including human excrement and grey water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.) from residences, business buildings and institutions. 
Sewer means an artificial, usually subterranean, conduit to carry off sewage. 
Sewer system or sewerage means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, transporting and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer tap fee or tap fee means the service charge for making a connection to the sewer system. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 100,000 gallons per work month or 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the county or the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the county may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this chapter; or, any discharge in which the concentration of any given constituent exceeds, for any period longer than 15 minutes, five times the average 24-hour concentration of that constituent during normal operations. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, excluding sewage and industrial wastes. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Subdivision means any tract of land divided, planned or developed as a subdevelopment with two or more residences, buildings or building sites. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Unsanitary means unclean, unhealthy or harmful to the public health. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater discharge permit means a permit in the form prescribed by the county, which establishes the wastewater characteristics which a significant industrial user may contribute or cause to be contributed to the sewer system. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 32-184. - Reserved. 
Sec. 32-185. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Whenever the director of the city public works department or, if designated by an intergovernmental agreement with the county, the director of the the county department of watershed management or their designee determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the director shall serve upon the violator a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in the city municipal court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may issue a summons to appear in municipal court without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the director, the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or to the sewer system. 
(c)  If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the director shall issue a summons to the violator to appear in municipal court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the violator is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(e)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction in municipal court, shall be subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-6. Each day of violation is considered a separate offense and is subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-6. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 32-186. - Authority to write summons. 
The director may designate authorized personnel of the department to write summons to appear before a court to answer questions pertaining to violations of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 32-187. - Right to entry—Inspection and sampling of industrial or commercial properties. 
The director and other employees designated by the director, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director or his designees ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where the user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director or his designees will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director or his designees shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operation. 
(3)  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated quarterly to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director or his designees and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director or his designees access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)  If the director or his designees have been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and are able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as a part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of an inspection warrant from the city municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 32-188. - Same—Inspection of private properties. 
(a)  The director and the director's designated agents, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter during reasonable working hours, except in the event of an emergency, all private properties through which the county or the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, measurement, maintenance, observation, repair and sampling any portion of the sewage system lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the specific easement pertaining to the property involved. Specific permission is granted the director and the director's designated agents, upon proper notification, to enter all private properties for the purpose of surveying or inspecting the premises, or sampling or monitoring of wastewater. While working on private properties referred to in this section, all the county or city employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. The owner of the private properties shall not be held liable for injury to the county or city employees while on the owner's properties. 
(b)  The county or the city, and its authorized agents and employees, may enter upon any lands in the city for the purpose of making such surveys, soundings, drillings, and examinations as the county or the city may deem necessary or desirable to accomplish the purposes of planning and engineering sewer system improvements; and such entry shall not be deemed a trespass nor shall it be deemed an entry which would constitute a taking in a condemnation proceeding, providing that reasonable notice of such entry shall be done in a reasonable manner with as little inconvenience as possible to the owner or occupant of the property, and the county or the city, depending on which governmental units effected such entry, shall make reimbursement for any actual damages resulting from such entry. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 6) 
Sec. 32-189. - Inspection warrants. 
The director, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this article; compliance with the terms of any permit; observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to any federal or state regulation; and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by a court of competent jurisdiction when the issuing judge is satisfied that the director has established by oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. 
(2)  An inspection warrant will be validly issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
a.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate so that the executor of the warrant and the owner or occupant of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the Code provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 7) 
Sec. 32-190. - Discontinuance of water services for nonpayment of sewer bill. 
(a)  This section only applies to owner-occupied property. The policy of discontinuing the furnishing of water at any meter service where there is a delinquent sewer bill after the occupant of the premises has been notified of the delinquency and has failed to remove the delinquency by payment of the bill is continued in full force and effect. 
(b)  Where there remains a delinquent sewer bill at any meter service after the occupant of the premises thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due bill in a current water bill or a separate bill and given an opportunity to pay the bill and refuses to promptly pay it, water service to this meter service shall be discontinued regardless of whether the bill remaining delinquent was incurred by a prior owner or occupant of the premises, and water shall not again be supplied to this building, place or premises through the county water system until the arrears are fully paid. 
(c)  Upon the failure or refusal of the owner or occupant to pay the delinquent sewer bill, the department shall remove the meter serving the premises, and service shall not be restored to the premises until a fee for installation of a new meter has been paid in advance. Such fee shall be a fee in the amount established by action of the county, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the county board of commissioners. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 8) 
Sec. 32-191. - Mandatory connections to public sanitary sewer. 
(a)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation and other such purposes, located within the geographic boundaries of the city and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer, is required to install, at the owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities, and to connect such facilities directly to the public sanitary sewer. In accordance with the provisions of this article, the owner has 24 months after the date of official notice to accomplish this, provided that the public sanitary sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(b)  Exceptions to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section may be granted by the city upon application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 9) 
Sec. 32-192. - Private sewage disposal facilities, generally. 
Except as specifically permitted by this article or by the county board of health, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other similar facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 10) 
Sec. 32-193. - Discharge of untreated sewage or polluted waters. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any outlet or to any portion of the public storm drain system, or to any natural stream within the geographic boundaries of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city or the county to treat the outflow from the public storm drain system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 11) 
Sec. 32-194. - Deposit of objectionable waste on public or private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit the deposit of, in any unsanitary manner, human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable wastes on any public or private property within the geographic boundaries of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 12) 
Sec. 32-195. - Nonavailability of public sanitary sewer. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to another means of sewage disposal. The private sewage disposal system must comply with all applicable regulations of the department, the county board of health, and the state department of human resources. Unless specific exceptions are made, a private sewage disposal facility in the city shall consist of an approved septic tank. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 13) 
Sec. 32-196. - General prohibition. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to maliciously or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any part of the sewer system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 1, § 14) 
Secs. 32-197—32-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 32-216. - Compliance with agreements. 
The operation of the sanitary sewer system shall remain in compliance with all sanitary sewer usage agreements between the county and the city, as well as between the county and other counties, municipalities and agencies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 32-217. - Sanitary sewer main extensions. 
(a)  The county sanitary sewer main extension policy shall apply to the extension or replacement of existing sanitary sewer mains on existing city roads or other dedicated rights-of-way to serve new developments. The city hereby adopts the county sanitary sewer main extension policy by reference as it currently exists and as it may be amended in the future. A developer may request the application of this policy if a project site is not adjacent to an existing main or the existing main is inadequate to serve the proposed development. 
(b)  The developer may apply for preapproval of the sewer main extension application with the understanding that such reimbursement shall be made only after the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section. Conversely, the developer may apply for reimbursement after complying with all the requirements of this section and such reimbursement shall be made on approved applications if funds are available for that purpose. Approval of all application requests shall be within the sole discretion of the county or, if designated by agreement, the city. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer mains approved and installed under this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All materials shall meet the specifications of the county department of watershed management. 
(2)  A sanitary sewer main design shall be prepared by and furnished to the county or, if designated by agreement, the city by a registered professional engineer licensed by the state. 
(3)  The developer shall contract for the installation of the sewer lines and shall furnish the county and the city a copy of the contract. When the work has been completed according to the specifications and duly inspected by the county or its designee, the developer shall provide as-built drawings and any required easements of the sewer main installation to the county and the city. As-built drawings shall be completed under the direction of an engineer/land surveyor licensed in the state and sealed. 
(4)  After the work has been completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the county and, if designated, the city, the developer shall provide a maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the costs of the construction of such facilities. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the county and the city in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. 
(5)  After receiving the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit, the county shall reimburse the developer a sum equivalent to 50 percent of the cost of the sewer main materials required to supply the proposed development. An eight-inch main will be considered as the minimum size main required to supply a development of any size. In the event the county's plans for future sewer service call for a sewer main to be installed larger than the size of the main required to supply the development, then the county may: 
a.  If the size of sewer main planned by the county is 15 inches or smaller, pay the difference in cost of the materials to install the size main required by the county plans. 
b.  If the size of sewer main planned by the county is greater than 15 inches, pay the difference in both the cost of labor and materials to install the size main required by the county plans. 
(6)  The developer shall be required to maintain the sanitary sewer lines for a period of 12 months. During this developer maintenance period, the county, or its designee shall make inspections and instruct the developer by letter as to what corrections must be made, if any. 
(7)  At the end of the 12-month developer maintenance period, the county and the city shall make a final inspection and notify the developer and the bonding company, if any, of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable at this time, the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit shall be released pursuant to the county policy. 
(8)  If required corrections are not made within 30 days of notice, the county shall have the authority to make these corrections at the expense of the bonding company. In cases where funds are being held under letter of credit or letter of escrow, the cost of making these corrections shall be drawn by the county from these funds, and the developer charged with any costs above the amount of such funds. 
(9)  The county shall have the full authority to inspect and test all sanitary sewer mains installed under this section. 
(10)  No use shall be made of such systems nor shall the county, or the city, accept such systems until the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section and until satisfactory tests and inspections have been completed. 
(11)  In calculating the county participation for material costs, the maximum material costs considered will be the county's contract price for like material. 
(d)  Private sanitary sewer extensions will not be accepted for maintenance by the county unless materials used for installation are inspected and approved by the county prior to construction and are found to meet the county specifications and unless the installation was inspected by the county during construction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 32-218. - Submission of petition. 
(a)  Whenever the owners, as listed on the latest ad valorem tax digest, of 51 percent or more of the property within any designated area, petition the county for sewer facilities, and this action requires the laying of a lateral sewer, the petition shall be filed with the department. The petition shall be examined to see if the signatures are valid and if it sufficiently describes the services required. Then, the county shall initiate, per its adopted policies, a preliminary engineering survey to make sure that the proper designated area is described. Cost for construction and engineering services are also estimated at this time. The petition would then be advertised, and a public hearing would be held before the county board of commissioners. If the county approves the petition, construction will be programmed. 
(b)  All assessments against property and the owners thereof for the construction of sewers shall be liens upon the property by the county or, if designated by agreement, the city from the date of adoption of the resolution authorizing the construction of the sewer lines. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 32-219. - Public hearing; public notices. 
(a)  When a petition for the construction of a sanitary sewer line has been filed on behalf of a person or when a recommendation for construction has been made by the head of any board or department of the county or the city, then a public hearing will be held before the county board of commissioners. The department shall notify the county board of commissioners of the impending petition. The department shall then give notice to all persons concerned by publication of a notice pursuant to the county policy for placing notices of public hearings for a period of at least 20 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the date and location of the proposed public hearing and shall give a general description of the proposed sanitary sewer construction. 
(b)  All owners of property abutting the proposed sanitary sewer line who shall be assessed for the cost of construction shall be notified in writing by the county at least 20 days prior to the hearing. All notices pursuant to this section shall be addressed to the owners listed on the latest ad valorem tax digest of the county at the addresses indicated. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 32-220. - Notification of abutting property owners of public hearing. 
In addition to the published notice of a public hearing on a petition for sanitary sewer construction, all owners of property abutting the proposed sanitary sewer line who shall be assessed for the cost of construction shall be notified in writing by the department at least 20 days prior to the hearing. All notices pursuant to this section shall be addressed to the owners listed on the latest county ad valorem tax digest at the addresses indicated. The records of the county showing evidence of the mailing of the notices shall be prima facie evidence, and failure of the owner of any property concerned to receive a notice shall in no way affect the validity of the proceedings or the assessment. The purpose of this written notice is to furnish the owner with an additional statement of the public hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 5) 
Sec. 32-221. - Conduct of hearing. 
At the hearing provided for in this division, any person whose property or interests are affected by the proposed sanitary sewer may appear before the county board of commissioners, in accordance with the county rules for same. The decision of the county with respect to the approval or rejection of the proposed sanitary sewer shall be final and conclusive. Any decision by the county in favor of the construction will indicate a public need for the sanitary sewer, and this shall make all matters pertaining to the construction of the sanitary sewer and the assessment of costs against the abutting property owners legal and binding. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 6) 
Sec. 32-222. - Procedures after plans and specifications received. 
When the county has received plans, specifications and necessary engineering data, the county will determine the names of all property owners affected, and the city will procure the necessary right-of-way and/or easement for construction of the sanitary sewer line as specified. Before final approval of any plans, the county will also ensure that sufficient stub-out connections are designated to adequately serve the territory affected. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 7) 
Sec. 32-223. - Performance of construction. 
All sanitary sewers will be constructed by the county or by such contractors as the county may designate from time to time. All sanitary sewer construction performed by a private contractor shall be guaranteed against defects in contractor-supplied material and workmanship for a minimum period of one year from the final inspection date. Construction will be under the supervision of the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 8) 
Sec. 32-224. - Assessments generally. 
(a)  After the construction of a sanitary sewer line has been completed, the department shall make up an assessment roll properly describing the sanitary sewer line and containing the names of all owners of abutting property. Each owner's property abutting the sanitary sewer shall be correctly described as it pertains to the construction. The cost of the sanitary sewer shall then be shared among the various property owners on a prorated basis depending on the number of linear feet each has abutting the sanitary sewer line. The actual assessment shall be calculated using a value in dollars and cents per linear foot based on the average cost for construction of all petitioned sanitary sewer lines in the county the previous year. Assessment rates will be approved by the county on an annual basis. 
(b)  The minimum assessment shall be for 65 feet, whether or not a sanitary sewer line has to extend that distance to service a property or not. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 9) 
Sec. 32-225. - Assessment computations; double-frontage lots, owners previously assessed, residences not totally served by gravity sewer. 
(a)  Whenever a tract of land abuts a sanitary sewer line on both the front and the rear, and the tract of land cannot be subdivided into two or more separate lots fronting each of the abutting sewers, then the property shall be assessed only for the side with the greater frontage. 
(b)  Several considerations shall be made before determining whether or not a tract of land can be subdivided. If the topography of the land makes it impractical to construct a building on one of the lots, or to provide sanitary sewer service to one of the lots, then the tract of land is not suitable for subdivision. 
(c)  Property owners who have contributed to the cost of existing sanitary sewers, whether by private contract, the original subdivisions or previous the county assessment, shall be exempted from current assessment. However, if property owners or previous owners did not contribute to the construction cost of existing sanitary sewers, they shall be assessed in the same manner as any other abutting property owner. 
(d)  When all floor levels of a residential unit are not served by the sewer by gravity, then the property will be assessed a percentage of the total assessment equal to a percentage of the total number of fixtures in a house or building that are actually served by the sewer main by gravity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 10) 
Sec. 32-226. - Assessment of corner property. 
Corner property shall be assessed under this division in the following manner: 
(1)  Where the sanitary sewer abuts the property only on the front, the property shall be assessed for the amount of frontage. 
(2)  Where the sanitary sewer abuts the property on both the front and side, the property shall be assessed for the frontage; the first 150 feet of the side abutting shall be exempted from assessment; the next 100 feet of the side abutting shall be subject to assessment; and the remainder of the side abutting beyond 250 feet shall be treated as outfall sewer and not assessed. 
(3)  Where the sanitary sewer abuts the property on the side only, the property shall be assessed for the frontage; the first 150 feet abutting on the sides shall be exempted; the next 100 feet of the sides abutting shall be subject to assessment; and the remainder of the side abutting beyond 250 feet shall be treated as outfall sewer and not assessed. 
(4)  Where the sanitary sewer abuts property that is pie-shaped or has an unusual frontage and that frontage is greater than the largest normal-shaped and assessed property, the property will be assessed for the same number of front feet as the largest, normal-shaped assessable property in the petitioned area. The county shall have the responsibility for determining what properties are to be considered pie-shaped or unusual. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 11) 
Sec. 32-227. - Outfall sewers. 
(a)  In this section, the term "outfall sewer" means a section of sanitary sewer line, either in a public street or across private property, which normally does not provide direct service to the abutting property. Usually, the outfall sewer is a section of a trunk sewer providing service to several street sanitary sewers serving properties, and its cost is not included in the assessment rate. However, when an outfall does provide direct service to the abutting property, the cost of constructing the outfall shall be assessed against the abutting property owners. 
(b)  Property owners desiring connection to outfall sewers may do so with concurrence of the director and shall pay an assessment based on the current year linear foot rate prior to their obtaining a sewer connection permit. 
(c)  Exceptions to the provisions of this section may be granted by the department upon application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 12) 
Sec. 32-228. - Payment of assessments. 
Whenever a sanitary sewer line has been constructed in accordance with this division and the cost thereof has been assessed against the benefiting property, then the respective owners shall be notified of the assessment, and they shall be required to pay in cash, within 60 days, to the county finance department, pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement with the city, the amount of the assessment. If the amount of the assessment causes a financial burden on the owner, then the owner may extend the assessment and pay it in annual installments. However, no less than one-fifth of the total assessment shall be paid within 60 days after notification. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 13) 
Sec. 32-229. - Extension of payments. 
If the property owner requires an extension in the payment of an assessment under this division, then the owner must execute in writing an extension agreement with the county stating that the owner shall pay a 20-percent down payment and, in a maximum of four equal annual installments, the amount of the assessment, less the cash down payment put forth on the due date. The extension agreement must be executed on or before the due date of the assessment. In the agreement, the owner must acknowledge the fact that throughout, the extension remains legal and valid, and all liens remain in force. The unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at a rate specified by the DeKalb County Code. Interest charges shall be assessed from the due date and shall be included in the installments. The agreement shall be negotiable in form, and the county will reserve the right to transfer or assign it to third parties. If ever the owner defaults in the payment of any installment, then the entire assessment shall immediately become due and payable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 14) 
Sec. 32-230. - Executions for failure to pay. 
Should the owner of any property against which a sanitary sewer assessment has been levied fail to execute a payment extension agreement as provided in this article, or fail to pay the assessment in cash within 60 days, or fail to pay the remainder of the assessment after default on extension, then an execution shall be issued in rem against the property and in personam against the owner in the name of the county board of commissioners. The execution shall be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the county superior court and shall include sums to cover principal, interest and administrative costs. All adjoining property owned by the same party or parties shall be covered in the execution. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 15) 
Sec. 32-231. - Assessments to be liens. 
All assessments against property and the owners thereof for sanitary sewer construction shall be liens upon the property from the date the county authorizes construction. All assessments shall be posted in an improvement docket and kept on file with the county finance department. Properties assessed shall be described in the docket in a manner sufficient to identify them with the section of the sanitary sewer they abut. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 16) 
Sec. 32-232. - Assessments after previous exemptions. 
(a)  The department may grant property abutting sanitary sewer lines an exemption from assessment. Often this occurs when private property is used, through negotiation of an easement, in the laying of a sanitary sewer line. Property thus exempted can be connected to the sewerage system at any future date without being liable for assessment. 
(b)  If, however, the property was exempted for another reason, such as the elevation of the property, and it is improved at a later date to a condition whereby sanitary sewer service can be attained and is required, then, if this occurs within 25 years after the completion of the sanitary sewer, the property is subject to assessment under the provisions of this division. If the improvement occurs more than 25 years after construction, the property may not be assessed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 17) 
Sec. 32-233. - Service connections. 
(a)  After sanitary sewer lines have been constructed and tied into the county sewerage system, each abutting property owner who has contributed to the costs of construction through assessment may desire a service connection. To make such a connection, the property owner shall hire, at the owner's expense, a plumber or contractor to lay pipe from the building drain to the stub-out provided. Before this service line can be connected to the sanitary sewer, the owner shall secure a permit from the county by paying a plumbing fee and a sewer tap fee. If the service line then passes the inspection criteria of the county, the owner may have it connected into the sewerage system. 
(b)  When no stub-out or other means of connection is provided so as to service the building drain, it shall be the responsibility of the county to provide a stub-out for the property owner at no cost if the property owners, present or past, have contributed to the cost of the existing sewer either by the original subdivision or by the county assessment. 
(c)  When a property owner desires connection to the sewerage system after construction of the sanitary sewer line, and no owner of the property has contributed to the costs of constructing the sanitary sewer line, the owner must pay a proportionate cost of construction based on the current year linear foot rate prior to obtaining a sewer connection permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2, § 18) 
Secs. 32-234—32-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 32-260. - Applications for building sewer permits. 
Applications for building sewer permits shall be supplemented by plans, specifications and other information considered pertinent to the issuance of a permit. At the time the application is filed, a plumbing and inspection fee in an amount established by the county, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the county board of commissioners, shall be paid to the county. Installations and their respective tapping fees, as set by the county, shall be placed in one of two categories, residential or nonresidential. Proposed nonresidential discharges which meet the definition of significant industrial user shall also obtain a wastewater discharge permit as described in division 4 of this article. Nonresidential development has the option of requesting a recalculation of the tap fee based on actual water consumption after the first year of occupancy in a new building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 1) 
Sec. 32-261. - Separate building sewer for each building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. An exception is made where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, and no private sanitary sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway; then, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole system considered one building sewer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 2) 
Sec. 32-262. - Old building sewers in new buildings. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the county, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 3) 
Sec. 32-263. - Location of building sewer and building drain. 
Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the department, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which a building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sewage carried by this drain shall be lifted by an approved sewage ejector to a height to permit gravity flow. All sewage ejector installations shall be approved by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 4) 
Sec. 32-264. - Owner to bear installation, connection costs. 
The owner shall bear all costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer. The owner shall compensate the county for any loss or damage that may have occurred to the public sanitary sewer as a result of the installation of the building sewer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 5) 
Sec. 32-265. - Conformity to the county specifications. 
The size, slope, alignment and materials used in constructing a building sewer; the methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, and backfilling of the trench; and the testing of the pipe shall all conform to the specifications, guidelines and other applicable rules of the county and the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 6) 
Sec. 32-266. - Connection of building sewer into public sewer. 
(a)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements and regulations of the county and the city. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from specified procedures must be approved in writing by the department before installation. 
(b)  An applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. Service shall not be instituted until the plumbing fee and sewer tap fee are paid, and the connection is approved. Excavations necessary for the accomplishment of the connection shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights, so as to protect the public from hazard. All excavations greater than five feet deep shall be covered when excavation is not being conducted. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored at the owner's expense, in compliance with city specifications. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 7) 
Sec. 32-267. - Connection of surface runoff and groundwater sources to public sewer. 
Connection, directly or indirectly, of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains or other sources of surface runoff is not permitted to a building drain or building sewer connected to a public sanitary sewer. Existing connections of these items to a building sewer shall be disconnected when the building sewer is connected to the public sanitary sewer system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 8) 
Sec. 32-268. - Connecting to public sewer without paying fees or obtaining permit. 
It is unlawful to connect to the public sanitary sewer without payment of the prescribed fee and without a permit. If such a sewer connection is made, a current sewer tap fee, the fee at the time the connection was discovered, will be assessed; back sewer use charges will be made and interest at the rate specified in chapter 2 of the DeKalb County Code will be charged. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 9) 
Sec. 32-269. - Maintenance and repair responsibility for building sewer service connections to public sanitary sewer system. 
The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of building sewer service connections to the public sanitary sewer system on private property. The county will be responsible for maintenance and repair of building sewer service connections within city or the county street rights-of-way and sanitary sewer easements. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 3, § 10) 
Secs. 32-270—32-286. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 32-287. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Upon determination that a violation of this division has occurred, the director shall serve upon that discharger a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific actions, shall be submitted by the violator to the department. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  The director may order a discharger which has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this division to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served by registered or certified mail, or by personal service on the user or the authorized representative of the user. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the discharger. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger. 
(c)  When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this division or that the discharger's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the discharger directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the discharger to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation and to prevent recurrence of the violation. 
Each day of violation of a cease and desist order, after notice thereof, shall constitute a violation of this division, and shall constitute a separate violation of this division, subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment, or both, set forth in section 1-6. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions of this division constitutes an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days for any single offense, in accordance with section 1-6. The city or county may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this division or to correct violations of this division. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or the county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
(e)  When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, the director may petition the courts for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the requirements imposed by this division on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking other action against a discharger. 
(f)  The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city or the county, including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death and other. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 13) 
Sec. 32-288. - Wastewater discharge permit required. 
(a)  All significant industrial users connected to, proposing to connect to or otherwise contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Proposed new significant users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connection to the sewer system and shall obtain such permit prior to contributing to the system. 
(b)  The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(c)  The director may deny permission to discharge or condition discharges from new, increased or significantly changed contributions from any industrial user, significant or otherwise, located within the city or in outside jurisdictions discharging to the county's POTW. 
(d)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this division. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements, or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 32-289. - Application. 
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the department an application in the form prescribed and furnished by the county and accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the county, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the county board of commissioners. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 2) 
Sec. 32-290. - Compliance with all applicable regulations. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 3) 
Sec. 32-291. - Permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed three years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable, except as defined in section 32-292; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state or local law; 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Limits on the rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of accidental discharge/slug control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
f.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
g.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 4) 
Sec. 32-292. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 120 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. If no new local, state or federal pretreatment requirements are impending on the user and the user has had no violation of the existing permit, the permit shall be renewed for a time period at least equal to the existing permit. All other expiring permits shall be reviewed and revised or renewed as determined by the director. Should a timely applied for permit expire before issuance of a new permit by the county, the existing permit shall continue in force until the new permit is issued. 
(b)  Discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and normally are not transferable to any succeeding user or the current user for a new operation. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days' advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 5) 
Sec. 32-293. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Compliance date report. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information in subsection (a)(2) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  User to submit certain information. Users described above shall submit the following information: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by the user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. 
d.  Flow measurement. The measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams. 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analyses identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 32-333. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 32-333. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional treatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 32-294. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the compliance schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. 
(4)  All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 32-294. 
(5)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the following information: flow measurements; measurement of pollutants; and the certification statement, as described in subsection (b) of this section, the baseline monitoring report. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 32-293. 
(d)  Discharge monitoring reports (self-monitoring reports). All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director and specified in the wastewater discharge permit but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report on the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, and the measured daily flows for the reporting period. All discharge monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 32-294. 
(1)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(2)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in this division, the results of the additional monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director's designee as identified in the wastewater discharge permit within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analyses and submit the results of the repeated testing to the director within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the department monitors the user's facility at least once a month, or if the department samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of that sampling. 
(f)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 32-288. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit as defined in section 32-183 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 6) 
Sec. 32-294. - Signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports (section 32-293) must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 7) 
Sec. 32-295. - Recordkeeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates the analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the county, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 8) 
Sec. 32-296. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any user may appeal an altered or new permit condition or alleged violation of a current permit condition to the department. Such appeal must be received within 30 workdays. The department shall schedule an appeal review meeting within 30 days to discuss the appealed condition of this division or wastewater discharge permit and corrective or remedial action to be taken. 
(b)  If the user and the department can agree to appropriate corrective remedial or preventive measures, such measures and a reasonable compliance schedule shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the user's wastewater discharge permit. If an agreement is not reached through the conciliation process, the department shall refer the appeal to the county board of commissioners and the county board of commissioners shall review the appeal and adjudge the dispute. The county board of commissioners shall then institute such actions as deemed advisable to ensure the user's compliance with the provisions of this division or other laws or regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 9) 
Sec. 32-297. - Public participation and access to records. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs and from the county's inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law or that such information is otherwise protected from disclosure under applicable federal or state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public. It shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving persons furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 10) 
Sec. 32-298. - Federal limits supersede local limits. 
Upon the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The county shall notify all affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 11) 
Sec. 32-299. - Publication of significant noncompliance; pretreatment violations. 
The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, a list of users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD; TSS; fats, oils and grease; and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violations which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 12) 
Sec. 32-300. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or any other required reporting; 
(4)  Falsifying self monitoring reports or other required reporting; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; 
(13)  Change of any condition that requires either temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge; or 
(14)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 14) 
Sec. 32-301. - Permit modification. 
The director may modify any permit in whole or in part during its term for cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division; 
(2)  Engaging in any act that would constitute basis for revocation of the permit; 
(3)  For the purpose of incorporating any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standard or requirements; 
(4)  For the purpose of addressing significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(5)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct clerical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  Changing any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 15) 
Sec. 32-302. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred, and the user can identify the causes of the upset; 
b.  The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, is lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 32-325(a) or the specific prohibitions in section 32-325(b)(3) through (b)(7) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the county was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permits, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, 
a.  The term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c)(3) and (c)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Prior notice. 
a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Enforcement action or approval. 
a.  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
b.  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (c)(4)a of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 4, § 16) 
Secs. 32-303—32-322. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-323. - Discharge of prohibited waters. 
Discharge to a public sanitary sewer of stormwater, surface runoff or groundwater is prohibited. These waters shall be discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, combined sewers, or to an outlet approved by the city or the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 1) 
Sec. 32-324. - Unauthorized tampering or use of sewers, appurtenances. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or open, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 2) 
Sec. 32-325. - Prohibited substances, wastes or materials. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
(1)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, or any other pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-up flash point of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 11.5 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to sewerage or harm to personnel; 
(3)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or any water wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in a quantity sufficient to interfere with any sewerage or sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a public nuisance, whether these wastes cause problems independently or via action with other substances; 
(4)  Solids or viscous liquids in quantities, types or sizes which will cause either flow obstruction in the sewer system or interference with the operation of the POTW (size may not be greater than one-half inch in any dimension); 
(5)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; and 
(7)  Wastes or pollutants which have been classified as hazardous waste or hazardous materials in accordance with 40 CFR 261. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 3) 
Sec. 32-326. - Limits set on certain substances, materials and wastes. 
(a)  Discharge of any of the following water substances, wastes, or materials into a public sanitary sewer in excess of the stated limits and/or conditions is prohibited: 
(1)  Liquid or water vapor having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F, or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees C. 
(2)  Waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils of a petroleum or mineral base, in a concentration greater than 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(3)  Substances which become solids or very viscous liquids at temperatures greater than 32 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(4)  Garbage that has been improperly shredded (any dimension greater than one-half inch). 
(5)  Waters or wastes containing the contaminants listed at a concentration greater than the limits set. This restriction includes, but is not limited to, discharges by any user of the collection and treatment system such that specific pollutants discharged to the county sanitary sewer system do not exceed concentrations specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The concentration limits on discharges by any user, listed below, may be used as a guide in design and plant control, but may be altered by the county in the event of a discharge causing upset, interference or pass through at the POTW or having a deleterious effect upon any other aspect of public welfare, either alone or in combination with other discharges: 
Local Discharge Limits for All City of Dunwoody Industrial Users—Maximum Daily Concentration (as measured in discharges from manufacturing processes only, excluding domestic wastes or unpolluted discharges). 

 
(1)  Waters or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing contaminants in such quantities that, after treatment of sewage, these contaminants impart their tastes or odors to receiving waters. 
(2)  Waters or wastes colored by dye or other solutions to such a degree that the color is not removed by treatment. 
(3)  Wastes containing substances emitting radiation greater than 1,000 picocuries per liter (pCi/l) for gross beta. 
(4)  Any other contaminant which the director deems harmful to the operation or efficiency of sewage treatment plants, the utilization or disposal of sludges, or to the health and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(5)  Waters or wastes containing any compound found to be toxic, in concentrations exceeding such acceptable limits as have been or shall be defined by the environmental protection agency. This limitation includes compounds defined by the environmental protection agency as priority pollutants pursuant to 40 CFR 403. 
(c)  Ground paper products shall be prohibited from being discharged into the public sewer system. 
(d)  All industrial users shall be required to meet pretreatment standards as set forth in 40 CFR 403, entitled General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(e)  The city or the county may establish by ordinance, or the director may establish in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards for requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 4) 
Sec. 32-327. - Discharges which affect effluent quality from sewage treatment plants. 
Discharges of materials or substances which would cause interference, upset and/or pass-through in the POTW, whether alone or in combination with other substances and discharges, are prohibited. Included without limitation in this category are: 
(1)  Slug concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as lime slurries). 
(2)  Slug concentrations of inert dissolved solids (such as sodium chloride). 
(3)  Slug concentrations of colored wastes (such as dyes and tanning solutions). 
(4)  Slug concentrations of materials high in BOD or COD. 
(5)  Slug concentrations of ammonia or organic nitrogen compounds. 
(6)  Slug concentrations of phosphorus compounds. 
(7)  Other wastes not amenable to treatment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 5) 
Sec. 32-328. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
(a)  At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director or his designee of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 32-334; 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)  Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this division shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. Pollutants, raw materials, products, processed materials or waste materials shall not be stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the storm drain or cause a contaminated discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 6) 
Sec. 32-329. - Separators and interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand separators shall be provided when wastes containing more than 100 mg/l of fat, oil, grease or sand are discharged. Separators shall also be provided for any other substance in the wastes which becomes viscous or solidifies at a temperature above 32 degrees Fahrenheit. All interceptors or separators shall be approved in writing by the county and shall be located for easy inspection. All expenses of installation and operation shall be borne by the owner. Interceptors and separators shall not be required for private living quarters. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 7) 
Sec. 32-330. - Industrial discharges and surcharges. 
(a)  Industrial contributors to the public sanitary sewer system shall be required to pay a sewer rate surcharge based upon the concentration of total suspended solids (TSS), five-day BOD, ammonia and/or total phosphorus in their effluents. Industrial dischargers whose wastes contain greater than 250 mg/l of either five-day BOD and/or total suspended solids, 30 mg/l ammonia, or ten mg/l total phosphorus shall pay the surcharge in an amount set by the county. 
(b)  If values for any constituent exceed two times the minimum surcharge concentration (i.e., 500 mg/l TSS) then the director may, if determined that these wastes adversely affect the POTW, require the industrial user to install pretreatment before discharging wastes to the public sanitary sewer system. This pretreatment must reduce the concentration of the wastes by treatment/removal of the excess constituent to the point where it no longer harms the POTW, and the values for all constituents are less than two times the minimum surcharge concentration. 
(c)  Periodic determination of the values for constituents subject to surcharge shall be made on composite samples of industrial effluents by personnel of the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 8) 
Sec. 32-331. - Discharges requiring pretreatment. 
The department may require pretreatment of wastewater to an acceptable condition before discharge to the public sanitary sewer system when wastewater contains the substances or possesses the characteristics of prohibited or limited discharges. Pretreatment may also be required if these wastewaters cause upset, interference or pass through at the POTW or have a deleterious effect upon any other aspect of public welfare, either alone or in combination with other discharges. In addition to lowering the concentrations of substances to an acceptable level through pretreatment or altering the characteristics of a wastewater, the department may require additional controls before discharge to the public sanitary sewer system. In particular, quantities or rates of discharge shall be altered so that the discharge becomes more compatible with the sewer system. Expenses incurred in the installation and operation of these controls shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 9) 
Sec. 32-332. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 10) 
Sec. 32-333. - Measurements, tests and analyses, and sample collection. 
(a)  Any measurements, tests, analyses, sample types, sample containers and/or holding times to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with procedures and specifications as set forth in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(b)  Analyses shall be determined at the control manhole, or upon a suitable sample taken at the control manhole. If no control manhole is available on the building sewer, the control manhole shall be considered the nearest downstream manhole to which the building sewer is directly connected. When the director deems it necessary, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole on the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes. This manhole, when required, shall be accessible, safely located, and constructed at the owner's expense in accordance with county specifications. 
(c)  Except as indicated in subsection (d) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite sampling techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(d)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, Ph, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 11) 
Sec. 32-334. - Accidental spills or drains. 
(a)  In the case of accidental spills, loss to the drains of any deleterious material or substances, discharges of a nonroutine nature, noncustomary batch discharges or slug loads, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the department of the incident. This notification shall include the time of occurrence, location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. The user shall take all possible actions to prevent a spill, and should a spill occur, shall take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the incident. Industrial users which store or otherwise handle toxic, hazardous or flammable materials must have an accidental discharge/slug control plan in place to prevent the discharge, accidental or otherwise, of said materials to the sewer system. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report, unless waived by the director, describing the causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar occurrences in the future. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 12) 
Sec. 32-335. - Discharge of trucked or hauled wastes. 
(a)  Discharge to any public sanitary sewer, appurtenance, or treatment facility of pumped, trucked or hauled wastes from commercial or industrial sources is prohibited. This ban specifically includes the disposal of greases and other grease trap-related wastes from food establishments. 
(b)  Discharge of domestic septage is allowable only at a county-authorized septic tank disposal site, located at the Snapfinger Creek Water Pollution Control Plant, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Septic tank pumping companies must register with the county health department division of environmental health; have their trucks inspected by that agency; and be issued a permit to operate. 
(2)  Discharge fees shall be payable by coupons obtained at the county division of revenue and license administration, and presented to the operator at the disposal site. Fees shall be as established by the county. 
(3)  A manifest form must be completed on every septic tank pumped. Copies of the manifests for the septage to be discharged must be presented to the operator at the disposal site. The operator shall have the authority to deny approval for discharge to any load not accompanied by manifests, due to discrepancies with the manifests, or other apparent problems with truck contents. 
(4)  Domestic septage shall be defined as the contents from septic tanks located at single-family residences, county school facilities, or the contents of portable toilets. 
(5)  Repeat and/or major violations of these regulations may result in the county barring the hauling company from the treatment facility and denying access to disposal in the county's system, in addition to the other fines and penalties cited in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 13) 
Sec. 32-336. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend the user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the order, sewer connection, and/or termination of water supply, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the director, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5, § 14) 
Secs. 32-337—32-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FATS, OILS AND GREASES 

Sec. 32-361. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the Fats, Oils, and Greases Regulations of the City of Dunwoody, Georgia. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 1) 
Sec. 32-362. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to water quality shall be as defined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in this Code and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the state codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to state law. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Architectural or historical restrictions means a building or structure in the city that is 100 years or older and has special historical or esthetic interest or value. 
Backflow means a reversal of normal flow in a system caused by a negative pressure (vacuum or partial vacuum) in the supply piping or other condition that reverses the normal direction of flow. 
Baffle means a retention wall three-quarters the length of the chamber nearer to the outlet. 
Best management practices means a schedule of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the sewer system. These practices may vary by site, but produce the same reductions in fats, oils, and greases in the sewer system. 
Change in operations means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures of a food service establishment. 
Compliance inspector means a person authorized by the county to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and/or disposal facilities. 
Director means the director or designee of the county department of watershed management, or, if delegated by an intergovernmental agreement, the director of the city department of public works. 
Extreme economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of these regulations that exceeds $50,000.00. 
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG) means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the food preparation process, that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
Fixtures means a pot sink, prerinse sink, vegetable sink, meat sink, mop sink, soup kettles, work stations, floor drains, automatic hood wash units, garbage disposals, trash compactors, dishwashers, and any other similarly functioning plumbing fixtures. 
Flow means volume of wastewater moving in a certain direction. 
Flow control device means a mechanism installed to control flow of hydraulic levels of FOG into an interceptor. 
FOG means fats, oils, and greases. 
FOG control program means to reduce and/or control the discharge of fats, oils, and grease into the sewer system by educating and regulating food service establishments located in the city or establishments located outside the city but which discharge FOG. 
FOG control program manager means the individual designated by the county to administer the FOG control program. 
FOG interceptor means a multicompartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
FOG manifest means a document that the state-permitted transporter must provide to the FOG generator as proof of services rendered. 
FOG wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the county authorizing the food service establishment or generator to discharge wastewater into the county's facilities or into the sewer system. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means any person who prepares and/or packages food or beverage for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences so long as the private residence is not used to prepare or package food or beverage for sale. Food service establishments include, but are not limited to, food courts; food manufacturers; food packagers; restaurants; catering services; bars/taverns; cafeterias; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; mobile food vehicles (coach); wing trailers; diners; grocery stores; bakeries; coffee shops; ice cream shops; lounges; hospitals; hotels; nursing homes; churches; schools; daycare center; and all other food service establishments not listed above, either fixed or mobile, as are or may hereafter be recognized by the county health department and/or the state department of agriculture. 
Fresh air system/fixtures means a system that provides free circulation of air, which will prevent contamination from back flow or back siphonage, e.g., compartment sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, meat sinks, vegetable sinks, work stations, and mop sinks. 
Generator means any person including those outside the jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city's boundaries. 
Georgia state permitted transporter means a transporter as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Grease trap means an inside mechanism no less than 100 pounds and no more than 300 pounds in size, with baffle and flow control installed before the master trap. 
Hot flushing means a situation prohibited in the city that occurs when the FOG interceptor is too close to a hot-water-using device so the water does not cool sufficiently in the interceptor to allow the FOG to coagulate and float to the top, and FOG is instead carried out to the sewer system. 
Limited food preparation establishment means an establishment that is engaged only in reheating or serving of ready-to-eat food products and, as a result, discharges wastewater containing less than 100 mg/l of FOG per operating business day. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
New construction means any structure, planned or under construction, where a sewer connection permit is required by law or regulation but has not been issued by the county. 
Nonhazardous manifest means a receipt that is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of FOG, liquids, or other wastes as required by the county. 
Plumbing Drainage Institute rating means interceptors that are tested, rated, and certified in conformance with Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute—G101 by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute. 
Regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city including, but not limited to: the United States Environmental Protection Agency, region IV, Georgia and Washington, DC, (EPA); the state department of natural resources (DNR); the state division of public health, the state environmental protection division (EPD); the county; or any regulatory agency or body as may be established by federal, state, or local law. 
Remodeling or remodeled means a physical change or operational change in a structure that requires an issuance of or revision to a business license or a building permit. 
Septic tank means a hollow chambered tank without a baffle, T's, and flow control to restrict FOG from entering the county's sewer system. 
Sewer system is defined as in section 32-183 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Shovel inspection means a FOG compliance inspector who uses a shovel to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Sludge means any solid, semisolid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
Sludge judge inspection means a test in which the FOG compliance inspector uses an instrument, usually a clear hollow plastic tube, to pull and measure a core sample from the FOG interceptor to determine its condition. 
Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute—G101 means a comprehensive engineering and testing program developed to establish flow rates and FOG holding capacity for uniform rating of FOG interceptors. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids within a sample. 
20 percent rule means the requirement for FOG interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG solids accumulation does not exceed 20 percent of the design hydraulic capacity of the FOG interceptor. 
Visual inspection means an in-person observation by a FOG compliance inspector to determine if a shovel inspection and/or a sludge judge inspection is necessary to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, or gaseous, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature intended for disposal. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, and bacteriological parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 2) 
Sec. 32-363. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by these regulations, upon citation and conviction of the violation in the city municipal court, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 1-6. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period, measured from the date of the first conviction, of any violation of these regulations, the municipal court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the municipal court shall impose a fine of $1,000.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(d)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the county or the city from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code, the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances, or state or federal law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 22) 
Sec. 32-364. - Purpose, scope and policy. 
(a)  These regulations are designed to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the county's sewer system while preventing blockages and overflows of the sewer system resulting from discharges of FOG into the county sewer system and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for all facilities emitting FOG. 
(b)  By enactment of these regulations, the city intends to exercise its authority over sizing, location, maintenance, and material of grease traps and/or interceptors within the city. 
(c)  The provisions of these regulations shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG discharged into the county sewer system. 
(d)  These regulations establish quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG; which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer system causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows and blockages. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 3) 
Sec. 32-365. - Transporters of nonhazardous commercial waste. 
O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. sets forth a permitting scheme for transporters of commercial waste and provides a regulatory method for the clean and sanitary removal of commercial waste. O.C.G.A. § 12-15-23 specifically authorizes local governments to enforce compliance with the provisions of the state law described in this section. O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended, is therefore adopted by reference as if set out fully in this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 4) 
Sec. 32-366. - Best management practices. 
(a)  All persons disposing of FOG shall be required to properly dispose of FOG using all of the following best management practices: 
(1)  Dispose of FOG in covered collection containers. 
(2)  Place food scraps from dishes into trashcans and garbage bags and dispose of properly. 
(3)  Avoid disposing of food scraps in garbage disposers to help maintain interceptor volume. 
(4)  Allow FOG to cool first before it is skimmed, scraped, or wiped off of all preparation and servicing surfaces. 
(5)  Prewash dishes and pans with cold water before putting them in the dishwasher. 
(6)  Cover the kitchen sink drain with screening and empty debris into the garbage as needed. 
(7)  Cover the floor drain with a fine screen and empty into the garbage can as needed. 
(8)  Recycle used fryer oil. 
(b)  All persons disposing of FOG shall not use any of the following practices when disposing of FOG: 
(1)  Pouring FOG down the drain; 
(2)  Putting food scraps down the drain; or 
(3)  Running hot water over dishes, pans, fryers, woks, and griddles to rinse FOG down the drain (also known as hot flush). 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 5) 
Sec. 32-367. - Requirements for interceptor and specific plumbing connections. 
(a)  All food service establishments shall only introduce pretreated wastewater acceptable to the county under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging, directly or indirectly, into any county sewer system. 
(b)  No more than 100 mg/l of FOG shall be discharged per operating business day. The FOG generator shall bear all of the expense of proving compliance with the 100 mg/l threshold. 
(c)  Any food service establishment required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an appropriately designed and adequately sized FOG interceptor that has been approved by the county. 
(d)  The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136. 
(e)  FOG interceptors shall be connected to the food service establishment's lateral sewer line after all fixtures which may introduce FOG have been connected and shall have fresh air connected, as defined in these regulations. Fresh-air fixtures include, but are not limited to, sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixtures which have a potential to introduce FOG. Wastewater from sanitary sewer fixtures and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the FOG interceptor. 
(f)  FOG interceptors shall not be connected to septic tanks. 
(g)  All food service establishments that have dumpster pad/trash compactor drains on site and are connected to the sewer system shall have a separate interceptor (no less than 1,000 gallons in size) installed and functioning at all times. The sloping area to the outside drain and the drain shall be covered either by the dumpster/compactor or a canopy to prevent inflow and infiltration of rainwater. 
(h)  Any drains that lead to the sewer system including, but not limited to, trench drains, enclosed dock drains, carwash drains, elevator drains, and other similar types of drains shall have an oil-water debris interceptor of no less than 1,000 gallons and no more than 3,000 gallons in capacity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 6) 
Sec. 32-368. - FOG interceptor physical specifications/requirements. 
(a)  All interior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of 100 pounds in capacity as defined by the Plumbing Drainage Institute; 
(2)  Be made of corrosion-resistant coated metal; 
(3)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(4)  Contain properly installed and functioning baffle walls and other flow control devices necessary to achieve the appropriate retention time; 
(5)  Have at least a 30-minute interior retention time before gray water is discharged into the sewer system; 
(6)  Tie all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(7)  Have a 15-foot distance between the FOG interceptor and the last fresh air fixture and have a proper flow control device; 
(8)  Have a temperature of discharge entering the interior FOG interceptor that does not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit; and 
(9)  Be Plumbing Drainage Institute rated, be accessible for inspection, and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications by a licensed plumber and not a representative and/or an apprentice of the licensed plumber. 
(b)  All exterior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of 1,000 gallons in capacity; 
(2)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(3)  Be constructed of reenforced materials suitable for load bearing and watertight to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(4)  Be precast with a minimum of 3,000 psi concrete per applicable American Society for Testing and Materials standards with four to seven percent air entrapment; 
(5)  Have an invert elevation of the inlet between three inches to six inches above the invert elevation of the outlet; 
(6)  Contain a properly installed and functioning baffle wall and other flow control devices necessary to achieve an adequate time for FOG to properly separate but not to exceed 24 hours; 
(7)  Contain inlet and outlet T's made of schedule 40 PVC piping and at a 90-degree angle with a minimum diameter of the inlet and outlet piping to be six inches; 
(8)  Include the outlet T six inches from the manhole cover; 
(9)  Include T piping of the inlet and outlet that is within 18 inches of the bottom and at least five inches above the static liquid level of the tank; 
(10)  Have the FOG interceptor set level on a consolidated, stable base so that no settling or tipping of the FOG interceptor can occur; 
(11)  Connect all of the fresh-air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(12)  Have the outlet discharge line from the FOG interceptor directly connected to a sewer line tapped into the collection main; 
(13)  Have solid manhole covers to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(14)  Have two or more manholes for entry to each chamber of hydraulic liquid mass; 
(15)  Be accessible for inspections and have no permanent or temporary structure or container placed directly over the FOG interceptor or installed in areas subject to traffic; and 
(16)  Be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(c)  The contents of any fryer oil containers shall not be mixed with any other FOG interceptor waste or any other nontoxic or toxic substances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 7) 
Sec. 32-369. - Maintenance requirements for new and existing FSE's. 
(a)  Depth of FOG. The depth of FOG (floating and settled) in the FOG interceptor shall not be equal to or greater than 20 percent of the total operating depth of the interceptor. 
(b)  General requirements for FOG interceptors. In order to maintain FOG interceptors, all food service establishments shall remove the sludge, floating materials, solids, and wastewater, and shall scrape all excessive solids from the walls, floor, baffles, and all pipe work and shall pump interior and exterior FOG interceptors dry as set forth in these regulations and as required by the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(1)  FOG interceptors shall be kept free from any inflow/infiltration such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., as such inflow reduces the effectiveness of the FOG interceptor; thereby increasing the need for more frequent cleaning. 
(2)  To ensure that the FOG interceptor can be maintained properly, the FOG interceptor needs to be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance, function, and inspection of the interceptor. 
(3)  A state permitted transporter shall perform all maintenance of FOG interceptors. All state permitted transporters working in the city shall have an active state waste transporter's permit and a county transporters permit in the manner and form set forth by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. Transporters working in the city are required to leave a copy of a nonhazardous waste manifest with the food service establishment. Maintenance schedules may vary based on individual circumstances to protect the sewer system. 
(4)  The FOG compliance inspector has the authority to change the FOG interceptors cleaning cycles for any FOG generator at any time. 
(5)  The discharge or introduction of any additives to the sewer system is unlawful and prohibited. The direct introduction of additives into the FOG interceptor is prohibited. Additives include, but are not limited to, biological agents such as enzymes, bacteria, and/or degreasing agents. 
(6)  The FOG generator shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the FOG interceptor waste by a state permitted waste transporter and maintenance of records of disposal as specified in this section. All waste removed from each FOG interceptor must be disposed of at an appropriate disposal facility designed to receive such waste. 
(7)  No FOG interceptor pumpage shall be discharged to the sewer system as otherwise prohibited in these regulations. 
(8)  Every FOG interceptor shall be required to have a Georgia Nonhazardous Waste Manifest. The Georgia Nonhazardous Waste Manifest must be complete with all information required by these regulations and state law. 
(9)  Mechanical FOG interceptors are prohibited in the city. 
(c)  Exterior FOG interceptors. Maintenance of exterior FOG interceptors shall be performed at least once every 90 days. Skimming, decanting, and/or any reintroduction of water into exterior FOG interceptors shall not be allowed under any conditions. 
(d)  Interior FOG interceptors. Interior FOG interceptors maintenance shall be performed once every 30 days, and all of the fresh air and/or safe-way plumbing fixtures shall be connected. In-house cleaning of interior FOG interceptors is prohibited. To ensure proper FOG interceptor maintenance, interior FOG interceptors shall be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance of the interceptor. Interior FOG interceptors shall be easily accessible with a minimum clearance of 36 inches. 
(e)  Interior and exterior FOG interceptor records. All food service establishments shall maintain records of the date and time of all cleaning and maintenance. Every FOG interceptor manifest shall be placed in a logbook, folder, or three-ring notebook. This book shall be made available on demand by the FOG compliance inspector during inspection. All records of at least three years shall be kept on site and available. These records shall include: 
(1)  A logbook of FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device cleaning and maintenance; 
(2)  A record of best management practices being implemented, including employee training; 
(3)  Copies of records and manifests of waste transporting interceptor contents; 
(4)  Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral sewer line; and 
(5)  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the FOG interceptors. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 8) 
Sec. 32-370. - Notification of spills by the food service establishment. 
(a)  In the event that any food service establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error, or the food service establishment has reasonable opportunity to know that his/its discharge shall exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or these regulations, the food service establishments shall immediately notify the FOG control program manager or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or sanitary sewer overflows, the food service establishment shall immediately notify the FOG control program manager or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit and the director of the county health department or designee orally or by telephone at the published numbers for such departments. 
(b)  All food service establishments shall provide written notification of this oral or telephonic notification to the FOG control program manager at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)  Such notification shall not relieve a food service establishment of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to county, the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor will such notification relieve a food service establishment from payment of any fees or imposition of any other liability which may be authorized by these regulations or other applicable law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 9) 
Sec. 32-371. - FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  Food service establishments proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater that contains FOG into the county sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit annually or cease ongoing operation until such permit is obtained. In addition to any other penalties authorized by law, failure to obtain such a permit shall subject the food service establishment to the potential of the disconnection of water service, until such permit is obtained. 
(b)  FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of these regulations and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the county. The county and the city, in accordance with these regulations and applicable law, shall have joint authority to enforce the conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits. 
(c)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit shall be issued upon: 
(1)  Receipt of a complete application; 
(2)  Compliance with these regulations; 
(3)  Compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code; and 
(4)  The proper installation and maintenance of a FOG interceptor that complies with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(d)  In the event that the food service establishment complies with the applicable provisions of these regulations, a permit will be issued or denied within 30 days of compliance with this section. If the permit is not issued or denied within the time frame specified herein, the permit shall be deemed issued and approved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 10) 
Sec. 32-372. - FOG wastewater discharge permit application. 
(a)  All food service establishments are required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit and shall complete and file with county prior to commencing or continuing discharges, an application for a wastewater discharge permit in a form prescribed by the county along with any applicable fees. The applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, assessor's parcel number, description of the food service establishment, operation, cuisine, service activities, and, as applicable, clients using the applicant's services; 
(2)  Whichever is applicable, the name and address of any and all principals/owners/major shareholders of the food service establishment, articles of incorporation, most recent report of the secretary of state, and a copy of the owner's business license; 
(3)  Name and address of property owner or lessee and the property manager for the property where the food service establishment is located; and 
(4)  Any other information specified in the application form. 
(b)  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control devices, FOG interceptors, or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
(c)  Other information related to the applicant's business operations and potential discharge may be requested to properly evaluate the permit application. 
(d)  After evaluation of the data furnished, the county may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in these regulations and as otherwise determined by the FOG control program manager to be appropriate to protect the county's sewer system. 
(e)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit and application fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by the county. Payment of the application permit fee must be received by the county at the time of filing the application for the permit. A food service establishment shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full, prior to any permit renewal. 
(f)  An application shall not be considered complete until all the information required by this section is provided to the FOG control program manager or designee. The FOG control program manager shall have 15 business days from receipt of such information to advise a food service establishment that an application is not complete. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 11) 
Sec. 32-373. - FOG wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any of the following conditions or limits: 
(1)  Limits on discharge of FOG (100 mg/l), which may cause or contribute to sanitary sewer overflows and/or sewer blockages; 
(2)  Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of FOG interceptors and other FOG control devices; 
(3)  FOG interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule; 
(4)  Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device; 
(5)  Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices; 
(6)  Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests; 
(7)  Requirements to self-monitor the discharge to the sewer system and periodically assess and report on the condition of the sewer lateral; 
(8)  Requirements for the food service establishment to construct operate and maintain, at its own expense, a FOG control device and sampling facilities; 
(9)  Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the FOG control program manager to protect the county's sewer system or as specified by other regulatory agencies; and 
(10)  Other terms and conditions which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 12) 
Sec. 32-374. - FOG wastewater discharge permit modification of terms and conditions. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be modified by the FOG control program manager if there is a change in: 
(1)  The generator's current or anticipated operating data; 
(2)  The county's current or anticipated operating data; 
(3)  The requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the city and/or the county; or 
(4)  A determination by the FOG control program manager and his designee that such modification is required to comply with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  The food service establishment may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change and the reasons for the change. The FOG control program manager shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing within 30 days of receipt of the request. 
(c)  The food service establishment shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least 45 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, not to exceed 45 days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 13) 
Sec. 32-375. - Permits for new and existing facilities; grandfathering; effective date. 
(a)  New facilities. Food service establishments which are newly proposed, constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated, shall be required to install a properly sized FOG interceptor according to the requirements set forth in these regulations, and such FOG interceptors shall be permitted and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the food service establishment. 
(b)  Existing facilities. The city and the county require all existing food service establishments to install, operate, and maintain a FOG interceptor that complies with the requirements set forth in these regulations. All food service establishments shall repair or replace any noncompliant plumbing or the existing FOG interceptor within 90 days of written notification by the county or the city if any one or more of the following conditions exist or occur: 
(1)  The facility is found to produce any product that creates FOG as a byproduct; 
(2)  The facility does not have a FOG interceptor; 
(3)  The facility has an undersized, irreparable, improperly configured, or defective FOG interceptor; 
(4)  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the city; 
(5)  The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership or expansion; 
(6)  The existing facility does not have plumbing connection to a FOG interceptor in compliance with the requirements of county and these regulations; or 
(7)  If a food service establishment changes its business name. 
(c)  Grandfathering provisions. If an existing food service establishment is housed in a structure that, because of its architectural or historical restrictions, the owner will suffer extreme economic hardship in order to upgrade the existing FOG interceptor, then the establishment may keep the current FOG interceptor in place provided that all fresh-air fixtures must be tied into the current FOG interceptor, and the FOG interceptor must be at least 15 feet from the last fresh-air fixture. Additionally, the FOG interceptor must be cleaned every ten days by a state permitted transporter. In the event that any remodeling of such a food service establishment is undertaken, or if the food service establishment changes ownership, then a FOG interceptor that complies with all applicable requirements of this code shall be installed. 
(d)  Notification of planned changes. All food service establishments shall notify the FOG compliance manager at least 90 days in writing in advance prior to any change of ownership, facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. All food service establishments shall submit any information requested by the county or the city for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the food service establishment's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
(e)  Effective date. These regulations shall become effective immediately upon adoption for all new and existing food service establishments and subject to the written policy promulgated by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 14) 
Sec. 32-376. - FOG wastewater discharge permit duration and renewal. 
FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued annually. At least 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the user shall apply for renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions of section 32-292. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 15) 
Sec. 32-377. - Exemption from FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 16) 
Sec. 32-378. - Nontransferability of permits and fees. 
(a)  FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under these regulations are for a specific food service establishment, for a specific operation, and create no vested rights. 
(b)  No permit holder shall assign, transfer, or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under these regulations nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit. 
(c)  A permitting fee that covers the administrative costs for administering the FOG program shall be established by the county and assessed to each facility subject to these regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 17) 
Sec. 32-379. - Payment of charges. 
All fees established by these regulations are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing or, if personally delivered, the date of delivery. Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 90 days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 18) 
Sec. 32-380. - Inspections; authority to enforce regulations. 
(a)  Authority to inspect. The compliance inspectors shall inspect food service establishments on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis and on a scheduled basis. All food service establishments may be inspected up to four times per year. Inspection of a FOG interceptor shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of FOG in an amount that would exceed the 20 percent rule. Inspection shall include all fixtures, equipment, food processing, and storage areas, and shall include a review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from a facility through the FOG interceptor. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not to be limited to: 
(1)  Failure to report changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(2)  Failure to properly maintain the FOG interceptor; 
(3)  Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; 
(4)  Failure to obtain or renew the FOG discharge permits in a timely manner; or 
(5)  Any other violations of these regulations or state law that requires correction by the food service establishment. 
(b)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of these regulations or where the FOG control program manager or designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the applicable provisions of this chapter, the FOG control program manager or designee is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform any of the duties imposed by the applicable provisions of this chapter. If such building, structure, or premises is occupied, the inspector shall present credentials to the occupant and shall request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure, or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law for entry. In the event of an emergency involving actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow, the inspector may access adjoining businesses or properties that share a sewer system with a food service establishment in order to prevent or remediate an actual or imminent sewer overflow. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 19) 
Sec. 32-381. - Reinspection fees; noncompliance letters; schedules. 
(a)  Reinspection fee. Any food service establishment in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or with any provision of these regulations shall pay a noncompliance fee. The purpose of the noncompliance fee is to compensate the county and/or the city for costs of additional inspections, follow-ups, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to these regulations. Noncompliance fees shall be in the amount adopted by the county. 
(b)  Noncompliance letters. Immediately following every inspection and/or FOG evaluation, the food service establishment inspected shall receive a letter indicating the results of the inspection. A certified letter of noncompliance means the food service establishment is in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code. Letters of noncompliance shall include a description of the code being violated and the immediate course of action the food service establishment shall be required to take to come into compliance. Failure to comply with a letter of noncompliance is also a violation of these regulations. 
(c)  Compliance schedule. Upon determination that a food service establishment is noncompliant with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of these regulations or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a FOG interceptor, the FOG control program manager may also issue and require the food service establishment to abide by a compliance schedule. The issuance of a compliance schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, requirements for installation of a FOG interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(d)  Fees. The FOG control program manager shall not issue a compliance schedule until such time as all amounts owned by the food service establishment due to the county or the city are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the FOG control program manager may issue an order suspending or revoking the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 20) 
Sec. 32-382. - Permit suspension and revocation; notification; hearing. 
(a)  Suspension and revocation. The FOG control program manager may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that a food service establishment: 
(1)  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a noncompliance letter or compliance schedule order; 
(2)  Destroys, removes, conceals, or knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the county or the city; 
(3)  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the county or the city to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with these regulations; 
(4)  Falsifies, tampers with, destroys, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to these regulations; 
(6)  Causes interference, a sewer blockage, or a sanitary sewer overflow in the sewer system, violates FOG interceptor maintenance requirements, violates any condition or limit of its FOG wastewater discharge permit, or violates any provision of these regulations; or 
(7)  Refuses to accept a notice by personal service or certified mail. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  When the FOG control program manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension or revocation, he shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the food service establishment setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days or more than 45 calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
(2)  At the suspension or revocation hearing, the food service establishment shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the director. The director shall conduct the hearing and shall render a decision in writing within 30 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(3)  The written decision and order of the director shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at the food service establishment's business address. Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the FOG control program manager becoming final, the food service establishment shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly into the county's sewer system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the food service establishment. Any owner or responsible management employee of the food service establishment shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. Upon an order of revocation by the FOG control program manager becoming final, the food service establishment shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the county's sewer system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the food service establishment. 
(4)  An order of permit suspension or revocation issued by the FOG control program manager shall be final in all respects on the 16th day after it is mailed to the food service establishment. 
(c)  Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations of the sewer system. Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, sanitary sewer overflows, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the county's sewer system and/or equipment, or to the operation of those facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for all costs required to clean and/or repair the facilities and/or equipment, together with expenses incurred to resume normal operations. A service charge of 25 percent of the county's or the city's costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the county and/or the city for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and recordkeeping. The total amount shall be payable within 45 days of invoicing. Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the county or the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the county and/or the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(d)  Termination of water service to the food service establishment. The county, by order of the FOG control program manager, may physically terminate water service to any property as follows: 
(1)  If so ordered in any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; or 
(2)  Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid FOG wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the county's sewer system after the issuance of a final order or suspension or revocation. 
All costs for physical termination of the water service shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food service establishment as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(e)  Emergency suspension order. The county may, by order of the FOG control program manager or designee, suspend water service when the FOG control program manager or designee determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause sanitary sewer overflows, sewer blockages, interference to the county's sewer facilities, or may cause the county and/or the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
(f)  Emergency suspension hearing. As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the director shall hold a hearing to provide a food service establishment the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the director. The director shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at that food service establishment's business address. This decision shall either lift the emergency suspension order or suspend or revoke the permit subject to the suspension and revocation appeal process set forth in these regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 5.1, § 21) 
Secs. 32-383—32-407. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 32-408. - Levied. 
A service charge is levied and assessed for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system. This charge is based on the amount of potable water consumed per month by each contributor to the sewer system. The rate at which this charge is levied shall be as established by the county. The charges imposed by this article may be periodically revised at the discretion of the county and pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement between the county and the city. A readiness-to-serve charge is imposed for the operation of the sewer system based on the size of the customer's water meter. A surcharge for overstrength waste, i.e., wastes consisting of total suspended solids and/or five-day biochemical oxygen demand materials in concentrations exceeding 250 mg/l, ammonia in concentrations exceeding 30 mg/l, and total phosphorus exceeding ten mg/l, is levied at a rate approved and adopted by the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 6, § 1) 
Sec. 32-409. - Billing. 
The county finance department will prepare for each contributor to the sewerage system a monthly or bimonthly notice of the amount due. This notice shall be addressed and mailed to the address as designated by the owner or occupant of the property. Payment is due in full ten days from the date the notice is mailed, and shall be in default if not paid on or before the 20th day after the date of the notice. Failure to receive the notice in no way relieves the occupant of liability for the amount due. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 32-410. - Collection. 
The county finance department will be responsible for the collection of all sewer service charges, pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement between the county and the city. It will have deposited to the account of the water and sewer fund of the county all sums collected for water and sewer services as soon as received. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 6, § 3) 
Sec. 32-411. - Disconnection of service for failure to pay. 
If payment has not been received 20 calendar days after the date of the notice of amount due for sewer services, a default notice shall be sent to the occupant of the property. If payment is not received within ten days after the date of the default notice, then the county will initiate action to terminate water service until such time as all sums due for sewer service, including penalties, are paid in full. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 6, § 4) 
Sec. 32-412. - Right to tax for benefit of sewer system. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting the right of the city or the county to exercise its right as authorized by law to create, operate and maintain a sewerage system through the imposition of ad valorem taxation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 6, § 5) 
Sec. 32-413. - Discharges to sewer system by persons or governments residing outside the county. 
No persons or governments residing or operating outside the limits of the county shall discharge or cause to be discharged any material into the sanitary sewer system of the county without the prior approval of the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 6, § 6) 
Secs. 32-414—32-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PHOSPHORUS CONTROL 

Sec. 32-440. - Declaration of policy. 
O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local government entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local government entity shall pass an ordinance mandating the retail sale of low phosphorus household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to encourage the use of clean phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight. The city adopts the county's findings that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream; promote health, safety, and welfare; and prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life, and property. It is vital to the health, well-being, and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the city that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 7, § 1) 
Sec. 32-441. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent. 
(1)  The term "household laundry detergent" means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(2)  The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
a.  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
b.  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
c.  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner; 
d.  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
e.  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
f.  A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
g.  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory; or 
h.  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospitals, health care facilities, or veterinary hospitals. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 7, § 2) 
Sec. 32-442. - Sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 7, § 3) 
Sec. 32-443. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum fine allowed under this Code. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 7, § 4) 
Sec. 32-444. - Civil action. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 32-443, the county and/or the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 7, § 5) 
Sec. 32-445. - Individual right to damages. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this division and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 25, art. III, div. 7, § 6) 
Secs. 32-446—32-473. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 32-474. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this division which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 32-478. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this division, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-3) 
Sec. 32-475. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city community development department finds that a violation of this division has occurred, the city community development department may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this division and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city municipal court by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require, without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city municipal court shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal court shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the municipal court upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in this subsection. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 14 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the city municipal court may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this division, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the city municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this division is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this division, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-8) 
Sec. 32-476. - Findings. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(2)  These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These nonstormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume nonstormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Therefore, the city adopts this division to prohibit such nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-1) 
Sec. 32-477. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  To prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this division shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This division is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this division are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-2) 
Sec. 32-478. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from this prohibition provision: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
This prohibition provision shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this division if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this division must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the county water and sewer department or its designee. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed; that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other; and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-4) 
Sec. 32-479. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-5) 
Sec. 32-480. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this division. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-6) 
Sec. 32-481. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in-person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(b)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(c)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 27, § 28-7) 
Secs. 32-482—32-501. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 32-502. - Findings. 
The mayor and city council makes the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The city is authorized by the supplementary powers provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6) to provide a stormwater collection and disposal system throughout the city. 
(2)  The federal Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the act emphasizes the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater programs which address water quality and the impact of stormwater runoff. 
(3)  Given the project cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses performed by the county and obtained by the city, it is appropriate to adopt a stormwater service fee rate methodology and to charge service fees to properties and persons within the city in a manner that recovers the cost of programs, systems and facilities and other costs associated therewith, including but not limited to allocations of the cost of services provided to the stormwater management utility by other funds of the city and other government entities and agencies, interest on bonds, operational and emergency reserves, allowances for delinquencies and bad debt, and such other costs as may be deemed reasonable and appropriate by the mayor and city council to ensure the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater programs, systems and facilities in the city. 
(4)  The stormwater conditions reflected in the study conducted by the county and obtained by the city reflect the current conditions of the stormwater system in the city. 
(5)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the city. Stormwater service fee rate methodology and service fees should be applicable throughout the city to enable the city to successfully manage operate and improve stormwater programs, systems and facilities at an advanced level. Service fees will also assist the city in meeting the regulatory obligations imposed by its national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permits by reducing pollution and increasing water quality within the city. 
(6)  The stormwater needs in the city include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Funding of stormwater programs, systems and facilities is therefore incidental to the fundamental regulatory function of the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities renders and/or results in both services and benefits to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses, and the services and benefits differ among the individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents in relation to the demands they impose individually and collectively on the stormwater systems and facilities. 
(8)  The services and benefits rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is not practical to allocate the cost of the city's stormwater management programs, systems and facilities in direct relationship to the services or benefits rendered to or received by individual properties or persons over a brief span of time, but it is both practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among properties and persons in proportion to the long-term demands they impose on the city's stormwater programs, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits. 
(9)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater systems and facilities in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 1) 
Sec. 32-503. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
Customer of the stormwater utility means all persons, properties, and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Detached dwelling unit means developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar nonresidential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by other than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple unit residential properties. 
Developed land means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of impervious surface as defined in this article. 
Duplex and triplex mean developed land containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) attached residential dwelling units located on one or more parcels of land. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by one parcel with that generated by another. An ERU shall be the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single detached dwelling lots in the city, which has been determined to be 3,000 square feet of impervious area. 
Hydrologic response means the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions, and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Multiple dwelling lot means a developed lot where more than one attached or detached residential dwelling unit is located. 
Other developed land means, but shall not be limited to, multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants. 
Service fees means the stormwater management service fees applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be used to fund the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Stormwater management systems means those systems which address the issues of drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs through improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the collection, retention, detention, and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 2) 
Sec. 32-504. - Establishment of a utility and an enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility which shall be responsible for stormwater management programs throughout the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. The stormwater utility management unit shall be composed of such personnel, employees and agents of the city as the mayor and city council may from time to time determine and their compensation shall be fixed and determined by the city manager as approved by the city council. 
(b)  A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established in the city budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the mayor and city council and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs, facilities, operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the city council, upon recommendation by the city manager. 
(c)  The mayor and city council hereby confers upon the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management programs, systems and facilities performed, provided or owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties other than roadways upon which such systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 3) 
Sec. 32-505. - Scope of responsibility for the city stormwater system and facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater facilities and public stormwater facilities located within the city. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the city and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. 
(b)  The city drainage system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the city which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement of those stormwater systems and facilities which: 
(1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities; 
(3)  Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(4)  Are determined by the city attorney to be the city's responsibility. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private facilities to ascertain that the stormwater systems are operating as intended. The stormwater utility may provide for remedial maintenance of facilities based upon the severity of problems and the potential hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 4) 
Sec. 32-506. - Requirements for on-site stormwater systems; enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  All property owners and developers of real property to be developed within the city shall provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site stormwater systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city development regulations and the laws of the state and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof charged to the owner in the same manner as a stormwater service charge. 
(b)  In the event that the city shall file an action pursuant to this article, from the date of filing such action the city shall have lien rights in relation to any service charge assessed against the property in the same manner as a tax levied against the property, which rights may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the Superior Court of DeKalb County. In addition, the city shall have the right to pursue collection of the service charge through other legal action or judgment. 
(c)  The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private property and public property owned by other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with any order or judgment entered pursuant to this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 5) 
Sec. 32-507. - General funding policy. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility program, systems and facilities shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater program, systems and facilities by individual properties or persons and/or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater programs, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses. Service charge rates shall be structured to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management within the city, including but not limited to general tax revenues allocated to stormwater management, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges and special assessments. 
(b)  The cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may include operating, capital investment and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management problems, needs and requirements. 
(c)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater systems or facilities or to private stormwater facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater systems or facilities. 
(d)  Stormwater utility service charge rates, fees and other similar charges shall be established by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 6) 
Sec. 32-508. - Stormwater service fee rates. 
Stormwater service fee rates may be determined and modified from time to time by the mayor and city council so that the total revenue generated by said fees and any other sources of revenues or other resources allocated to stormwater management by the city council shall be sufficient to meet the cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, operating expense, capital outlays, nonoperating expense, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the city council. Stormwater service fee revenues in any given year may exceed or be less than the cost of service in that year, provided, however, that the stormwater service fee rate shall be based on meeting the long-term projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities. All unencumbered stormwater management funds derived from service fees and other sources of revenue not expended at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the stormwater management utility enterprise fund account and balances shall be forwarded to the next fiscal year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 7) 
Sec. 32-509. - Exemptions. 
The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)  Undeveloped land; 
(2)  All public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Railroad tracks shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service fees; and 
(4)  Any property whereby 100 percent of the stormwater runoff is contained on the premises and no runoff enter into the stormwater management system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 8) 
Sec. 32-510. - Credits. 
Credits to the stormwater service fee may be determined and modified from time to time by the mayor and city council. Credits are available based on the following: 
(1)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit for on-site systems or facilities. Stormwater service charge credits shall be determined based on the technical requirements, design and performance standards contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(2)  Property owners seeking service charge credits pursuant to this article must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the city of a stormwater service charge credit application prior to January 1 of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed. Credits will only be granted through applications approved by the city for the remainder of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed. Any credits issued by the county in 2008 or any application received by the county before January 1, 2009, are hereby accepted as valid credits and applications for the city for the calendar year 2009. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a timely filed completed application, the city manager or his designee shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit has been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was submitted to the city. 
(4)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on: 
a.  Continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time; and 
b.  Upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. 
The city may revoke any credit at any time for noncompliance with this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 9) 
Sec. 32-511. - Stormwater service fee billing, delinquencies, and collections. 
A stormwater service fee bill may be sent though the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. The stormwater service fee bill may be billed and collected along with other fees and charges, including but not limited other utility bills, assessments or property taxes, as deemed most effective and efficient by the city manager. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fees and other charges and any associated fines or penalties, including but not limited to interest on delinquent service fees. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency during that backbilled period. A late charge of one percent of the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service fee bill shall be charged when a bill becomes delinquent. Thereafter, an additional charge of one percent based on the unpaid bill and any applicable delinquency charge shall be charged for each month the bill remains delinquent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 10) 
Sec. 32-512. - Appeals. 
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner and sequence: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager or his designated representative. In the case of stormwater service fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions that influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Using information provided by the appellant, the city manager shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days. In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to any property in conformance with the general purposes and intent of this article. 
(3)  All decisions by the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. All decisions of the city manager shall be final. 
(4)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have a right to appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the city's order or decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2008, ch. 26, § 11) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE COMPILED ORDINANCES OF 2008 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Compiled Ordinances of 2008 that are included herein. Sections of the compilation not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification, and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 