CODE OF THE CITY OF FOREST PARK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
The General Ordinances of the City 
____________ 
Ordained and Published in 1994  by Order of the  Mayor and Council 
____________ 
Laurel Henderson and Associates  P.O. Box 747  Morrow, Georgia 30260  (404) 961-7753 

OFFICIALS 
____________ 
MAYOR  Charles "Chuck" Hall 
____________ 
COUNCILMEMBERS 
H.H. Estes  John Buckholts 
Shane Short  Robert C. Wheeler 
Corine C. Deyton 
____________ 
CITY MANAGER  CITY ATTORNEY 
William J. Werner  Steven M. Fincher 
____________ 
PREFACE 
The Code of Forest Park, Georgia, is a codification of all ordinances of the municipality of a general and permanent nature. The code has been adopted by the governing body through the enactment of a single ordinance and thus constitutes the general body of ordinances enacted by the municipality. 
The code includes several features that will facilitate its use. The various chapters and articles of the code are topically arranged and follow one another in a natural, logical order. The table of contents, with a complete outline of this order, will often provide sufficient reference points to the reader. In addition, the reader may consult the index at the end of the volume. At the beginning of each chapter there is a section-by-section listing of the provisions within the chapter. 
Nontextual provisions such as severability clauses, repealer and enacting clauses are covered in Title 1 of this code and apply to the entire code. Various editorial notes, state law references and cross references have been included throughout the code to clarify its provisions. 
As of January, 1990, the Code of Forest Park is being supplemented by Book Publishing Company. The current supplement contains ordinances through Ordinance No. 93-026, adopted December 20, 1993. 
Book Publishing Company 
201 Westlake Avenue North 
Seattle, WA 98109 
(206) 343-5700 
1-800-537-7881 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FOREST PARK, GEORGIA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR FOREST PARK, GEORGIA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING CERTAIN PENALTIES; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, hereby ordains: 
Section 1.  The document entitled "Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia," including the revision dated November, 1985, and the subsequent revision dated February, 1986, a copy of which accompanies this ordinance and is incorporated herein and made a part hereof, is hereby adopted and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance. 
Section 2.  All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature of this city enacted on final passage on or before February 3, 1986, and not in the code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall this repeal affect any rights or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall this repeal affect the present annual appropriation of the city; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes now due or accrued; nor shall this repeal affect any zoning ordinance of the city or amendments thereto; nor shall this repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or resolution or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as provisions of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of the effective date of this code, are intended, and shall be considered as continuations thereof and not at new enactments. 
Section 5.  Any and all additions or amendments to the code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the code so that reference to "The Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  A copy of the code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone authorized by the city clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments, ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the city governing authority to make those provisions a part of the code, when those provisions have been reprinted in page form, and to extract from the code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed. A copy of the code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it and shall be considered the official code of the city. 
Section 7.  As pages of the code are replaced because the matter contained in them shall have been repealed, amended or otherwise shall have been superseded or rendered obsolete or inoperative, the city clerk shall retain copies of the pages of the code so superseded, rendered obsolete or otherwise rendered inoperative in a file so that the former provisions of the code may be readily available and easily found. The purpose of this section is to permit anyone desiring to do so to ascertain the precise status of any section of the code as of a given date. 
Section 8.  In case of the amendment of any section of the code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in the city charter or the code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 9.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which may cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Section 10.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of any conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 11.  This ordinance shall be in force and take effect on April 7, 1986. 
Adopted this 7th day of April, 1986. 
/s/  Jerome Tomasello, Mayor 
/s/  Charles F. Laws, City Clerk 
Supplement History Table 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A new charter for the City of Forest Park was adopted in the 1988 Session of the General Assembly (H.B. 1811). Unless historical notes appear in parentheses at the end of sections, the provisions codified herein are from the 1988 act. All numbering is that of the original act. Any material in brackets has been added by the codifier for clarity. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Forest Park, Georgia in the County of Clayton, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Forest Park, Georgia." Under that name, the city shall be and continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property, real and personal, which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; bring and defend actions; may contract and be contracted with; and may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will. This Act shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Forest Park, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention of or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of specific powers. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the city council, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Advertisement of city. To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising said city and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital, commercial, manufacturing, and other enterprises into the city. 
(2)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder. 
(4)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(5)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection, construction, and repair of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades. 
(6)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(7)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(8)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations. 
(9)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(11)  General health, safety and welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city, to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city. 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city. 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(20)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(21)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(22)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community. 
(23)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency. 
(24)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(25)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(26)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(27)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(28)  Public utilities and services. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. If any such charges, rates, fares, fees or assessments are not paid, such shall constitute a lien against any property of the persons served; said lien to be enforceable in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. The city is further authorized to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission. 
(29)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(30)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city. 
(31)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities. 
(32)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(33)  Solid waste. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; and to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; which charges, taxes, or fees, if unpaid shall constitute a debt and the city shall have a lien against any property of the persons served; said lien to be enforceable in the same manner, and under the same remedies, as a lien for city property taxes. 
(34)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors. 
(35)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements. 
(36)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(37)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(38)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(39)  Vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(40)  The governing body of the City of Forest Park shall have the authority to annually appropriate and donate money, derived from taxation, contributions, or otherwise, for and to any corporation, company, association, or institution for purely charitable purposes. The governing body is authorized, in its discretion, to select the recipients of such appropriations and donations and as to determine the amounts of the same. 
(41)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular power in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 00-05, §§ 1, 2, 4-3-2000) 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE 
PART 1. - COUNCIL COMPOSITION 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. The councilmembers shall be elected from council districts, and the mayor shall be elected at large. As used in this charter, the terms 'ward' and 'council district' shall have the same meaning. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided in Article I of this charter. 
(Act. No. 17, Ga. Laws 1997) 
Sec. 2.11. - Qualifications for mayor and council members. 
To be eligible for the office for mayor or council member, a person must be at least 21 years of age, and must meet the requirements of a qualified voter of the city, as prescribed by state law, and must have physically resided in the city for at least one (1) year preceding the election in which he offers as a candidate, and shall continue to reside physically in the city limits during this period of service. No person shall be eligible to be mayor or council member who shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude unless that person has received a full pardon and has all rights of citizenship restored. When qualifying, a person shall provide the city clerk with an affidavit as described in section 21-3-91 of the O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 2.12. - Terms of office. 
Except for the transitional terms provided for in section 5.13 of this charter, the terms of office for the city council shall begin on January 1 following the election and shall continue for four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.13. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in section 5.17 of this charter. 
Sec. 2.14. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and council members shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. The mayor and council members may individually make inquiries of any city employee concerning the operations of the city. 
PART 2. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2.20. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular public meetings at a stated time and place as provided by ordinance but not less often than twice a month. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible two (2) days prior to such meetings. 
(Act No. 329, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 2.21. - Mayor as presiding officer. 
The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the city council and shall have a vote only in the case of a tie vote by council members. 
Sec. 2.22. - Mayor pro tempore; alternate presiding officer. 
(a)  The city council at the first regular meeting in January each year, shall elect from its membership a mayor pro tempore for a term of one (1) year. The mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the mayor during his absence from the city or his disability. 
(b)  In any instance where the mayor pro tempore acts as mayor and becomes unable to fulfill duties of the mayor's office, the city council, by a majority vote, shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members to perform those duties. Any such inability of the mayor pro tempore shall be declared by majority vote of all council members. 
Sec. 2.23. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers, in addition to the presiding officer, shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. In any event, the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers, including the vote of the presiding officer where necessary to break a tie vote, shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(Ord. No. 97-012, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 12-38, § 1, 12-21-2012; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 1-22-2013; Act No. 329, § 2, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 2.24. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at his pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.25. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, resolutions, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  appoint committee members as provided in section 2.24; 
(6)  recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(7)  call special meetings of the city council as provided in section 2.20; 
(8)  cast the deciding vote in any instance where the council vote is tied; 
(9)  approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in section 2.32; 
(10)  perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or by ordinance. 
PART 3. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 2.30. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.31. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be "Be it ordained by the Governing Body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia," or words of similar import, and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules of which it shall establish; provided, however, except for emergency ordinances as provided in section 2.33, no ordinance shall be adopted the same day it is introduced unless it was distributed to council members for their review with the council agenda at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting at which the ordinance is formally introduced. 
(c)  Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(d)  Votes required to enact any ordinance or resolution shall be as prescribed by section 2.23. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall authenticate the ordinance by his signature, number ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall place a copy into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose. The city clerk shall maintain a similar book for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk, and he shall attach a copy of them to the original minutes of the meeting at which they were adopted. 
(e)  For the purposes of this charter, a resolution shall be denied as a formal expression, opinion, will, or intent of the governing body. 
Sec. 2.32. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the clerk to the mayor. 
(b)  Within seven days after the passage thereof the mayor may veto any resolution or ordinance of the council regardless of whether the mayor was present at the time of its enactment. The veto shall be in writing, setting forth the reason for the veto, and shall be delivered to the city clerk, who shall notify each councilmember at his or her home address by hand delivery or by registered mail. Such notice shall contain the reason for the veto. No later than the second council meeting after the mayor's veto the council may override the mayor's veto of any measure or act by a vote of four or more of its members to be taken by "yeas" and "nays" and entered upon the minutes of the council. 
(c)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided herein. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to city council as though disapproved and shall become law unless overridden by the council as proved in subsection (c) above. 
(Ord. No. 97-012, 12-15-97; Act No. 329, § 3, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 2.33. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but at least four affirmative votes shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 97-012, 12-15-97; Act No. 329, § 4, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 2.34. - Codification; printing. 
(a)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at [a] reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
PART 4. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2.40. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to contract with the city manager to serve for a definite period of time, not to exceed two (2) years, and shall fix his compensation and benefits. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. The mayor of the city is authorized to execute a contract with the city manager on behalf of the city pursuant to such terms and conditions as the city and the city manager may agree. The contract shall be reviewed and approved by the city council prior to its execution and appointment of a city manager. 
(c)  In the event the city determines that the city will exercise its authority to contract for the services of a city manager as authorized above, no such contract shall be executed during the last forty-five (45) days of any year in which the city holds a general election for purposes of electing a mayor or councilpersons. 
(Ord. No. 95-005, 7-3-95) 
Sec. 2.41. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager shall serve under the supervision of the city council. The city council may remove or suspend the city manager, which suspension shall be effective immediately; automatic termination shall follow in ten days, unless the city manager requests a hearing before the council. Said hearing, at the city manager's request, may be either public or private, and shall be held within ten days of the date of the request. All actions to be taken under this section, by the council, shall be by the action of three affirmative votes. 
(Act No. 329, § 5, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 2.42. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager may designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another qualified city administrative officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or his disability shall cease. 
(b)  In the event of the city manager's permanent absence for any reason, or in the event a temporary absence or disability later becomes a permanent absence or disability, the city council shall have the authority to designate a city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager until such time as the permanent replacement for the city manager has been determined. Voting on the replacement city manager shall be conducted as for the adoption or ordinances as set out in section 2.23 of this charter. The person appointed pursuant to this provision shall be the acting city manager until such time as another qualified city administrative officer is so designated or a new city manager is appointed pursuant to section 2.40 of this charter. 
(Ord. No. 95-005, 7-3-95) 
Sec. 2.43. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  He shall appoint to established positions, and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he appoints, except as otherwise provided by law, or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency. 
(2)  He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(3)  He shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but he may not vote. 
(4)  He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervisions, are faithfully executed. 
(5)  He shall prepare and submit all annual operating budgets to the city council. 
(6)  He shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  He shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(8)  He shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(9)  In the absence of another appointee, he shall serve as the purchasing agent for the city. 
(10)  He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 2.44. - Council relationship with administration. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no member of the council shall be permitted to give orders to any officer, department head, or employee, either publicly or privately, except in emergency situations. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Council's authority to organize government. 
The city council by ordinance may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city; may provide that the same person shall fill a number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and other agencies of the city. 
Sec. 3.11. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the city council; attending meetings of the city council and keeping a journal of its proceedings at such meetings, including the names and members present and absent, the vote of each member on each question, each motion considered, and the text of each resolution or ordinance considered; preparing and certifying copies of official records in his office, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinance; and performing such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.12. - Finance director. 
A finance director shall be appointed as provided in section 3.14. The finance director shall be the head of the city finance department and shall be responsible for the receipt, custody and disbursements of the city's money or funds; shall provide for accounting therefor; and shall perform such other duties as required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.13. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance. The city attorney or such assistant city attorneys may be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may at the discretion of the city council be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city, concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as provided by the city council. The city council may refer proposed contracts and resolutions, and shall refer all proposed ordinances to the city attorney for approval as to form prior to execution or adoption. 
Sec. 3.14. - Administrative and service department. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(b)  All appointive officers and directors of department shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(c)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(d)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The city manager may suspend or remove directors under his supervision, which suspension shall be effective immediately; automatic termination shall follow in ten days, unless the director appeals the manager's action as provided in this section. Written notice of such action and the reasons therefor, together with notice of the right of appeal, shall be provided to the director at the time of such action and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the city manager's action by three affirmative votes. 
(e)  The city manager may suspend or remove directors under his supervision in accordance with the provisions contained herein. 
1.  Termination. If the city manager determines that termination of a director is warranted, written notification shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested or hand-delivered to the director and sent by regular U.S. mail or hand-delivered to the mayor and city council. The director shall be considered suspended with pay effective immediately as of the date of the notice and shall continue to receive the other benefits of his/her employment with the city during the term of said suspension. In the event that the director appeals the city manager's decision to the mayor and city council as provided in this section, the suspension with pay and other benefits shall continue until the mayor and city council rules upon the city manager's decision to terminate said director. If an appeal is filed and the termination is upheld by the mayor and city council, then said termination shall become effective immediately upon the decision of the mayor and city council. In the event that there is no appeal of the city manager's decision, the director's termination shall automatically become effective on the first business day following the Appeal Period. 
2.  Suspension. If the city manager decides that suspension of a director is warranted, written notification shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested or hand-delivered to the director and sent by regular U.S. mail or hand-delivered to the mayor and city council. The suspension shall become effective on the first business day following the Appeal Period unless the director appeals the city manager's decision. If the director appeals the city manager's decision, there shall be no suspension unless and until the city manager's decision is upheld by the mayor and city council. In the event the suspension of the director is upheld by the mayor and city council, the suspension shall become effective on the first business day following the date of the decision of the mayor and city council. 
3.  Notice. Written notice of the city manager's intention to suspend or terminate any director and the reason therefore, together with notice of the right of appeal, shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested or hand-delivered to the director and sent by regular U.S. mail or hand-delivered to the mayor and city council. 
4.  Appeals. The director may appeal the decision of the city manager to the mayor and city council by written notification to the clerk of the city council. Written notification must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of suspension or termination (referred to herein as the "Appeal Period"). The mayor and city council, after a hearing, may override the city manager's action by three (3) affirmative votes. 
5.  Calculation of days. The ten (10) day Appeal Period set forth herein shall mean ten (10) calendar days. If the tenth (10th) day falls on a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday recognized by the city such that the city hall is closed for regular business, the appeal may be filed on the first business day following said Saturday, Sunday, or holiday. 
(Ord. No. 97-012, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, 4-15-2002; Act No. 329, § 6, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 3.15. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, ordinance, or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by three affirmative votes. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and one (1) member as vice-chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-012, 12-15-97; Act No. 329, § 7, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 3.16. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Except as authorized by law, the mayor or any council member shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or matter in which he is personally interested. 
Sec. 3.17. - Oath of office. 
Before a person takes any office, elective or appointive, in the city government, he shall take the following oath or affirmation before an officer of the state authorized to administer oaths: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; and that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the charter and ordinances of the City of Forest Park and I will well and truly perform the duties of the office of ____________ , and that I will to the utmost of my skill and ability endeavor to promote the interest and property of said city, without fear, favor, or affection. So help me God." 
The oath shall be administered orally and it shall also be signed. Signed oaths shall be permanent records and shall be kept as such by the city manager. 
Sec. 3.18. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.19. - Personnel policies. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: (i) the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; (ii) the administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; (iii) hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; (iv) such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and (v) such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Sec. 3.20. - Bonds for officers and employees. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Forest Park. 
Sec. 4.11. - Municipal judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or acting judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she has met all requirements imposed by state law. 
(c)  All judges shall be appointed by mayor and city council pursuant to the method of selection established by ordinance. 
(d)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution of mayor and city council. 
(e)  The appointment of any judge to the municipal court shall be of a term of no less than one year. The length of such term shall be established by ordinance, resolution, or written agreement between the judge and the mayor and city council. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the judge, he or she may be removed from office. Such removal shall occur as authorized by state law. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the judge, unless he or she is removed from office or he or she has resigned, he or she shall serve until mayor and city council appoint a successor. 
(h)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. 
(Ord. No. 95-004, 5-1-95; Act No. 329, § 8, 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 17-08, § 1, 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or twenty (20) days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for three hundred sixty-five (365) days or both or in such amounts and for such terms as may be authorized by the local or general laws of this State, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi, at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgements, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 95-004, 5-1-95) 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Clayton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to those proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
(a)  All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Sec. 5.11. - Wards. 
(a)  The Wards of the City of Forest Park shall be established as shown on the attached Exhibit A, unless and until changed by any future Ordinance of the city. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Forest Park, as the governing body and authority, shall have the power to make changes in ward lines, consistent with state law, from time to time whenever it is deemed advisable to contract or extend them; provided however, that the ward lines whenever rearranged shall not increase the number of wards beyond the total of five (5) wards. 
(c)  Following the publication of each decennial census, the city council may enact a Home Rule Redistricting Ordinance to reapportion election wards using the criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4.1. 
(Act. No. 17, Ga. Laws 1997; Ord. No. 11-38, § 1, 9-19-2011) 
Editor's note— It should be noted the Exhibit A referenced above is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 5.12. - Qualifications for council (residence in ward). 
A person desiring to qualify for the office of mayor or councilmember shall specify in writing to the city clerk the office which he seeks, and, if qualifying for the office of councilmember, shall state whether for councilmember at large or for a designated ward. A councilmember who qualifies to represent a designated ward in the city shall at the time of qualifying and at all times while holding office reside in that ward. 
(Act No. 329, § 9, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 5.13. - Regular elections. 
(a)  Those persons presently elected to office shall continue to serve until their successors are duly elected and qualified as provided by law. 
(b)  At the municipal election held in 1997, the mayor and councilmembers from council district 1 shall be elected for terms of four years. The councilmember presently serving who was elected from Ward 6 shall at the organizational meeting in January, 1998, and for the remainder of his or her term represent council district 5. At the municipal election held in 1999 and every four years thereafter, councilmembers from council districts 3, 4, and 5 shall be elected for terms of four years. The councilmember presently serving who was elected at large shall for the organizational meeting in January, 1998, and for the remainder of his or her term represent council district 2. At the 1999 election, his or her successor shall be elected for a term of two years. Thereafter, the mayor and councilmembers from council districts 1 and 2 shall be elected for terms of four years at the municipal election held in 2001 and every four years thereafter. 
(Act. No. 17, Ga. Laws 1997) 
Sec. 5.14. - Determination of results. 
Candidates who receive a majority of votes cast in an election shall be elected to a term of office for four (4) years (except for the transitional three (3) year terms provided in the previous section) and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. In the event no candidate for a designated office receives a majority of the votes cast in an election, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such runoff shall be held on the 14th day after the holding of the election. 
Sec. 5.15. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, council members, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)  knowingly violating any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished as follows: by the vote of four councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Clayton County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(Act No. 329, § 10, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 5.17. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 
PART 1. - TAXATION 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
PART 2. - BORROWING 

Sec. 6.20. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.22. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
PART 3. - ACCOUNTING AND BUDGETING 

Sec. 6.30. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.31. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.32. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or the council may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.33. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last meeting of the last month of the preceding fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this time, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.31. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.34. - Tax levies. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.35. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus with the same reflected in the minutes. The council only shall have the authority to make changes in the adopted budgets to shift funds from one line item to another and from one department to another. 
Sec. 6.36. - Capital improvements budget. 
An annual capital improvements budget shall be prepared by the city manager and submitted to city council for adoption in accordance with the budget procedures described in sections 6.32 and 6.33. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.33. 
Sec. 6.37. - Lapse of appropriations. 
(a)  All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year lapse into the general fund as unappropriated surplus or reserves, unless otherwise provided by law or the code of ordinances. 
(b)  No appropriation provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.38. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
PART 4. - PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 6.40. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  it is in writing; and 
(2)  it meets all requirements of city ordinances concerning purchases and contracts. 
Sec. 6.41. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.42. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying the cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of the street, avenue, alley, or public place when such swap is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.11. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 180 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof [of] this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.15. - Effective date. 
This charter shall become effective on [March 24, 1988]. 
Sec. 7.16. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Forest Park in the County of Clayton, approved April 19, 1973 (Ga. L. 1973, p. 3701), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Title 1 - General Provisions 
Chapter 1.  Use of Code 
CHAPTER 1. - USE OF CODE 

Sec. 1-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Park, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1959, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
Building and zoning administrator: Whenever the words "building and zoning administrator" are used, they shall mean the building inspector of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
City: The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Computation of time: Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; except that the last day shall be excluded if it is Sunday. 
County: The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Clayton, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Department of planning, building and zoning: Whenever the words "department of public services" are used, they shall mean the department of planning, building and zoning. 
Director of planning, building and zoning: Whenever the words "director of public services" are used, they shall mean the director of planning, building and zoning. 
Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing body: Whenever the words "governing body" are used, they shall mean the mayor and council of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Joint authority: Whenever a joint authority is given to three (3) or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
Month: The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number: Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath: The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and"affirmed." 
Or, and: "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Other officials or officers, etc.: Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only (i.e., "city clerk," "director of public works," etc.), they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Forest Park. 
Owner: The word "owner" applied to real estate shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint interest or other fee interest in the whole or a part of such real estate. 
Person: The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following: The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State: The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street: The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
Week: The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
Year: The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Department of police services: Wherever the words "department of police services" are used herein, same shall mean the department providing police services for the City of Forest Park, Georgia and which shall hereafter be known as the "department of police services of the City of Forest Park, Georgia." 
Department of fire and emergency medical services: Whenever the words "department of fire and emergency medical services" are used herein, same shall mean fire protection services and emergency medical services, together with the services of emergency management administration and all services providing thereby and shall hereafter be known as "the department of fire and emergency medical services." 
Director of police services: Whenever the words "director of police services" are used, they shall mean the director of public safety of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Director of police and fire services: Whenever the words "director of police and fire services" are used, they shall mean the director of public safety of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Planning commission: Whenever the words "planning commission" are used they shall mean the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-2; Ord. No. 86-010, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 87-016, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 95-003, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 96-003, § 5, 2-5-96) 
Sec. 1-1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The boldfaced catchlines of sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1959, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinances repealed. 
(Code 1959, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-1-6. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  Conformity to numbering system; omission of repealed portions. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Form of amendments generally. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: … (Set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)  Form for incorporation of new material. When the governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code which the governing body desires to incorporate into the Code a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ____________ . It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)  Repeal. All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(e)  Renumbering. When necessary, sections and subsections to the Code may be renumbered by the official codifier for the city to fulfill the intent of the governing body but all such changes shall be approved in advance by the city attorney. 
Sec. 1-1-7. - Altering Code prohibited; penalty for violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 hereof. 
(Code 1959, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-1-8. - General penalty. 
Any person who violates any section or provision in this Code or in any ordinance of the city by doing any act which is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or who fails to do any act which is required by said Code or ordinance, shall, after trial and if convicted in the appropriate Forest Park Municipal Court, be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisoned for a period not to exceed six (6) months and one (1) day, unless otherwise noted in this Code or other specific ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-004, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 14-21, § 1, 9-2-2014) 
Title 2 - General Government 
Chapter 1.  Mayor and Council 
Chapter 2.  Elections 
Chapter 3.  Administration 
Chapter 4.  Personnel 
Chapter 5.  Municipal Court 
CHAPTER 1. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Establishment of governing body, City Charter, Art. II. 

ARTICLE A. - MEETINGS OF GOVERNING BODY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Open meetings law, O.C.G.A., § 50-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-1-1. - Time, date and location of regular meetings. 
(a)  The governing body shall establish from time to time by resolution the times, dates, and locations of regular meetings. Such regular meetings shall occur no less often than twice per month. 
(b)  At any regular meeting, the time, date or location of the next regular meeting may be changed by action of the city council. 
(c)  Unless otherwise changed by action of the city council, any regular meeting which falls on a legal holiday shall be held on the first work day following said holiday. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 1-3-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Presiding officer; rules of order. 
(a)  The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tem, or in the absence of both mayor and mayor pro tem, any member of the governing body who may be designated by the members present, a quorum being present, shall preside at all meetings of the governing body. 
(b)  The presiding officer shall enforce "Robert's Rules of Order" relating to parliamentary procedure during all meetings of the governing body; however, should such "Robert's Rules of Order" conflict with the provisions of this code the provisions of this code shall prevail. 
(Code 1959, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-1-3. - Agenda. 
(a)  All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, petitions, contract documents, request(s) for personal visitation, or other matter to be submitted to the governing body shall, at least one (1) week prior to each meeting of the governing body be delivered to the city manager, whereupon the city manager shall immediately arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business and shall furnish each member of the governing body with a copy of the same at least ninety-six (96) hours prior to the meeting. 
(b)  The section shall apply to regularly scheduled meetings of the governing body scheduled pursuant to section 2.20(a) of the Charter of the City of Forest Park and not to specially called meetings called pursuant to section 2.20(b) of the aforesaid Charter section. Additionally this section should be read in conjunction with section 2.24 of the charter of the City of Forest Park giving the city council the authority to establish its own rules and procedures. 
(Code 1959, § 2-3; Ord. No. 97-002, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 97-005, 3-17-97) 
Sec. 2-1-4. - Roll call. 
Before proceeding with the business of the governing body, the city clerk or his duty shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Code 1959, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-1-5. - Reasons for vote in minutes. 
Any member of the governing body shall have the right to have entered in the minutes the reasons for his vote or action pertaining to any matter of city business. 
(Code 1959, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-1-6. - Oath. 
(a)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city the oath hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Before a person takes any office, elective or appointive, in the city government, he shall take the following oath or affirmation before an officer of the state authorized to administer oaths. 
(c)  Said oath shall read: 
"I, ____________ (state your name) solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; and that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Forest Park, and I will well and truly perform the duties of the office of ____________ (insert name of office), and that I will to the utmost of my skill and ability endeavor to promote the interests and property of said city, without fear, favor, or affection. So help me God." 
_____ Signature of Office Holder 
Signature of Administering Officer 
(d)  The signed oath shall be permanent records and shall be kept as such by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 88-014, 9-19-88) 
Sec. 2-1-7. - Rules of procedure and decorum. 
The following rules of procedure and decorum are hereby adopted to be applicable to all regular and special meetings of the city's governing body: 
(1)  Getting the floor. 
(a)  Each member of the governing body shall have a right to speak and address any matter or issue before the governing body, for up to a total initial time limit of three (3) minutes per matter or issue. However, when a member of the governing body wishes to make a motion or speak during a discussion or debate, he or she must first be recognized by the presiding officer in order to speak. Council members are not permitted to call out or interrupt another speaker. The order in which members of the governing body are to be recognized for the purpose of addressing or speaking to any particular issue or subject matter shall be determined by the presiding officer in his or her discretion, provided that the presiding officer shall not be entitled to prohibit a member of the governing body from speaking regarding each issue or matter under discussion, for up to a total of three minutes for each issue or matter. The only manner in which any member of the governing body may be recognized by the presiding officer for the purpose of speaking during a meeting is to first raise a hand and be recognized by the presiding officer, in accordance with this subsection. 
(b)  When making remarks at a meeting, each member of the governing body shall confine his or her remarks to the topic being discussed or debated, and shall avoid personal attacks upon other members of the governing body or upon the motives or character of other members. 
(c)  After all members of the governing body who wish to speak on a single topic have been allowed to speak, then the presiding officer shall have the right, but not the obligation, to allow a member of the governing body to speak a second time on the subject or topic being discussed, for up to a total of two (2) additional minutes for each topic or subject being discussed. 
(d)  A second is required for any motion to assure minimum support for the motion. 
(e)  When a second is not forthcoming, the motion will "die for lack of a second," and the presiding officer shall so announce. Then the next order of business will be taken up without further debate or discussion. 
(f)  The presiding officer has the right to rule remarks or comments out of order and thereby terminate them, if a council member has already made essentially the same point, or if the council member is repeating something he or she has already stated. The purpose of this rule is to avoid redundancies and repeating the same point more than once, and to avoid wasting time during debate and discussion. 
(g)  No council member shall be allowed to speak on any one (1) topic for more than a total of five (5) minutes during any single meeting. 
(2)  Decorum during meetings. 
(a)  All requests for recognition by the presiding officer must be done by first raising a hand and waiting for the presiding officer to recognize the council member in order to begin speaking. Except for raising a "point of order," at no time shall any council member be allowed to interrupt the presiding officer if he or she is speaking, for any purpose. 
(b)  All comments of any council member shall be addressed to the presiding officer or to the general public in attendance at the meeting; provided however that it shall be the privilege of a council member to ask any question to the city manager, any city staff person or the city attorneys. 
(c)  No council member shall be permitted to make rude, obnoxious, slanderous, or personal attacks on anyone, including but not limited to any other member of council or the presiding officer. All council members shall also refrain from side discussions or other distractions during a meeting. 
(3)  Point of inquiry. 
(a)  A member of the city council may raise a "point of inquiry" if a simple clarification of a motion (a motion that is already before the council for consideration) is needed. This should be done by raising a hand and stating to the presiding officer, "point of inquiry," and at that time the presiding officer may in his or her discretion, recognize the council member by stating "state your point." 
(b)  Points of inquiry are used sparingly and only in case of honest confusion as to the intent or meaning of a then pending motion. A point of inquiry may not be used to simply add to the debate or discussion. 
(c)  Clarification cannot take longer than three (3) minutes. 
(4)  Point of order. 
(a)  A council member may interrupt a speaker in order to raise a "point of order," if the council member reasonably believes a meeting is being conducted in a manner inconsistent with these rules or Robert's Rules of Order. 
(b)  If a point of order is properly raised by the council member being recognized by the presiding officer to speak, then the council member who was speaking will upon request of the presiding officer yield the floor for the limited purpose of hearing the point of order. 
(c)  The mayor would then say "state your point". 
(5)  Public comments. 
(a)  Public comments will be allowed only during the "public comments" period of each regular meeting of the governing body at the time shown on the agenda. Members of the public are not allowed to participate in any debate or discussion being conducted by the members of the governing body. 
(b)  Public comments will be limited in time to a total of three (3) minutes per speaker, and a total time limit at any one meeting of fifteen (15) minutes. If more than five (5) potential speakers sign up to make public comments, then the total amount of time permitted for each individual speaker will be reduced by an announcement of the presiding officer, so as to limit the total time to fifteen (15) minutes. 
(c)  No person may sign up more than once in an effort to gain more time for a public comment. 
(d)  Public comments during a meeting of the city governing body will only be allowed to residents of the City of Forest Park or to owners of businesses maintaining a business site physically situated within the corporate limits of the City of Forest Park. 
(e)  Persons not residing within the City of Forest Park who do not own a business as specified in subsection (d) above who wish to address the governing body during any regular meeting must first request that they be placed on the agenda for the upcoming regular meeting, such request to be made in writing by close of business at city hall on the Wednesday immediately preceding the regular meeting at which they wish to speak. 
(f)  All public comments must be limited to matters on the agenda or over which the governing body has jurisdiction. 
(g)  Nonresidents who do not own a business as specified in subsection (d) above will also be limited to three (3) minutes per speaker, and a total of fifteen (15) minutes for an entire group of speakers at any single meeting, whether they are speaking on the same topic or not. If more than five (5) potential nonresident speakers are placed on the agenda in order to address the governing body, the time permitted for each individual speaker shall be reduced so as to limit the total time for speaking for such nonresidents to fifteen (15) minutes at any one (1) meeting. 
(6)  Addressing the city council and citizens. 
(a)  Speakers may raise any point of concern regarding any matter on the agenda or any matter over which the governing body has jurisdiction, but each speaker must maintain a decorous demeanor and refrain from personal attacks upon members of the governing body, shouting and using obscene language. 
(b)  The presiding officer may interrupt and take the floor away from individuals who violate subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Comments which are redundant or repetitive from previous statements made in the same meeting may be ruled out of order and terminated by the presiding officer. 
(7)  Removal for violation of these rules. Any council member who violates these rules must first be orally warned by the presiding officer, and if the council member then interrupts another speaker or speaks out without being recognized, or violates these rules in any other way for a second time in a single meeting, then the presiding officer may ask the sergeant at arms (a sworn City of Forest Park Police Officer) to remove the offending council member from the city council chambers for the remainder of the meeting. 
(8)  Purpose of these rules. It is not the intent of these rules to in any way hinder or impair the full and free expression of all competing viewpoints in discussions and debates. Instead it is the intent of this section to foster confidence in government through encouraging civil and respectful meetings. The failure to strictly observe these rules and procedures shall not affect the jurisdiction of the governing body and shall not be deemed to in any way invalidate or impair the legal validity and effect of official action taken by the governing body at any meeting that is otherwise held and conducted in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 14-07, §§ 1—3, 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-1-8. - Qualifications for office of mayor and council member. 
In addition to the qualifications set forth in Section 2.11 of the City Charter, in order to qualify to run for election to the office of mayor or council member of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, the person seeking to qualify shall not have been involuntarily removed from any elective office within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date the person seeks to qualify for such office. 
(Ord. No. 11-35, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 2-1-9, 2-1-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Additional civil defense emergency powers of mayor, § 4-3-4. 

Sec. 2-1-11. - Power of mayor to declare the existence of emergency conditions. 
In the event the mayor, as the chief executive officer of the city, determines that an emergency condition or emergency conditions exist, he shall issue a declaration and proclamation declaring the emergency. He may proclaim and declare an emergency when in his opinion there is reasonable danger to life or property due to the presence or likelihood of unusual weather conditions, fire, civil unrest, unforeseen disaster or the stoppage or loss of utility service or services in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9A-1) 
Sec. 2-1-12. - Powers of mayor after declaration of emergency conditions. 
After the mayor has declared the existence of an emergency as set forth above, he shall have the power in all or a portion of the city to: 
(1)  Direct the work, actions, and activities of city employees to assist in preserving life, limb, and property; 
(2)  Close streets and sidewalks to vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
(3)  Impose curfews; 
(4)  Close business establishments; 
(5)  Close public buildings and other public facilities; 
(6)  Cooperate with and assist personnel of the United States of America, the State of Georgia, Clayton County, and other municipalities to the end of preserving life, limb and property in Forest Park. 
(Code 1959, § 9A-2) 
Sec. 2-1-13. - Limitation of emergency powers. 
The mayor shall have the authority to exercise the powers set forth above only for a period of seventy-two (72) hours after the declaration of emergency or until the next regular or called meeting of council, whichever occurs first. However, should emergency conditions exist at the expiration of seventy-two (72) hours after the initial declaration and no council meeting has occurred he shall exercise emergency powers until the emergency no longer exists or until council meets, whichever is first. 
(Code 1959, § 9A-3) 
Sec. 2-1-14. - Memorandums of understanding. 
The mayor shall have the power to enter into "Memorandums of Understanding" with the proper authorities of the United States of America, the State of Georgia, Clayton County, and other municipalities in order to effectively carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such memorandums shall first be reviewed by the city council and receive the approval of same. 
(Code 1959, § 9A-4) 
Secs. 2-1-15—2-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinance book to be maintained, City Charter, § 2.16; Code of Ordinances, Title 1. 

Sec. 2-1-21. - Preparation. 
All ordinances and resolutions shall be approved as to form by the city attorney prior to council consideration. No ordinance or resolution shall be prepared for presentation to the governing body unless ordered by a member of the governing body or the city manager or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. No ordinance shall be changed in any form whatsoever by the governing body except by ordinance, and specifically, no ordinance shall be changed by motion or resolution. 
Sec. 2-1-22. - Introduction and approval. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the governing body must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the governing body, except that the city manager or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the governing body, and any member may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-1-23. - Limitation on subject matter; enacting clause. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one (1) subject, except ordinances making appropriations and ordinances codifying or rearranging existing ordinances, and the subject of all ordinances shall be clearly expressed in the title. The enacting clause of all ordinances introduced to governing body shall be: "Be it ordained by the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia." 
(Code 1959, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-1-24. - Signing. 
All ordinances shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk who shall also affix the seal of the city, and shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 2-11) 
Secs. 2-1-25—2-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - COMPENSATION FOR THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— This article was originally designated as Article D, comprised of §§ 2-4-32—2-4-34. Numbering was changed by the codifier to fall with other provisions relating to the governing body. 

Sec. 2-1-31. - Time for determining compensation. 
The salary for the mayor and members of the council shall be set by the governing body from time to time. In any event, any action to increase the salary or compensation of the elected members of the governing body shall not be effective until after the taking of office of those elected at the next regular municipal election held immediately following the date on which the action to increase the compensation was taken. Further, the governing body shall take no action during the period of time beginning with the date that candidates for election to membership on the municipal governing body may first qualify as such candidates and ending with the date members of the municipal governing body take office following their election. No action shall be taken until notice of intent to take said action has been published in the legal organ of Clayton County, Georgia at least once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week during which the action is to be taken. 
(Ord. No. 88-017, 10-17-88) 
Sec. 2-1-32. - Annual compensation and monthly expense allowance for the mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall receive an annual compensation that shall be set by resolution of the governing body, and shall be paid on a monthly basis. In any month that the mayor shall be absent without just cause from a regular meeting or a regular work session held during that month, then there shall be a deduction of ten (10) percent from the mayor's gross monthly compensation for that month for each regular meeting missed by the mayor without just cause that month, and a deduction of ten (10) percent from said gross compensation for each regular work session missed by the mayor without just cause that month. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "just cause" shall mean and include an absence due to personal illness of the mayor or a member of the mayor's immediate family, an absence due to attending the funeral of an immediate family member, or any absence deemed justified and reasonable by a vote of the governing body. In all cases, the question of whether there was "just cause" for an absence shall be determined by a vote of the governing body based on information provided by the mayor. 
(c)  The mayor, in addition to his or her annual salary, shall receive payment up to an amount set by resolution of the governing body on a monthly basis so as to reimburse the mayor for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor for carrying out his or her duties during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 93-017, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 05-58, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 05-59, § 1, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 09-55, § 1, 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 2-1-33. - Compensation and expenses of members of the city council. 
(a)  Each member of the city council shall receive an annual compensation that shall be set by resolution of the governing body, and shall be paid on a monthly basis. In any month that a councilmember shall be absent without just cause from a regular meeting or a regular work session held during that month, then there shall be a deduction of ten (10) percent from the councilmember's gross monthly compensation for that month for each regular meeting missed by said councilmember without just cause that month, and a deduction of ten (10) percent from said gross compensation for each regular work session missed by said councilmember without just cause for that month. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "just cause" shall mean and include an absence due to personal illness of the councilmember or a member of the councilmember's immediate family, an absence due to attending the funeral of an immediate family member, or any absence deemed justified and reasonable by a vote of the governing body. In all cases, the question of whether there was "just cause" for an absence shall be determined by a vote of the governing body based on information provided by the councilmember. 
(c)  Each member of the city council, in addition to his or her annual salary, shall receive payment up to an amount set by resolution of the governing body on a monthly basis so as to reimburse said councilmember for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the councilmember for carrying out his or her duties during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 99-016, § 2, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 09-55, § 1, 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 2-1-34—2-1-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - CODE OF ETHICS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2012, repealed former Art. E, §§ 2-1-41—2-1-69, and enacted a new Art. E as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 01-01, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 01-04, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 04-05, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 04-10, § 1, 2-16-2004; Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 5-5-2008. 

Sec. 2-1-41. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage ethical standards of official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who do not abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Sec. 2-1-42. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code of Ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this Code of Ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Sec. 2-1-43. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this Code of Ethics: 
(1)  Board of ethics or board means the entity created by section 2-1-46 of this article. 
(2)  Business means any corporation, company, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual, trust or other legal entity carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
(3)  Business transaction means to convey, acquire or lease (for compensation or by gratuity) any personal property, real property, or provide services (for compensation or by gratuity) on behalf of oneself or any third party as an agent, broker, dealer, or representative. 
(4)  City means the City of Forest Park. 
(5)  City employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
(6)  City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined elsewhere, does not include city employees, but does mean the mayor and members of the city council. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council, as appropriate, to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
(7)  Confidential information means any information which by law or practice is not available to the public. 
(8)  Consultant means any person not a member of the governing authority and who is not an employee of the city who is retained to render personal services of a technical or professional nature, whether paid or unpaid, and who has other personal or private employment. The term "consultant" includes, but is not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors, accountants, brokers, financial advisors, and title abstractors. 
(9)  Contract means any claim or demand against or any lease, account, or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, verbal, or in writing. 
(10)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(11)  Governing authority or city council means the mayor or any council member of the city. 
(12)  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws and step-children. 
(13)  Incidental interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which is acquired merely by chance or without intention or calculation, and which has insignificant value, if any. 
(14)  Interest means any direct pecuniary or gratuity benefit, which is not a remote interest, held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority or to a member of city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. All such members shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
a.  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
b.  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefit unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
c.  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, or shareholder except as otherwise provided herein; or 
d.  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(15)  Official act or action means any legislative, administrative, appointive, or discretionary act of a city official or official as defined in (6) above. 
(16)  Paid means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary, a commission, a dividend, or percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee. 
(17)  Participate means to take part in official acts, actions, or proceedings personally as a city official or official through approval, disapproval, decision, discussion, recommendation, investigation, the rendering of advice or the failure to perform a duty or the failure to act; provided, however, abstention required by this article shall not be considered as participation. 
(18)  Person means any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust, or association, whether paid or unpaid, and includes any city official or official. 
(19)  Property means any property, whether real or personal, or tangible or intangible, and includes currency and commercial paper. 
(20)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official or official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. This generally includes, but is not limited to, the adoption of the general budget and adoption or substantial revision of the land use plan or zoning ordinance of the city, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city garbage charges or similar matters. Such are deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
(21)  Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or indirectly, which is not a remote interest, which results in a pecuniary (monetary) or non-monetary benefit accruing to the official as a result of an official act or action taken by the official, involving a contract or other transaction with: 
a.  Any immediate family member; 
b.  Any business or entity in which the official receives compensation or other benefits in lieu of compensation; 
c.  Any business or entity where the official serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
d.  Any person or entity in which the official is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor thereof. 
(22)  Transaction means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action by an official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Sec. 2-1-44. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than in their official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record, such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse themselves from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of their office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, any such contract, with the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in their work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  This prohibition shall not apply in the case of the designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. 
(4)  This prohibition shall not apply in the case of borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan. 
(5)  This prohibition shall not apply in the case of contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 (Sale of real or personal property) as now or hereafter amended. 
(6)  This prohibition shall not apply in the case of contracts for services which are awarded pursuant to sealed competitive bids subsequent to an advertised competitive bid process in accordance with the purchasing ordinance of the city. 
(7)  This prohibition shall not apply in the case of contracts with former city officials except that the city shall not enter into any contract with, or take any official act or action favorably affecting, any person, or business represented by a former city official when such person has been a city official within the twenty-four-month period preceding such action, unless: 
a.  The city had a contract with such person or business prior to the member leaving office; 
b.  The business received the contract for having the lowest and best bid pursuant to the purchasing procedures established by the city and the city official did not represent the business in its discussions with or submissions to the mayor and council; or 
c.  The contract is an exception recognized under this section of the ethics ordinance. 
(8)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known verbally on the record or in writing to the city council and the city clerk prior to any discussion or vote related to such agency. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic or political gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation or gratuity to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation or gratuity could reasonably be expected to impair or call into question such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse themselves and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment, or supplies for private or political purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice of the city to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public, for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use their position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial or any other benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city, nor shall a city official attempt to or obligate the city or give the impression of obligating the city to any obligation whatsoever without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training, or other educational events, and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the city nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the city on any matter pending before the municipal court of the city. 
(q)  No city official shall, by such member's conduct, give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence or unduly enjoy favor in the performance of official acts or actions by the official or that such member is affected unduly by the rank or position of or kinship or association with any person. 
(r)  No city official shall directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of their official duties. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  A non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value (value of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or less); 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  A transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 (Sale of real or personal property) as now or hereafter amended; 
(4)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; and 
(5)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
(s)  Except as required by Georgia's Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.) or other properly enacted statutory authority, no city official, whether paid or unpaid, shall disseminate nonpublic information or undisclosable information concerning the property, governing operations, policies, decisions, plans, or affairs of the city, nor shall such official use such information or any information acquired in his/her official capacity to advance his/her financial or personal or political interest or that of others under any circumstances. 
(t)  No city official shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a city official. 
(u)  No city official shall use his/her superior position to require an employee of the city to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his/her family, business, social, church, or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(3)  Work for him/her personally without paying him/her just compensation. 
(v)  No city official shall use city property of any kind for purposes other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for these purposes or any other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Sec. 2-1-45. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision or discussion on any matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and city council prior to participating in a vote or decision or discussion regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  No city official shall engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties of the official. For the purposes of this paragraph, the employment of a city official as a consultant by any business involving matters unrelated to any contract or transaction by or with the city shall not be deemed incompatible with such official's official duties. 
(d)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision or discussion is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision or discussion, and need not disclose the interest. 
(e)  Any city official who has an interest which said official has reason to believe may be affected by such official's acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the city shall disclose the precise nature and value of such interest prior to the city officials taking official action on a matter affecting such interest by making a verbal statement on the record or by providing a sworn written statement to the city council and the city clerk. Such statements shall be deemed a public record. Further, such official shall abstain from participating in any official acts or actions related to such interest. 
(f)  Any city official who has an ongoing relationship with a business or individual arising out of the normal course of commerce for which such official receives compensation at a commercially reasonable rate, shall disclose such relationship if the city has or can be reasonably anticipated to purchase goods or services from such business or individual. A disclosure of such relationship shall be made once each year during the month of January on a disclosure form provided by the city clerk. Such disclosure shall describe the nature of the relationship, the official and other parties in the relationship, and the financial interest of the official in such relationship. Such disclosure forms shall be kept on file in city hall by the city clerk and shall be deemed a public record. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Sec. 2-1-46. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Creation; qualification of members. There is hereby created a board of ethics (the "board") consisting of five (5) members who are residents of the city, and have been residents of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of being appointed to the board, and shall remain residents of the city while serving as a member of the board. Members of the board shall not be elected officials, persons appointed to elective office, full-time appointed officials whether exempt or nonexempt, or city employees, nor shall they be currently serving on any other board or commission or authority of the city. Further: 
(1)  No person shall serve as a member of the board if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(2)  Members of the board with any matter pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint, shall be disqualified from serving on the board for that complaint. In such an event, the mayor and council shall qualify and appoint an alternate member of the board to serve in the place of the disqualified individual, for that complaint only. 
(3)  No person shall serve on the board who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude (an offense that is contrary to justice, honesty, modesty, good morals, or man's duty to man) in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least five (5) years have elapsed from the date of the restoration of such rights. 
(4)  No person shall serve on the board who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age or who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the city. 
(5)  Upon appointment, members of the board shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(6)  Members of the board serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council, and may be removed by majority vote of the mayor and council, with or without cause. 
(b)  Composition of board; term of office. Each member of the board shall be appointed by the mayor and council, with one (1) member being from each of the five (5) wards of the city. Members appointed to the board from odd wards (1, 3, and 5) shall have an initial term of two (2) years, and those appointed from even wards (2 and 4) shall have an initial term of three (3) years. Successors to the first members of the board and all future successors thereof shall be appointed for two-year terms upon the expiration of their respective terms of office. All members of the board shall serve until their successors are appointed. No person may serve more than three (3) consecutive terms as a member of the board. 
(c)  Presiding officer and other officers. The board shall select its own presiding officer, and any other officers it feels are necessary, from among its members. 
(d)  Vacancy; removal from board. A vacancy of the board shall exist by reason of death, resignation, loss of ward and/or city residency, or removal by the mayor and council. If a member of the board ceases to be a resident of the ward for which they were appointed or of the city, that member's position on the board shall become vacant. If a member's residency is contested, the member's position on the board, by operation of law, shall become vacant upon the establishment of the fact of such non-residency by a court of competent jurisdiction. A member of the board challenged on the basis of non-residency in the city or ward shall file an affidavit with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of receiving the challenge, setting forth the facts supporting the residency of such member. A member of the board may also be removed from the board during a term if the member becomes ineligible to hold civil office within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 and that ineligibility is established by a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction which declares the office vacant because of such ineligibility. Any vacancy on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term or new term by the mayor and council qualifying and appointing a person residing in the respective ward of the vacancy. 
(e)  Staff; legal advisor. The mayor and council shall provide such staff support for the board as they determine to be necessary for the board to fulfill its duties. The city attorney is hereby designated to be the legal advisor for the board, except that the city attorney is not authorized to represent the board in any legal action if doing so would create a conflict which would prevent the city attorney from also representing the mayor, the city council, or the city manager. The city clerk shall serve as recording secretary to the board and shall provide such administrative services to the board as may be necessary. Neither the city attorney nor the city clerk shall be eligible for appointment as members of the board. 
(f)  Compensation of members of the board of ethics. The presiding officer of the board shall receive compensation in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per meeting. Other members of the board shall receive compensation in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per meeting. 
(g)  Duties and powers of the board. 
(1)  The board shall have the following duties and powers: 
a.  Adopt written rules governing its procedures and providing for the holding of regular and special meetings, which rules shall be subject to the approval of the city council, and a copy of the rules, if any, shall be filed with the city clerk; 
b.  Administer oaths; 
c.  Conduct hearings as needed to hear and decide specific cases in which a violation of this article is alleged, whether such cases arise from a complaint or are brought on the board's own motion; 
d.  When it deems it appropriate, request the city attorney for assistance in compelling the production of documents and witnesses to assist the board in the conduct of any investigation; 
e.  When circumstances make it necessary to do so, request outside legal counsel, a hearing officer or panel, and other experts as needed after solicitation of recommendations from the city attorney (unless the need to retain outside counsel is caused by a conflict involving the city attorney's office), which must first be approved by the city council, who, upon approval, shall enter into a contract for such services. 
f.  Serve as legal custodian of the board's records, and accept, file, maintain, and administer, in accordance with all applicable laws, any information related to the purposes of this article; 
g.  File all open opinions of the board with the city clerk, which shall be open to public inspection. To the extent permitted by law, confidential opinions and any records obtained or filed in connection with requests for confidential opinions, whether the records are written, tape recorded, videotaped, or otherwise recorded, shall be kept confidential; and confidential advisory opinions rendered shall be closed in whole to public inspection. Confidential opinions and summaries of them or open references to them shall be drafted in such a way as not to reveal confidential information; 
h.  In coordination with the city attorney and other appropriate personnel of the city, ensure that each member attends or has attended a workshop on ethics as conducted by the city attorney. Attendance at this workshop is a condition of service as a member of the board, and, each board member shall commit themselves to attend the workshop within ninety (90) days of taking office. 
(2)  The board does not have the authority to reverse or otherwise modify a prior action of the city council or an officer or employee of the city. If the board finds a prior action of the city council, officer or employee to have been ethically improper, the board shall render an initial decision advising that the action should be reconsidered. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Sec. 2-1-47. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  Who may request board action. 
(1)  Any person or persons may file a complaint with the board, by filing the complaint with the city clerk, against any city official, prospective city official, or former city official, either personally or on behalf of an organization. 
(2)  Any request for board action shall be in writing and signed under oath by the person or persons making the complaint, and shall be legibly drawn. Further, the complaint shall specify the provisions of this article alleged to have been violated, with specific and detailed facts alleged to constitute a violation of this article. 
(3)  There shall be a filing fee in an amount established by the city council, from time to time, for each ethics complaint filed with the board, with said fee being initially set at fifty dollars ($50.00). Said filing fee must be paid in advance before any ethics complaint is received or accepted for consideration by the board. If the ethics complaint is sustained, in full or in part, then the filing fee shall be refunded to the complaining party. However, if the ethics complaint is denied or dismissed, then the filing fee shall be retained by the city to help defray administrative costs associated with processing the ethics complaint. 
(4)  After a complaint has been filed and during the pendency of a complaint before the board, no member of the board may communicate directly or indirectly with any party or other person about anything regarding the complaint, except that: 
a.  The members of the board may obtain legal advice from the city attorney; 
b.  The members of the board may discuss the complaint at a lawfully conducted meeting. 
c.  If any person attempts to communicate with a board member regarding the pending complaint, the board member shall report the substance of the communication to the board on the public record at the next regular meeting of the board, and the board may take any actions it deems appropriate under the circumstances to deter such communications. 
(b)  Procedures for hearing ethics complaint. 
(1)  Upon receipt of such a complaint, but in any event not later than three (3) business days after receipt thereof, the city clerk shall date-stamp receipt of the complaint and forward the complaint simultaneously to the board, the person against whom the complaint is filed, and the city attorney. 
(2)  The city attorney shall provide the board with a preliminary written analysis of the ethics complaint no later than thirty (30) days from the date the complaint is filed with the city clerk. 
(3)  During any investigation and during any hearing which is conducted to determine whether a violation of this article has occurred: 
a.  The person under investigation or the accused may be represented by counsel of his or her own choosing and expense; and 
b.  The accused or his or her representative, if any, shall have an opportunity to: 
1.  Challenge the sufficiency of any complaint which has been filed against him or her; 
2.  Bring witnesses to testify on their behalf and offer any other evidence on their behalf; 
3.  Establish all pertinent facts and circumstances related to the complaint; 
4.  Question or refute testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses; and 
5.  To the extent the board or its appointed hearing officer or panel, in their discretion, determines it to be just and reasonable under the given circumstances of each complaint, the accused may conduct pretrial discovery in the manner usually available in civil actions, however, such discovery shall be limited to interrogatories and requests for production of documents. 
(4)  The following principles shall apply to evidence taken and presented in connection with hearings conducted by the board: 
a.  The board shall not be bound to adhere strictly to the statutory rules of evidence, except that hearsay, verbally or written, shall not be admissible into evidence, and the board shall be fundamentally fair in its administration of evidence; 
b.  During any hearing conducted by the board to determine whether a violation of this article has occurred, all evidence, including certified copies of records, which the board considers shall be fully offered and made a part of the record in the proceedings; 
c.  The accused or any other person under investigation shall be afforded adequate opportunity to rebut or offer countervailing evidence; 
d.  The board shall inform the accused or his or her counsel of any and all exculpatory evidence in its possession; and 
e.  The standard of proof in hearings conducted under this article shall be the preponderance of the evidence admitted at the hearing. 
(5)  The board, in addition to its other duties and powers, may: 
a.  Appoint a hearing officer or a panel consisting of three (3) members, who must first be approved by the city council, to conduct hearings under this article; 
b.  With the approval of the city council, retain outside legal counsel and other experts as needed with respect to hearings in accordance with its policies. Any contract regarding the selection and retaining of a hearing officer or panel or retaining of outside counsel and other experts, shall be made after solicitation of recommendations from the city attorney and upon approval by the city council of a contract for services approved as to form by the city attorney; 
c.  Order testimony to be taken by deposition before an authorized court reporter by any individual who is designated by the board and, in such instances, to compel testimony and the production of evidence to the extent it is otherwise lawfully authorized to do so, by having document and/or witness subpoenas issued by the judge of the municipal court. Further the board may, upon request of the accused, on its own motion, or upon request of the complainant(s) or city attorney, the board may have the judge of the municipal court issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses who are necessary for the hearing; 
d.  Require any person to submit in writing such reports and answers to questions relevant to the proceedings conducted under this article as the board may prescribe, such submission to be made within such period and under oath or otherwise as the board may determine; and 
e.  Request and obtain from the department of revenue copies of state income tax returns and access to other appropriate information as permitted under state law regarding all persons who are the subject of such complaint and investigation. 
(6)  The person against whom the complaint is filed, shall have ten (10) days from the day the city clerk received the complaint, to submit a written response to the complaint prior to the board deciding whether to hold a hearing. 
a.  If the ethics complaint is dismissed, the complainant(s) who filed the ethics complaint shall have only one (1) opportunity, within fifteen (15) days of the dismissal, to amend and re-file the ethics complaint with the board. 
b.  If the complainant(s) who filed the ethics complaint fail to amend and re-file their dismissed ethics complaint within fifteen (15) days of the date of dismissal, then the complainant(s) shall be forever barred from bringing the dismissed accusation(s) against the accused again. 
(7)  Within ten (10) days following receipt of the city attorney's analysis, the board shall review and consider the ethics complaint and the city attorney's analysis, and, determine, solely in the board's opinion, if a hearing should be held. If the board determine that a hearing should be held, then the board shall set a date certain for the hearing to take place within forty (40) days of receipt of the analysis from the city attorney, unless the accused petitions for and the board consents to a later date. 
(c)  Decision of board. 
(1)  As soon as practicable after giving due consideration to the ethics complaint, or, if a hearing was held, within thirty (30) days after the hearing, the board shall take any action or combination of actions which it deems appropriate and which it is lawfully empowered to take, including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Dismiss the complaint based on one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
1.  The complaint does not allege facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this article; 
2.  The board has no jurisdiction over the matter complained of in the complaint; 
3.  Failure of the complainant to cooperate in the board's review and consideration of the complaint; and 
4.  The complaint is defective in a manner which results in the board being unable to make any sound determination as to the occurrence of an ethics violation. 
5.  However, a rejection or dismissal of a complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
b.  Determine that no violation of this article has occurred; 
c.  Determine that the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this article and that the board will conduct a hearing, in which case the board shall promptly send written notice of such determination to the accused and to the party who made the complaint; 
d.  Determine that further information must be obtained in order for the board to determine whether the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of the article; or 
e.  Schedule the complaint for further review and consideration at a future time certain, in which case the board shall promptly send written notice of such determination to the accused and to the party who made the complaint. 
(2)  After it has made its decision, the board shall issue its written findings of fact and conclusions in the form of an initial decision, and may issue any additional reports, opinions and recommendations as it deems advisable under the circumstances, to the city council. All such reports shall be reviewed by the city attorney prior to their issuance to the city council. 
(3)  Once a decision has been rendered by the board, either the complainant or the accused shall have thirty (30) days to request a review of the board's decision by the city council. In absence of an application for review to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of notice of the board's decision, the board decision shall, without further proceedings, become the decision of the city council, and shall be rendered in writing, affirming the board's decision, within thirty (30) days of the date the request for review would have expired. In the event the city council receives a request for review of the board's decision within the time period prescribed, the city council shall review the board's decision and the record of the board's hearing and render its decision in writing, either affirming the board's decision or reversing the board's decision, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request for review. However, the city council, may extend such period in any case in which it finds that the complexity of the issues and the length of the record require an extension of the period, and in such an event the city council shall render a decision within ninety (90) days of receipt of the request for review. A copy of the city council's decision shall be promptly mailed to each party or their attorney of record. 
(d)  Statute of limitations. No action shall be taken on any complaint which is filed more than six (6) months after a violation of this Article is alleged to have occurred, and a complaint alleging a violation must be filed within six (6) months from the date the complainant(s) knew or should have known of the action alleged to be a violation of this article. 
(e)  Penalties . Any person[s] violating any provision of this article shall be subject to: 
(1)  A written and oral reprimand by the city council, requiring an apology to the public; 
(2)  A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense and not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense; 
(3)  A request for resignation; 
(4)  A suspension, without pay, of not less than thirty (30) days and not more than ninety (90) days; and/or 
(5)  Removal from office upon the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the city council, with the mayor casting a vote in the event of a tie vote. However, if the individual is an elected official, such removal shall not occur until after notice has been given and a hearing has been held in accordance with the city's charter, and upon the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the city council, with the mayor casting a vote in the event of a tie vote. 
(6)  The penalties prescribed in this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive of each other or of any other penalties which may be imposed pursuant to any other laws or policies of the state or city. 
(f)  Appeals . 
(1)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by a final decision of the city council may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section: 
a.  Any final decision by the city council shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Clayton County. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the city council, provided, however, no action of the city council shall be reviewable by the superior court if neither party requests the city council to review the decision of the board. 
b.  An action for judicial review shall be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Clayton County, within thirty (30) days after the decision of the city council. 
c.  Any penalties imposed by the city council shall not be stayed during the pendency of the judicial review provided for in this section. 
(2)  There shall be a filing fee in an amount established by the city council, from time to time, for each city council decision which is appealed to the Superior Court of Clayton County, with said fee being initially set at two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) to help defray administrative costs associated with preparing the record for appeal. 
(3)  The provisions of this article are to be construed liberally, to the end that the public interest be fully protected, and shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws and applicable provisions of the city charter. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this article and any applicable federal, state or city charter provision which does not expressly provide otherwise, the federal, state or city charter provision shall control. To the extent permitted by law, all ordinances, resolutions or rules, and parts of ordinances, resolutions or rules inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed. Further, the propriety of any official act or action taken by or transaction involving any city official prior to the effective date of this article shall not be affected by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Secs. 2-1-48—2-1-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - PAYMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-1-91. - Purpose. 
This legislation is enacted to set forth guidelines for the payment and/or reimbursement of expenses incurred by the mayor and council in connection with travel for required training or other business activity which is directly related to or required for the carrying out of their duties for the city. It is the intent of this legislation to ensure that its elected officials are fully reimbursed for any and all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses paid by them in connection with the business of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-013, § 1, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 01-01, § 2, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 11-41, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
Sec. 2-1-92. - General requirements. 
(a)  The city shall make all necessary hotel accommodations for the mayor and members of council when such is required, upon request. 
(b)  Travel within the State of Georgia shall be by personal vehicle, and the city shall pay mileage based upon the prevailing rate established by the Internal Revenue Service. All trip mileage shall be calculated using the city's City Hall as the starting and returning point, and shall be paid in advance for each such trip. 
(c)  Should travel outside the State of Georgia be required, the city shall make reservations and pay for all air travel, at coach fare. All such air travel should be scheduled sufficiently in advance in order to take advantage of any discount fares whenever possible. 
(d)  The city shall pay for all lodging, parking, valet service, and registration fees, if any, for all officials. 
(Ord. No. 99-013, § 1, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 01-01, § 2, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 11-41, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
Sec. 2-1-93. - Reimbursable expenses. 
It is intended for the city to pay all known and required expenses for the officials so as to minimize the need for reimbursement. However, in the event an official incurs a necessary expense in connection with the business they are transacting on behalf of the city, then such expense shall be reimbursable and paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-013, § 1, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 01-01, § 2, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 11-41, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
Sec. 2-1-94. - Per diem. 
(a)  Officials shall receive a per diem as may be established from time to time by the mayor and council, which is related to official business for the city. Said per diem shall be established as a part of the city's annual budgetary process, and shall not exceed a reasonable amount that would be needed for subsistence expenses such as three (3) meals per day and tipping while attending the training, seminar, conference, or other business activity related to official business for the city. 
(b)  Until changed or modified, the per diem is established at ninety dollars ($90.00) per day. Such per diem is to minimize any out-of-pocket expenses of the elected officials and shall be included as income on the officials' W-2 forms. 
(Ord. No. 99-013, § 1, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 01-01, § 2, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 11-41, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
Sec. 2-1-95. - Nonreimbursable expenses. 
Expenditures for rental cars, entertainment, and any expenses incurred for personal activities and personal uses while on city business are not reimbursable. Further, the city shall not reimburse an official for any expenses incurred for a spouse or other companion. 
(Ord. No. 99-013, § 1, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 01-01, § 2, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 11-41, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
CHAPTER 2. - ELECTIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Elections, O.C.G.A., Title 21, Ch. 3. 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Election officials. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A., Title 21, Chapter 3), as now or hereafter amended. 
State Law reference— Municipal powers, etc., O.C.G.A., §§ 21-3-8, 21-3-31, 21-3-32, 21-3-120, 21-3-227(b), 21-3-251 and 21-3-283. 
Sec. 2-2-2. - Voter registration deadline. 
The deadline for registration of voters in city elections shall be as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 21-3-126(b)(1), as it now exists or is hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 93-024, 11-15-93) 
State Law reference— Registration, O.C.G.A., § 21-3-126. 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Notice of candidacy; filing dates. 
Notices of candidacy shall be filed by candidates for offices of the governing authority not sooner than 52 days prior to the election in the case of a general election and not sooner than 30 days prior to the election in the case of a special election. The deadline for filing the foregoing notices of candidacy shall be 22 days prior to the election in the case of a general election; and 15 days prior to the election in the case of a special election. Notices of candidacy shall be filed in the office of the municipal election superintendent during normal business hours. 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A., § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be three percent (3%) of the annual compensation of the office sought, which fees shall be received by the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the city. 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, O.C.G.A., § 21-3-90. 
Sec. 2-2-5. - Polling place. 
The polling place shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
State Law reference— Polling places, O.C.G.A., § 21-3-163. 
CHAPTER 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Loyalty oath required of municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A., § 45-3-11 et seq. 

Sec. 2-3-1. - Departments established. 
(a)  The following departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Police; 
(2)  Finance; 
(3)  Public works; 
(4)  Parks and recreation; 
(5)  Public services; 
(6)  Fire; and 
(7)  Technology services. 
(b)  Each department may be headed by a director who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as provided by law or as prescribed from time to time by the city manager. Department directors shall report to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-3-2. - City manager. 
(a)  The position of city manager is hereby created. The city manager shall devote his time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city over which he has jurisdiction. 
(b)  The city manager may, in consultation with each agency and department of the city, propose written agency or department rules and regulations, or amendments thereto, to organize and operate each agency or department of the city in the most efficient manner reasonably possible, consistent with the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The city manager may propose written rules and regulations, or amendments thereto, for city government wide application on subjects under the city manager's responsibilities to organize and operate the city in the most efficient manner reasonably possible, consistent with the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(d)  All such rules and regulations, or amendments thereto, shall become effective thirty (30) days after being sent to the mayor and council for review unless, by motion, such rules and regulations are disapproved in whole or in part within such time by the mayor and council. 
(e)  All such rules and regulations may be amended by a resolution of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2-3-3. - City clerk. 
(a)  The city clerk, in his dual capacity as clerk and treasurer of the city, shall: 
(1)  Issue warrants, summons, receipts, executions, and other processes in the name of the city. 
(2)  Maintain an accurate and legible minute book in which is recorded every official act of the governing body and reveals which persons were present. The minute book shall be in sufficient detail to allow ready reference and shall reflect the proper adoption of resolutions, motions and ordinances as required by law. 
(3)  Be the official custodian of city records. 
(4)  Be the tax collector for the city. 
(5)  Be the official custodian of city property, real and personal, seeing that it is maintained, insured and protected. 
(6)  Receive, collect, and deposit all funds due the city from every source. 
(7)  Maintain the city's bank accounts and see that no withdrawal or payment is made from same except as authorized by the governing body. 
(8)  Pay the legitimate and due bills of the city taking advantage at all times of discounts. 
(9)  Require adherence to the city budget unless deviation is authorized by the governing body. 
(10)  Require the finance director to provide monthly reports of every account and claim payable to the city which has remained unpaid for thirty (30) days after the same became due. 
(11)  Perform such other duties and functions as are required by the code of ordinances, and the motions and resolutions of the governing body. 
(b)  The city clerk shall delegate to such deputies, as authorized by the governing authority, such of his duties as good judgment dictates should be so delegated. 
(Code 1959, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Monies belonging to city; receipt and deposit. 
In accordance with Georgia law, all funds received by officers and employees of the city shall be properly receipted and promptly deposited into the appropriate account under the direction of the director of finance. 
Sec. 2-3-5. - Collection of money due the city. 
The city manager is authorized to engage the services of any reputable collection agency to collect money due the city and to compensate the agency or agencies as is customary in the trade whenever in his judgment such services are the most advantageous to collect the money. 
(Code 1959, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-3-6. - Bonds required of certain officers and employees. 
Any elected official, appointed officer or employee who, in the course of his duties, handles funds belonging to the city, shall give good and sufficient bond to the city, in accordance with applicable administrative regulations, conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of his duties, and for proper application of all monies or property coming into his hands by virtue of his office or employment in an amount as established by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2-3-7. - Use of city labor or property for private purposes. 
It shall be unlawful to use, furnish, cause or permit any city labor or property to be used or furnished for the benefit of anyone except the city, unless such use is authorized by the governing body and entered on the minutes. 
(Code 1959, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-3-8. - Code enforcement. 
(a)  There is hereby created within the City of Forest Park a position known as "code enforcement officer." 
(b)  The duties of the code enforcement officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The enforcement of all ordinances contained within the Code of Ordinances for the City of Forest Park. 
(2)  To issue citations for violations of said Code of Ordinances, in order to insure compliance with said Code. 
a.  Any person found to be in violation of said ordinance may receive a warning citation in the first instance, 
b.  In the event said violation is not corrected, the code enforcement officer shall then cite that person for violation of said ordinance, 
c.  Any citations issued by the code enforcement officer shall contain a summons and shall be prosecuted as set forth in section 2-5-4 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park. 
(c)  Retention of authority. Each and every department head, where otherwise authorized to do so, shall retain their individual authority to cite persons for violations of same, and nothing contained herein shall in any manner delete or remove any authority given to any other person pursuant to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park. Further, the position of code enforcement officer and the authority to cite persons for violations of the code is created in order to provide an additional source by which persons found to be in violation of any part or parts of the code of ordinances shall be compelled to comply with same. 
(Ord. No. 87-014, 8-7-87) 
Sec. 2-3-9. - Use of credit card to pay monies due city. 
(a)  All sums due to the city including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The city finance director, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The mayor is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. 
(b)  A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
(c)  A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuer to the city shall be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of credit card issuer. 
(d)  Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance of payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(e)  No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability from the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. 
Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedure for the unpaid amount that would otherwise have been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Ord. No. 99-014, § 1, 8-2-99) 
Secs. 2-3-10—2-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - PUBLIC RECORDS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Records of traffic violations bureau, § 2-5-23. 

Sec. 2-3-21. - Official records of city; keeping and maintaining. 
It shall be the policy of the governing body to make each and every record kept and maintained by the governing body and the officers, agents, and employees of the city available to the public for reading, inspecting, examining and copying the same, provided that those records which by order of a court of this state or by law are prohibited from being open to inspection by the public shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 2-3-22. - Custodian designated. 
The city clerk is hereby made the official custodian of the records of the city, including records made by its officers, agents and employees of every nature whatsoever. 
(Code 1959, § 2-14) 
Sec. 2-3-23. - Removal from city hall restricted. 
The custodian of the records of the city shall not allow any person to take away from the city hall or any other place where the records are lawfully stored any records for any purpose whatsoever, unless by competent and lawful court order, except by motion of the governing body. 
(Code 1959, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-3-24. - Examination or inspection. 
Any person desiring to see, inspect, examine, or copy any record made by any officer, agent, or employee of the city or any record of the governing body of the city shall make written request and present the same in person to the city clerk, and it shall be the duty of the record custodian at that time to designate a time certain within a period of seventy-two (72) hours from the date of such request when such records will be available to the applicant; provided that persons desiring to inspect records of the police and fire services departments which are open to public inspection shall present the inspection request directly to the appropriate department. 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A., § 50-18-70 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3-25. - Inspection, examination or copying, presence of custodian required, hours limited. 
In order to preserve the authenticity and correctness of any and all records of the city no person shall be allowed to see, inspect, examine or copy the same unless within the presence of the records custodian of the city or some person designated by the records custodian, and such examination shall be made during regular business hours when city offices are kept open to the public. 
Sec. 2-3-26. - Cost of certified copies. 
When the city clerk is called upon from time to time to prepare and certify any copies of official records in his office, the costs of said preparation and certification shall be paid at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per page. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-26; Ord. No. 88-015, 10-17-88) 
Sec. 2-3-27. - "Records" construed. 
The records referred to in this article shall include not only the minutes of the governing body, all contracts of the city, all ordinances and resolutions enacted by the governing body, all memoranda and records kept by the city clerk of every nature whatsoever, all records of the public services department, all records of every other department of the city, all records of the police and fire services departments, including municipal court records and police docket, but shall also include all other records kept and maintained by any officer, agent, servant or employee of the city concerning matters pertaining to the city except those records not open to public inspection by order of a court of this state or by law. 
Sec. 2-3-28. - Retention of public records; destruction of obsolete records. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99, the city has adopted the Records Retention Schedule for Local Government Records as published by the Georgia Secretary of State's Department of Archives and History, and any such amendments or updates as may be made to such retention schedule for local government records. 
(b)  All city records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules, in the most updated version of the retention schedule for local government records. 
(c)  The support services director shall serve as the coordinator of the records management plan and is authorized to act for and on behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Retention Act. In discharging the records management and records destruction duties, the director shall, whether personally or by delegation, maintain all records in accordance with the Georgia Secretary of State Retention Schedules for Local Government Records adopted by the mayor and council, and shall not destroy, allow, or direct any employee to destroy, any record except as provided on the aforesaid retention schedule. 
(d)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the mayor and council which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. These memoranda of destruction shall be kept by the support services director in a central location, and may be viewed by any member of the public as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 98-009, § 1, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 05-27, 5-25-2005) 
State Law reference— Records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A., § 50-18-99. 
Sec. 2-3-29. - Records management committee. 
(a)  Creation: A records management committee consisting of the following; director of support services, director of finance, director of public works, director of recreation and leisure services, director of planning, building and zoning, director of police, director of fire and city manager shall be established. 
(b)  The committee shall be responsible for assisting the support services director in the development of policies and procedures governing the city's records management program; reviewing the performance of the program on an annual basis; proposing changes and improvements to the records retention policy if needed; planning, formulating and prescribing records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; monitoring records retention schedules in compliance with the State of Georgia Records Retention Schedule for Local Government Records. 
(c)  The committee will review all lists of records proposed to be destroyed, for pending open records requests, records pertinent to a pending law suits, or when a department head requests in writing to the records management committee that certain records be retained for a period longer than that established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-35, § 1, 6-20-2005) 
CHAPTER 4. - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-4-1. - Personnel regulations. 
The personnel regulations of the city, adopted May 15, 1967, as now or hereafter amended, establishing comprehensive personnel policies for employees of the City of Forest Park, is hereby incorporated by reference herein. An up-to-date copy of the personnel regulations is maintained in the office of the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2-4-2. - Official holidays for city employees. 
(a)  The following days shall be observed as holidays for the city: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Day; 
(3)  Memorial Day; 
(4)  Independence Day; 
(5)  Labor Day; 
(6)  Thanksgiving Day; 
(7)  The day following Thanksgiving; 
(8)  Christmas Eve Day; 
(9)  Christmas Day; and, 
(10)  One personal holiday. 
(b)  The granting of a personal holiday shall be subject to the approval of the employee's department head and only one (1) such holiday shall be granted in any calendar year. 
(c)  Any officer or employee may, at the discretion of his immediate supervisor, be required to work on any of said holidays, and in that event, shall be entitled to an additional day of compensation, or, at the option of the supervisor, shall receive compensatory time off at a later date. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-2; Ord. No. 87-018, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 98-015, § 1, 10-5-98) 
Sec. 2-4-3. - Drug free workplace policy; elimination of substance abuse; employee assistance. 
The document entitled "City of Forest Park, Georgia Drug-Free Workplace Policies and Procedures for Elimination of Substance Abuse and Employee Assistance," which is attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted to apply to all officers and employees of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. An up-to-date copy of the foregoing policy is maintained in the office of the city clerk for inspection by the public and all officers and employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 2-4-4. - Secret recording by city employees prohibited. 
The document entitled "Policy Against Secret Recording," which is attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted to apply to all officers and employees of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. An up-to-date copy of the foregoing policy is maintained in the office of the city clerk for inspection by the public and all officers and employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 3-18-2013) 
Secs. 2-4-5—2-4-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 2-4-11. - Extended to city employees. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the State of Georgia and the Federal Security Administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this article, the benefits of the System of Old Age and Survivors' Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, the state enabling act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 2-80) 
State Law reference— State enabling act, O.C.G.A., § 47-18-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-4-12. - Authority to execute agreements. 
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia for coverage of said employees and officials as provided for in section 2-4-11 hereof, to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by said law provided. 
(Code 1959, § 2-81) 
Editor's note— Persons performing services to the city on a fee basis, such as the city attorney, are excluded from coverage under social security. 
Sec. 2-4-13. - Withholdings from salaries or wages. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 2-4-11 hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1959, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-4-14. - Contributions by city. 
There shall be appropriated from the general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 2-4-12 of this article. Such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by said agency. 
(Code 1959, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-4-15. - Records to be kept by city. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-4-16. - Exclusion of employees not authorized to be covered. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-4-17. - Agreement with the Employees Retirement System of Georgia. 
(a)  The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement amending the original plan and agreement with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, in substantially the form attached hereto as exhibit A, providing for the release of social security escrow deposits. 
(b)  The City of Forest Park, hereinafter referred to as "the city," agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, hereinafter called the state agency, in regard to collections from city employees and in making reports and payments to the state agency. 
(c)  The city hereby pledges an amount which it would receive in state grant funds as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports, and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. The city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, then the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city's state grant funds, would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. 
(Code 1959, § 2-88) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A, setting out the text of the agreement, is not included in this codification. 
Secs. 2-4-18—2-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— An employees' health and accident fund was adopted for the city by Resolution No. 83-163, 7-18-83. The city also adopted a death benefit fund by Resolution No. 83-160, 6-20-83. 

Sec. 2-4-31. - City thrift and savings plan. 
The provisions of the City of Forest Park thrift and savings plan as set forth in that agreement by and between the City of Forest Park, a governmental unit established under the laws of the State of Georgia, and Bank South, N.A. as trustee, executed by the parties on or about July 1, 1983, that set forth a City of Forest Park thrift and savings plan consisting of eleven (11) sections and containing provisions for definitions, participation and service, contributions, interest of participants, benefits, designation of beneficiary, administration, powers, duties and responsibilities of trustee, amendment of the plan, discontinuance of contributions and termination of the plan, together with that amendment to the City of Forest Park employees' retirement plan, executed and dated by the City of Forest Park, a governmental unit established under the laws of the State of Georgia and referred to therein as "employee" on July 1, 1983, the provisions of said agreement and amendment are set forth in their entirety and copies are available for inspection by the members of the general public, as well as the employees of the city on the bulletin board at the entry to the meeting area of city hall, where the mayor and council conduct their regular public meetings, as well as in the office of the city manager, where the same will be available for inspection and copying, and the provisions of both the agreement and the amendment are hereby referred to and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 83-284, 11-21-84) 
Sec. 2-4-32. - Life insurance benefits for city officials and employees. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted and implemented a self insurance program to provide for life insurance benefits for officials and employees of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, to be payable to beneficiaries designated by said officials and employees, in the following amounts: 
Mayor and members of city council: $150,000.00 
City manager: $150,000.00 
LRA executive director: $150,000.00 
Department heads—Directors: $150,000.00 
Deputy directors, colonels and majors: $40,000.00 
Management analyst(s): $40,000.00 
All other employees $20,000.00 
(b)  This self insurance program is intended to be in lieu of the former death benefit fund established by Resolution No. 83-160, adopted July 18, 1983. 
(c)  The benefits under this life insurance program are extended only to active officials and full time employees of the city during their terms of office or their full time employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, § 1, 7-7-2008) 
CHAPTER 5. - MUNICIPAL COURT[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Establishment of municipal court, appointment and qualifications of judge, jurisdiction, etc., City Charter, Art. VI. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-5-1. - Time, place for holding court. 
(a)  The chief judge of the municipal court shall convene court on Wednesday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. in the morning, and from 1:30 p.m. until 5:00 p.m. in the afternoon. 
(b)  In the event that there is insufficient time within which to dispose of cases pending, or in the event that a national holiday falls on said date, the chief judge may convene such additional court sessions as may be necessary in order that all cases may be tried or otherwise disposed of in a timely manner. 
(c)  The assistant municipal court judge assigned to the environmental division shall convene court on Thursday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. in the morning, and further, shall have the same authority as that given to the chief judge in subsection 2-5-1(b) hereinabove. 
(1)  Sessions of the environmental division of the municipal court shall be convened at 785 Forest Parkway, Forest Park, Georgia, or at such other times and places as the chief judge of the municipal court shall designate. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-1, as amended by Ord. No. 88-013, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 96-004, 2-19-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-013 rewrote the above section in its entirety to provide specifically for the time and place for court. 
Sec. 2-5-2. - Contents of copies of charges. 
All copies of charges requiring persons to appear in the municipal court shall be properly dated the day they are issued, and shall be signed by the officer making the case, and shall notify the person summoned of the day and hour for his appearance and the charges against the accused. 
Sec. 2-5-3. - Disposal of cases. 
Every case entered on the municipal court docket shall be promptly disposed of by the court on the call of the case in its regular order or as soon thereafter as is reasonable by trial, continuance, dismissal, forfeiture of bond, attachment for contempt or by any other lawful order or judgment. 
(Code 1959, § 14-7) 
Sec. 2-5-4. - Summons—Issuance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any member of the police department, in all cases where complaint is made or information obtained of any violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city, to issue a summons, bearing test in the name of the city and directed to the accused, requiring him to appear before the municipal court to answer such charge, which summons shall designate the time and place of trial. It shall be signed by the patrolman or officer issuing same and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving a copy at his place of residence by the issuing officer. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any code enforcement officer as set forth in section 2-3-8 of this Code, in all cases where complaint is made or information obtained of any violations of the ordinances of the city or of a party's failure to comply with the ordinance of the city, to issue a summons bearing test in the name of the city and directed to the accused, requiring him to appear before the environmental division of the municipal court to answer such charge, which summons shall designate the time and place of trial. It shall be signed by the code enforcement officer issuing same and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at his place of residence by the issuing code enforcement officer. 
(Code 1959, § 14-8; Ord. No. 96-004, 2-19-96) 
Sec. 2-5-5. - Same—Contempt for failure to appear. 
Any person summoned as provided herein who shall fail, neglect or refuse to appear, or to make a satisfactory showing for such failure, neglect or refusal to appear and answer the charge specified, may be punished as provided in section 4.13 of the city charter. The case may be continued to such time as the municipal court may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the chief of police, or other member of the police force, to arrest the offender and bring him before the court to answer the contempt, and it shall be the duty of such police chief to keep the offender in custody until he is brought before the court, unless he gives bond for his appearance as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-004, 2-19-96) 
Sec. 2-5-6. - Rights of accused. 
Any person charged with an offense against any of the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature of the cause of his accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial before the judge; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him and have the privilege of cross-examination, as in the superior courts of the state; and shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, as to him shall seem proper. No one shall be condemned, fined or punished without full opportunity of being heard in his own defense. 
(Code 1959, § 14-10) 
Sec. 2-5-7. - Witnesses—Subpoenas. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the court or the clerk of court, or the deputy clerk of the environmental division of the municipal court, or such person as designated by the municipal judge shall issue a subpoena directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served as other process by the chief of police, or other officer, policeman or code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 96-004, 2-19-96) 
Sec. 2-5-8. - Same—Contempt for failure to appear. 
If any person summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend the trial, or render an excuse, insufficient in the judgment of the judge, the defaulting witness shall be liable to such punishment as provided by the city charter for contempt. If the case shall be continued on account of the absence of the witness, the court may issue attachment against the witness, requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial, why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. The chief of police shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest such witness, or cause him to be arrested by some other officer or police officer, and shall confine him, so as to have him before the judge at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
Sec. 2-5-9. - Continuances. 
Where the ends of justice may require, all cases may be continued. Applications for continuance shall be addressed to the sound discretion of the judge, under the rules governing in the superior courts of this state. All motions in the municipal court for a continuance of any case, where the defendant is at liberty on bond shall be made by the defendant, his attorney at law or his attorney in fact, which designation shall not include the surety of his appearance bond. No motion to continue a case shall be entertained except in open court and on the day set for trial. Where an appearance bond has been forfeited and the forfeiture is subsequently set aside for cause, no further motion to continue the case for trial shall be entertained until a forfeiture fee as provided in the schedule of court fees has been paid. 
(Code 1959, § 14-13) 
Sec. 2-5-10. - Rules of practice. 
The rules of evidence and examination of witnesses shall be the same as in the superior courts, so far as such rules are applicable to the case on trial. All officers, informers and persons injured shall be competent witnesses. In general, the municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of practice governing the superior courts, so far as they are applicable to municipal courts, and by a sound construction of the charter and ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 2-5-11. - Contempt. 
Any person who, during a session of the municipal court or any division thereof, shall be guilty of a contempt of court, or who refuses to abide by any sentence or order of the court, shall be punished as provided in section 4.13 of the city charter or section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-004, 2-19-96) 
Sec. 2-5-12. - Docket—Required. 
(a)  A court record of all cases coming before the court clerk and made by persons other than code enforcement officers, shall be kept in the office of the court clerk, records bureau, on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of this code or any city ordinance, and at the trial of all cases in the municipal court, the court clerk or other designated person shall record on the original copy of charges the punishment inflicted and the date, and an entry shall be made under the judge's sentence showing the final disposition of the case, that is, whether the fine, if any, was collected, the date of such collection and the disposition of such amounts. The original copy of charges, showing the within described information, shall constitute the permanent record of the court and shall be maintained in the order as directed by the judge. 
(b)  A court record of all cases issued by code enforcement officers and coming before the deputy clerk of the environmental division of the municipal court shall be kept in the office of said deputy clerk, on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of any city ordinance, and at the trial of all cases in the environmental division of the municipal court, the deputy court clerk or other designated person shall record on the original copy of the charges the punishment inflicted and the date, and an entry shall be made under the judge's sentence showing the final disposition of the case, that is, whether the fine, if any, was collected, the date of such collection and the disposition of such amounts. The original copy of charges, showing the within described information, shall constitute the permanent record of the environmental division of the municipal court and shall be maintained in the order as directed by the assistant judge of the municipal court with the approval of the chief judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 96-004, 2-19-96) 
Sec. 2-5-13. - Same—Docketing under false name. 
All cases must be docketed in the correct name of the accused where such name is ascertainable and shall correctly describe the offense charged. The docketing of a defendant under a false or assumed name, or under a false charge, shall be sufficient ground for the removal of any officer guilty thereof who has any knowledge of the true name or the true charge. 
(Code 1959, § 14-17) 
Sec. 2-5-14. - Trying person under fictitious name. 
It shall be unlawful for the judge to knowingly try a person under a feigned name, where he has reason to believe a fraud is being practiced on the court and on the public. 
Sec. 2-5-15. - Court costs. 
(a)  The costs in all cases tried before the municipal court shall be set at the discretion of the judge or by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(b)  The costs may be charged and collected from the defendant upon conviction or forfeiture at the discretion of the judge. 
State Law reference— Payments made from fines and bonds to peace officers' annuity and benefit fund and such other fund as required by the state code, O.C.G.A., § 47-17-60. 
Sec. 2-5-16. - Appearance bonds. 
(a)  The officer on duty and in charge of the police station when any arrest is made may take bond with or without security, as per schedule, payable to the city, for the appearance of any person accused or suspected of being guilty of the violation of any ordinance of the city, to stand to and abide his trial; and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced. 
(b)  If any arrested person or necessary witness shall fail to give the bond and security required of him, such person so refusing may be confined in the jail of the city or the common jail of the county, or be kept under guard so as to be present at his trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(c)  All bail taken under the provisions of this section shall be special bail and the power of the security over the principal shall be the same as in special bail. Upon failure of any principal in any bond to appear where such principal is charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city or upon the failure of any principal, who is a witness, to appear and testify as engaged, the judge of the municipal court shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond or recognizance to show cause before him on any date named therein, not to be less than ten (10) days from the passage of such rule, why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond or recognizance and all costs of forfeiture. 
(d)  Any member of the police force of the city shall serve a copy of the rule described in subsection (c) upon the principal and surety, if to be found in the city, personally or by leaving a copy at their usual place of abode, at least five (5) days before the time named therein for hearing the cause. 
(e)  If no sufficient cause is shown to the contrary, the judge of the municipal court shall proceed to enter up judgment against the principal and sureties for the amount of such bond and costs, and the court clerk shall issue execution for the amount of the judgment and costs, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the judge, and place the same in the hands of the chief of police who shall proceed to collect the same by levy and sale. 
(f)  Any surety upon any bail bond of any person charged with a violation of any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city may petition the judge at any time for release, and if such release is granted, the judge shall issue an order to the chief of police of the city, who shall confine such principal until discharged by order of the municipal court, or until such principal shall give other good and acceptable security and such release shall discharge such surety from all liability upon the bond. 
(g)  No officer of the city shall accept on any bail bond any surety residing beyond the limits of the county except as authorized by the court, but in case he shall do so, the surety will be bound and upon entry of judgment against such surety, the judgment shall be collected as provided by law. 
(h)  If the person arrested shall fail to appear at the place and time of trial so appointed, it shall be the duty of the judge to declare any pledge forfeited and to order the money to be paid into the city treasury as in other fines and forfeitures if it has not already been deposited in such treasury. If the person so arrested shall appear as engaged and is adjudged not guilty, the money and the property thus deposited shall be ordered by court delivered up to the person depositing same. Should any accused person be adjudged guilty and fined on his trial the amount of the fine and costs of the trial shall be paid into the city treasury, and the remainder, if any, refunded to the accused or to the person entitled thereto. 
(Code 1959, §§ 14-29—14-35) 
Sec. 2-5-17. - Appointment and duties of municipal court judges. 
(a)  The mayor and council may appoint a chief judge to preside over the city's municipal court. 
(1)  The chief judge shall be responsible for the general supervision of the municipal court and shall promulgate all rules necessary for the supervision, conduct, and administration of the court. 
(2)  A member of the governing body shall nominate any qualified person for the office of chief judge, said nomination shall be seconded, and, in the event more than one (1) qualified person is nominated, the person obtaining the vote of the majority of the governing body shall be appointed chief judge. 
(b)  The governing body shall also appoint an assistant judge who shall preside over sessions of a division of the municipal court to be known as the environmental division. 
(1)  Said appointment shall follow the same procedure for appointment as that of the chief judge. 
(c)  The governing body shall also appoint as many judges pro tempore as it may deem necessary from time to time. 
(1)  Said appointments shall follow the same procedure for appointment as that of the chief judge. 
(2)  Such judges pro tempore shall be acting chief municipal court judge or assistant municipal court judge in the absence, disability or disqualification of such judges. 
The judges pro tempore shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the chief or assistant judge. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 2-20-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 2-5-18. - Terms of municipal court judges. 
Municipal judges shall serve a term of one year, unless modified by written agreement between the governing body and the judges, which agreements shall otherwise comply with state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 2, 2-20-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-07, § 2, adopted Feb. 20, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 2-5-18.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-07, § 3, adopted Feb. 20, 2017, repealed § 2-5-18.1, which pertained to municipal court judge pro tem, and derived from Ord. No. 17-01, § 3, adopted Jan. 3, 2017. 
Sec. 2-5-19. - Compensation of municipal court judges. 
The amount and frequency of compensation of municipal judges shall be established from time to time by resolution of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 4, 2-20-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-07, § 4, adopted Feb. 20, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 2-5-20. - Environmental division of municipal court; records; deputy clerk; reporting. 
(a)  The environmental division of the municipal court is charged with the responsibility of adjudicating those cases made for violations of the city ordinances by code enforcement officers. All matters coming before this division of the municipal court shall remain under the general supervision of the chief judge of the municipal court. 
(b)  Records of all proceedings conducted by the environmental division of the municipal court, including but not limited to dockets, original citations and records of disposition thereof, sentences, assessments of fines, punishment and performance or payment thereof, shall be maintained by the environmental division of the municipal court and not merged with the records of the municipal court. However, a copy of the docket book shall be maintained in the offices of the clerk of the municipal court. 
(c)  A person shall be designated by the chief judge of the municipal court to serve in the capacity of deputy clerk of the environmental division of the municipal court, and that person shall be charged with the same responsibilities within the confines of the environmental division of the municipal court as are charged to the clerk of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 96-004, 2-19-96) 
ARTICLE B. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Handling of traffic violations, § 10-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-5-21. - Created; administration; schedule of fines. 
There is hereby established a traffic violations bureau to assist the court with the clerical work of traffic cases and the disposition of the same. Such bureau shall have such duties and responsibilities as the judge and the chief of police designate. The judge shall designate specific offenses in respect to which payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau (or person so designated as herein set forth) in satisfaction thereof, and shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of such fines for first, second and subsequent offenses, provided such fines are within the limits declared by law or ordinance, and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall require appearances before the judge. 
Sec. 2-5-22. - Duties of bureau. 
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the traffic violations bureau in reference to traffic offenses: 
(1)  It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts, and represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive court appearance, and give power of attorney. 
(2)  It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the court docket, and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present. 
(3)  It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding 12 months, whether such guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations bureau. 
(Code 1959, § 20-241) 
Sec. 2-5-23. - Records. 
The traffic violations bureau shall keep records of all the fines collected by the traffic violations bureau or the court, and of the final disposition or present status of every case or violation of the provisions of this code and other laws and ordinances. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. 
Cross reference— Public records, § 2-3-21 et seq. 
Sec. 2-5-24. - Procedure. 
The traffic violations bureau shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by this article and other traffic ordinances of this city or as may be required by any laws of this state. 
(Code 1959, § 20-243) 
Title 3 - Finance 
Chapter 1.  Purchases and Contracts 
Chapter 2.  Ad Valorem Taxes 
Chapter 3.  Occupation, Profession and Business Taxes 
Chapter 4.  Alcoholic Beverage Excise Taxes 
Chapter 5.  Hotel, Motel, Lodging Excise Tax 
Chapter 6.  Budget 
Chapter 7.  Rates for Fees, Taxes, Assessments, and Penalties 
CHAPTER 1. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-1-1. - Purchasing agent; city manager. 
The city manager shall be the purchasing agent for the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-47) 
Sec. 3-1-2. - Same—Duties. 
The purchasing agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to purchase or contract for the purchase of all supplies and contractual services needed by any agency of the city, except as otherwise provided by law, or the governing body. The purchasing agent shall act to procure for the city the highest quality of supplies and contractual services at the least expense to the city, discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales, keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably necessary to the operation of this article, exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts, and act so as to procure for the city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to declare vendors who default on their quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the city for a stated period of time. 
(Code 1959, § 2-48) 
Sec. 3-1-3. - Unauthorized purchases. 
Except as herein otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any city officer or officers to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this article unless the provisions of this article are complied with, and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by the city, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(Code 1959, § 2-49) 
Sec. 3-1-4. - Requisitions and estimates. 
All departments of the city, either by or with the authorization of the department head thereof, shall file with the purchasing agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the purchasing agent may prescribe. 
(Code 1959, § 2-50) 
Sec. 3-1-5. - Revisory power. 
The purchasing agent, or his designated representative, shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost. 
Sec. 3-1-6. - Encumbrance of funds. 
(a)  Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or any market purchases until he has determined, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the using department concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the purchasing agent from issuing an order for the purchase of any goods or services where funds to cover such purchase are not immediately available, provided that the provisions of subsection (a) concerning determination of sufficient unencumbered balance have been complied with and the means of defraying the amount of such order are available. 
Sec. 3-1-7. - Discounted or competitive prices. 
The city manager is hereby directed and authorized to engage in purchasing goods and materials needed by the city from any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who will make said goods and materials available to the city at a price which is discounted or competitive with prices being charged on the open market. Subject to the preference for local bidders prescribed by section 3-1-18, the city manager is further directed to obtain all goods and materials purchased on behalf of the city and for use by the city at the lowest price obtainable, provided, however, that said goods shall be of similar or approved quality for like merchandise available for sale throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-010, § 1, 5-20-91) 
Sec. 3-1-8. - Competitive bids favored. 
All purchases of, and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable shall, except as otherwise provided herein, be based wherever possible on competitive bids. 
(Code 1959, § 2-54) 
Sec. 3-1-9. - Formal contract procedure; maximum without bids. 
(a)  Generally. Subject to the local preference provided by section 3-1-18, all items, equipment, services and supplies, except as otherwise herein provided, when the cost thereof shall exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. 
(b)  Other limitations and procedures. The limitations and requirements contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not be applied to the purchase of the following goods and services: 
(1)  Professional services. Professional services such as medical, architectural, legal, etc., may be contracted by negotiation, upon approval of the governing body; 
(2)  Sole source. All items, equipment, services and supplies for which there is only a sole source may be contracted by negotiation, upon approval of the governing body; 
(3)  State contract. Any item which may be purchased pursuant to a state contract for purchase of goods and materials, upon approval of the governing body; 
(4)  Market conditions. Any item, the cost of which does not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), which due to its scarcity or other unusual market conditions, either temporary or permanent, is unavailable for purchase on the market if the requirements of subsection (a) are complied with, upon approval of the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tem; and, 
(5)  Noncompetitive negotiation. When as determined by the mayor and council prior to an award, the needs of the city cannot be met by the other methods of procedure outlined herein, a contract may be made by noncompetitive negotiation. 
(Ord. No. 91-010, § 2, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 96-014, 10-7-96; Ord. No. 98-012, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 98-014, § 1, 9-21-98) 
Sec. 3-1-10. - Notice inviting bids. 
Notice inviting bids shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city and at least four (4) days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. 
(Code 1959, § 2-56) 
Sec. 3-1-11. - Scope of notice. 
The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
(Code 1959, § 2-57) 
Sec. 3-1-12. - Bidder's list. 
The purchasing agent may also solicit bids from all responsible prospective suppliers by sending them a copy of such notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. 
(Code 1959, § 2-58) 
Sec. 3-1-13. - Notice on bulletin board in city hall. 
The purchasing agent may also advertise all pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall. 
(Code 1959, § 2-59) 
Sec. 3-1-14. - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of any deposit and/or release of any surety where the agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any deposits and/or require performance of the surety required by the purchasing agent upon failure on his part to enter a contract within fourteen (14) days after the award, or such other time as may be designated by the purchasing agent. 
Sec. 3-1-15. - Bid opening procedure. 
Bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection, and a copy furnished to the governing body. 
(Code 1959, § 2-61) 
Sec. 3-1-16. - Rejection of bids. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all-bids for one (1) or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(Code 1959, § 2-62) 
Sec. 3-1-17. - Lowest responsible bidder. 
Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Code 1959, § 2-63) 
Sec. 3-1-18. - Award to other than low bidder. 
Business[es] which maintain a permanent location within the city and secure an annual business license from the city are designated as "local businesses." A purchasing preference is established in favor of local businesses. In the event a bid is received from a local business which is no more than five (5) percent higher than the low bid, such local business shall be considered the lowest bidder for purposes of this chapter. Except as provided in the preceding sentence, no award shall be given to any bidder other than the lowest bidder without the consent and approval of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 91-010, § 3, 5-20-91) 
Sec. 3-1-19. - Tie bids. 
If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and after adjustment for local preference as provided in section 3-1-18, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Where no local bidder is involved, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(Ord. No. 91-010, § 4, 5-20-91) 
Sec. 3-1-20. - Subdividing contracts. 
No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 2-66) 
Sec. 3-1-21. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  When the governing body shall determine that it is in the best interest of the city to sell or otherwise dispose of any property belonging to the city, not needed for public use or that may have become unsuited for public use, it shall be the duty of the governing body to declare such facts, and to list or describe the property. All real property to be sold, and all personal property, the estimated resale value of which shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), shall be sold at public auction or by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder, after reasonable notice inviting proposals. 
(b)  Surplus property of the city with an estimated resale value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less may be sold at the discretion of the purchasing agent by negotiated sale without advertisement and the acceptance of bids. 
State Law reference— Sale of municipal property, O.C.G.A., § 36-37-6. 
Secs. 3-1-22—3-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTS 

Sec. 3-1-31. - When required. 
All public improvement projects costing in the aggregate of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more should be completed and performed under and by virtue of a written contract by and between the city and the performing party and which contract shall be drawn, prepared and executed in accordance with ordinances and resolutions in effect in the city. 
Sec. 3-1-32. - Procedure for awarding. 
Whenever the governing body deems it necessary or desirable to undertake any public works or other public improvements costing in the aggregate twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more, they shall by motion declare such work or improvements necessary. Such motion shall state the type of work or improvement to be done, as well as define the extent and character of the same. Upon the adoption of such motion, it shall be the duty of the director of public works or an engineering firm designated by the governing body to proceed to prepare an estimate of the cost of such proposed improvements, as well as all plans and specifications as may be necessary. Said plans, specifications and cost estimates shall thereupon be delivered to the governing body, who, after examining the same, shall determine whether to proceed with the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 3-1-33. - Resolution; advertisement for bids. 
Should the governing body determine, after studying the estimate furnished by the director of public works or the engineering firm, to proceed with the improvements, they shall pass a motion setting forth said facts. The motion shall set forth such terms and conditions as they shall deem proper or necessary with reference to the letting of the contract and the provisions thereof. Such motion shall also direct the city manager to advertise for sealed proposals for furnishing the materials and performing the work necessary in making such improvements. The notice for such proposals shall be published once a week for two (2) weeks prior to the date set for opening bids. The city manager may also solicit bids from any responsible parties by sending a copy of such notice that will acquaint them with the proposed improvements. 
Sec. 3-1-34. - Bid deposits. 
The city shall require a bid deposit of at least five (5) percent on proposed improvement contracts with the city. All unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of any deposit and/or release of any surety. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit and/or penalty imposed against a surety on said contract upon failure of the contracting party with the city to enter a contract within fourteen (14) days after the award to said party, or such other time as the city manager shall direct. 
Sec. 3-1-35. - Bid opening procedure. 
All bids on proposed improvement contracts with the city shall be submitted sealed to the city manager and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection, and a copy furnished to the governing body. 
(Code 1959, § 2-72) 
Sec. 3-1-36. - Rejection of bids. 
The city shall reserve the right to reject all bids or parts of all bids, when the public interest will be served thereby, and shall have the further right to waive all technicalities. 
(Code 1959, § 2-73) 
Sec. 3-1-37. - Lowest responsible bidder. 
Contracts for municipal improvements shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the city manager shall be governed by the provisions of section 3-1-17. 
(Code 1959, § 2-74) 
Sec. 3-1-38. - Award to other than low bidder. 
No award for a contract for municipal improvements shall be given to other than the lowest bidder without the express consent of the governing body. 
(Code 1959, § 2-75) 
Sec. 3-1-39. - Tie bids. 
If all low bids received are for the same amount or unit price, all other things being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Where no local bidders are involved, the city manager shall award the contract for municipal improvements to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(Code 1959, § 2-76) 
Sec. 3-1-40. - Professional engineer for certain work. 
In all public works costing twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more, the plans and specifications and estimates of cost shall be prepared by, and the construction executed under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer, when expertise is not available in the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 3-1-41. - Bond of contractor. 
No contract for any public works or improvements, costing more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall become valid until the contract therefor shall have been duly executed and the contractor shall have executed and delivered to the city good and sufficient surety bond conditioned for the faithful performance and completion of such contract and said bond shall have been approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 10-7-96) 
State Law reference— Bonds required of contractors for public works in excess of $5,000, O.C.G.A., § 36-82-101 et seq. 
Sec. 3-1-42. - Contracts for less than $25,000. 
All public works contracts costing less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be awarded in such manner as shall be directed by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 96-014, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 3-1-43. - Cooperative ventures for water and sewer line installation. 
(a)  Nothing contained in section 3-1-31 through section 3-1-42 shall prevent the city from entering into agreements with property owners or developers for joint participation in the costs of installation of water mains and sanitary sewers, when such agreements are in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  When such ventures are contemplated, it shall be the responsibility of the department head under whose jurisdiction the work is to be done to fully inform the city manager in writing of the details of the proposal together with the estimated costs to the city. The city manager, together with the director of public works or engineering firm designated by the city, shall review the proposal in detail and submit the matter together with their recommendations to the governing body for approval or rejection. 
(c)  In all instances where city participation as to the furnishing of labor or materials is contemplated as outlined above, any contracts for the installation of water mains and sanitary sewers shall be between the property owner or developer and the contractor who actually performs the work. This section is intended merely to allow city participation where feasible in furnishing labor or materials without the necessity of advertising for bids and entering into a contract. 
Sec. 3-1-44. - Emergency public works contracts costing less than $100,000.00. 
(a)  All public works or public improvement contracts necessitated by an emergency that can be performed at a cost of less than one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) shall not be required to comply with the competitive bid award requirements and instead shall be awarded in such manner as shall be directed by the governing body. 
(b)  The nature of the emergency shall be described in the minutes of the city council. 
(c)  The public works or public improvement project shall not be subdivided in an effort to evade the competitive bid award requirements. 
(Ord. No. 01-02, § 1, 3-19-2001) 
CHAPTER 2. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 3-2-1. - Ad valorem taxation to be levied and collected. 
As described in the city charter, there shall be levied and collected an annual ad valorem tax upon all property in the city subject to municipal taxation under the law of the State of Georgia. 
(Code 1959, § 19-1) 
Sec. 3-2-2. - Assessment of property for the purpose of ad valorem taxation; owner-occupied tax exemption; exemption for disabled residents; and exemption for persons above the age of 65 years. 
(a)  The city hereby declares that it elects to use the same assessments as are used by Clayton County, Georgia, for the purpose of taxing real property in the City of Forest Park, Georgia, as provided by the law of the State of Georgia. By the enactment of this section, the city manager is directed to procure from the county the assessment made by said county on real property located in the corporate limits. 
(b)  Exemption for owner-occupied single family dwellings. 
(1)  The city shall allow an exemption in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for purposes of determining the amount of ad valorem taxes to be paid on real property of a dwelling which is owned and occupied by the owner of said real property provided that said owner-occupier shall make application to the city as herein set forth. 
(2)  In order to qualify for this tax exemption, the owner of said real property shall complete an application provided for by the city and file same with the tax clerk of the city. The form shall require the name of the owner of the real property, the name of the occupant of the real property, and the address of the real property. 
(3)  The forms shall be filed when the initial exemption is claimed, and shall be automatically renewed by the city in each subsequent year for so long as the premises are occupied by the owner. 
(c)  Special exemptions for disabled persons and persons above the age of 65 years. 
(1)  The city shall allow an exemption in the amount of $4,000 for purposes of determining the amount of ad valorem taxes to be paid on real property of any person who owns said real property and provides the tax clerk with a letter from a licensed physician stating that said person is totally and permanently disabled for all purposes whatsoever. The city shall also allow an exemption in the amount of $4,000 for purposes of determining the amount of ad valorem taxes to be paid on real property of any person who owns said real property and provides the tax clerk with a copy of a birth certificate, valid Georgia driver's license, or other form of identification which is acceptable to the tax clerk of the city, which shows that person having attained the age of 65 years prior to January 1 of the next year for which ad valorem taxes will be assessed. However, no owner of real property within the city shall be entitled to claim more than one of the tax exemptions set forth in this code section. 
(2)  The tax clerk shall make proper notation on the tax records in order to reflect such disability, or age. 
(Code 1959, § 19-2, as amended by Ord. No. 82-266, 6/21/82; Ord. No. 86-008, 5/5/86) 
Sec. 3-2-3. - Time for fixing tax rate. 
The governing body shall, on or before the first regular meeting in July of each year, prescribe, fix, and levy an ad valorem rate of taxation against all the property returned and assessed as provided in this code of ordinances, the charter of the city and the law of the state. 
Editor's note— The ad valorem tax rate is generally set at the second council meeting in June following adoption of the annual budget. 
Sec. 3-2-4. - Date taxes due and payable; interest on delinquent taxes. 
All ad valorem taxes due the city on all property in the city subject to taxation shall be due and payable annually. Any such tax not paid by December 20 shall be declared delinquent. Delinquent taxes shall accrue interest at the highest legal rate per annum authorized by state law from December 20 to the date payment is made. 
All ad valorem tax payments shall be first applied to the oldest taxes due until all ad valorem taxes, past due and current, are fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 1-7-2008) 
Editor's note— At the city's instruction Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2008 was placed in § 3-2-4. 
State Law reference— Rate of interest (one percent (1%) per month) on past due taxes, O.C.G.A., § 48-2-40. 
Sec. 3-2-5. - Executions for unpaid taxes; sales. 
(a)  For any and all unpaid taxes during any year, executions shall be issued against the property and the owners thereof on or after December 20 of each year for the amount of taxes due, the interest thereon and such fee for the issuance of the execution as provided by law. Such execution shall be issued by the city clerk and bear teste in the name of the mayor and shall be levied by the chief of police or any other police officer of the city. Such execution shall bind all the property, real and personal, of the defendant; and the costs thereof shall be the same as on tax collector's executions by the laws of this state. 
(b)  The execution shall be levied by the chief of police or any other police officer of the city, upon such property as in the discretion of the levying officer may be suitable or available for such purposes, and the same shall be advertised once a week for four (4) weeks next preceding the date of sale in the official organ of Clayton County or in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. Sales of such property shall be conducted on the first Tuesday of the month before the door of the city hall, or in the council chambers, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., and the same shall be conducted by the chief of police, or any other police officer. All property shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash. The proceeds arising from such sale shall first be applied to the payment of the taxes due, including the interest and costs and expenses of sale, and any surplus remaining shall be paid to the owner of such property, provided that the city may buy any property to be sold under and by virtue of such tax executions. 
State Law reference— Time, place and manner of sale of property for taxes due municipality, O.C.G.A., § 48-5-359; tax executions, O.C.G.A., § 48-3-1 et seq.; tax sales, O.C.G.A., § 48-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-2-6. - Redemption of property by owner. 
Any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon any real property sold under or by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes may redeem such property within one (1) year of the date of sale as provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Redemption of property, O.C.G.A., § 48-4-40 et seq. 
Sec. 3-2-7. - Register of sales. 
The chief of police shall keep a register of all sales of real estate in a book provided by him for that purpose, in which he shall enter each tract, lot or parcel of land exposed to sale, the quantity sold, and the amount of taxes and costs for which the same was sold, and the purchaser's name, leaving at the end of each line three (3) columns in blank leaving a sufficient space to insert the name of the person who may redeem such tract, lot or parcel of land, the date of redemption, and the amount of redemption money paid, which book shall be kept in a neat and legible manner, and shall always be open for the inspection of any and all persons interested and who shall apply to the chief of police for an examination of the same. 
(Code 1959, § 19-22) 
Sec. 3-2-8. - Records to be kept by chief of police. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city: 
(1)  to keep a file of all newspapers in which his official advertisements appear; 
(2)  to keep an execution docket in which he shall enter a full description of all executions levied by him on any kind of property, showing what property levied on, the date of levy, and the service of notice, together with all his acts and doings thereon; 
(3)  to keep a book in which shall be entered a record of all sales made by him, describing the property and the process under which sold, the date of the levy and sale, the name of the purchaser, and the price; 
(4)  to keep the book or books indexed for each entry thereon. 
(Code 1959, § 19-23) 
Sec. 3-2-9. - Designation of person to bid in property for city. 
Any member of the governing body or upon their failure to do so, anyone designated by the chief of police, may act for the city in bidding the amount of tax and costs on property sold for tax by the chief of police, where no one else bids that amount, and see that the chief of police executes a deed for the city as required by law. 
(Code 1959, § 19-24) 
Sec. 3-2-10. - Property purchased by city at tax sales—Records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city tax office to keep a record of all property purchased by the city at the tax sales, showing whose property was so purchased, the amount bid for it by the party bidding from the city, and what portion of it was tax and what portion costs, respectively. 
(b)  The tax office shall also file the deed to the city made by the chief of police, the execution under which the land was sold, attached, which shall be delivered to him by the chief of police, and a copy of the newspapers in which the sale at which the city purchased, was advertised. 
Sec. 3-2-11. - Same—Custodian. 
The city clerk, or his authorized representative, shall be the proper person for the chief of police to place in possession of all property purchased by the city at the tax sales or sales of any kind by the chief of police, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep special watch over all such property and see that no person is allowed to trespass thereon. In case the property is improved, the city clerk shall rent out the same, collect the rents and return all amounts collected for rent into the city treasury, and he shall also keep a record of all amounts thus received for rent. 
Sec. 3-2-12. - Same—Disposition. 
(a)  Property purchased by the city at the tax sales for city taxes and which has been held by the city under deed made in pursuance of the sale for one (1) year, shall be sold and disposed of by the city as follows. The city clerk shall present to the governing body at any regular or called meeting thereof a full description list of all property so purchased by the city and which has been so held by the city for one (1) year. 
(b)  The governing body may then by resolution, direct a sale of all or such portion of said property as in its judgment should be sold. Such direction being given, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to advertise such property and conduct such sale in accordance with the provisions of state law. The chief of police shall sell or have sold the property to the highest bidder for cash, and each piece of the property shall be sold separately. 
State Law reference— Notice of foreclosure of right to redeem property, O.C.G.A., § 48-4-45 et seq.; judicial sales, O.C.G.A., § 9-13-140 et seq. 
Sec. 3-2-13. - Same—Purchasers to receive quit claim deed. 
Purchasers at such sale as provided in section 3-2-12 shall receive from the city a quit claim deed, to be executed by the mayor upon the payment of the purchase money to the city clerk or the chief of police. In case of failure to comply with the bids, the city shall have the same alternatives and remedies as prescribed by the laws of this state in cases of sheriff's sales. 
(Code 1959, § 19-29) 
Sec. 3-2-14. - Officer's performance authorized. 
The chief of police is authorized to do and perform any and all things usual, necessary or expedient for the purpose of making sale of any and all property levied upon under such tax or other execution due the city. 
(Code 1959, § 19-30) 
Sec. 3-2-15. - Personalty sales, bill of sale. 
The officer making tax sales shall execute to the purchaser in cases of sales of personalty a bill of sale to same in the usual manner of the execution of deeds and bills of sale by sheriffs under similar circumstances. 
(Code 1959, § 19-31) 
Sec. 3-2-16. - Same—Fi.fa. authorized. 
Whenever any personal property has been levied upon by the chief of police, by virtue of any execution in favor of the city, the chief of police may, in his discretion, allow the defendant in fi.fa. to replevy the property under the same rules and conditions as prescribed for sheriffs and constables in this state, and the bonds thus taken shall be collectible in the same manner prescribed for the collection of forthcoming bonds taken by sheriffs and constables of this state, or the chief of police may receive money in pledge instead of the bond. 
(Code 1959, § 19-32) 
Sec. 3-2-17. - Perishable property or property expensive to keep, procedure after execution upon same. 
Whenever the chief of police shall levy any execution in favor of the city upon perishable property, or property the keeping of which is attended with expense, upon application by the chief of police to the mayor, the mayor may order the same sold at public outcry in the same manner as prescribed for tax sales in this chapter, provided that the mayor shall grant no order for such sale unless the defendant has had at least one (1) day's notice of the application of the chief of police, provided defendant is in the city or can be found. 
(Code 1959, § 19-33) 
Sec. 3-2-18. - Waste transfer station special tax district. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, there is hereby established a special tax district within the City of Forest Park, Georgia to be known as the "waste transfer station special tax district." Said waste transfer station special tax district shall include and encompass all structures and related personal property that are not exempt from ad valorem taxation that are located on or within the parcel of real property identified by the Clayton County Tax Assessor's Office as Tax Parcel Identification Number 13079C A045, and bearing a street address of 327 Lamar Drive, Forest Park, Georgia, 30297. Said waste transfer station special tax district is further shown on the map entitled "waste transfer station special tax district" attached hereto as exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference. The Mayor and Council of the City of Forest Park, Georgia may amend said waste transfer station special tax district from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Purpose . The waste transfer station special tax district is established for the purposes allowed under Georgia law. The tax is assessed against any owner of real property and personal property included within said special tax district. 
(c)  The effective date of the creation of the waste transfer station special tax district shall be January 1, 2017. There is hereby assessed and levied upon all real and personal property in said special tax district a tax, the rate of which shall be determined annually by the City of Forest Park and adopted by resolution of the mayor and council thereof. Such assessment and levy shall commence with the ad valorem tax bill for all property within the waste transfer station special tax district for the 2017 tax year and continue for each succeeding tax year thereafter until and unless said special tax district is terminated by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council. 

(Ord. No. 16-24, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
CHAPTER 3. - OCCUPATION, PROFESSION AND BUSINESS TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), adopted Oct. 3, 2016, repealed former Ch. 3, §§ 3-3-1—3-3-50, and enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. Former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition List. 
Cross reference— Business and occupation licenses, § 9-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-3-1. - Occupation tax imposed on businesses in the city subject to applicable regulations and requirements. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the City of Forest Park, Georgia (hereinafter "the city"), with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location or office in the state and falling within the criteria of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 or real estate brokers, agents or companies that sell any real property located in the city, shall pay to the city an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation. Moreover, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city who is subject to any applicable regulations and requirements set forth in this chapter shall, prior to and during the operation of the business, trade, profession or occupation, comply with all applicable regulations and requirements of the city and State of Georgia. The failure to register and pay the occupation tax by the date required shall be a violation of this article. 
The occupation tax certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the location or office if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such occupation tax certificate shall be shown to the director of finance, any code enforcement officer or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
The occupation tax certificate referred to in this article shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year subsequent to its issuance. Renewal applications and payment of the tax for all businesses required to register shall be completed on or before October 1 of each year. The failure to renew registration by the date required shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "City of Forest Park" or "city" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "the City of Forest Park, Georgia." 
(b)  As used in this chapter, the following terms are hereby defined: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business shall maintain its ordinary and customary usage according to context but also may be used to generally identify a person or entity carrying on a trade, occupation, profession, or other non-commercial enterprise, including the operations of a local government that are proprietary in nature. 
Depository financial institution means a bank or a savings and loan association. 
Engaged in business means any person, whether acting as an owner, operator or agent in any business within the city, shall be deemed to be engaged in business when performing any act of selling any goods or services, soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including sales or services of a wholesaler, retailer or manufacturer. 
Flat fee means the amount assessed uniformly to all businesses which earn no gross receipts in the city and businesses that generate gross receipts that are not subject to calculation of occupation tax, and uniformly to all practitioners of professions and occupations in the city for the initial startup, renewal, reopening or amendment of occupational tax accounts. 
Governing authority means the elected mayor and members of the city council of the city. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation to, the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
(4)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use or excise tax; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
(3)  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly-owned partnerships or wholly-owned entities; 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
(6)  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office of the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor or agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. A location which is used for yard sales, garage sales, and bake sales events, but not as a part of any business enterprise or profession, but instead are sponsored and operated by a private individual or group, normally for purposes of financially supporting special events or endeavors for nonprofit or charitable groups, does not constitute a location or office. 
Nonprofit organization means an entity or organization described in section 501(c), 501(d), 501(e) 664 or 401 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied, assessed and collected on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Occupation tax certificate means that document issued by the city, which, when properly annotated or validated by the director of finance or other designee, shall serve as evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Permit means a work permit for employment in a regulated business, issued by the director of finance or other designee in conformance with the provisions of the chapter. 
Person, wherever used in this chapter, shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit organizations, professional practitioners or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means a person who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. A separate occupation tax shall be required for each registered or licensed professional person, without regard to whether the person is fully engaged or employed in the profession, or whether the person performs all the duties customarily associated with the profession. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax based upon profitability ratio in combination with gross receipts. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. Regulatory fees do not include an administrative fee and do not include development impact fees, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8), or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-3. - Business classifications and North American Industry Classification System. 
The following business tax classifications are hereby adopted, drawing from the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): 

 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-4. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  Administrative fees. A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in an amount to be established by the governing authority by resolution from time to time, shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, reopening, issuance of a replacement license or a temporary conditional license or amendment. The annual administrative fee shall be due no later than October 1 of each year. 
(b)  Regulatory fees—Imposition; examples of businesses, etc., subject to fee. A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those businesses covered by said code section. A regulatory fee does not include an administrative fee. Examples of businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations which may be subject to regulatory fees include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors and workers; 
(2)  Carnivals; 
(3)  Taxicab and limousine operators; 
(4)  Tattoo artists; 
(5)  Stables; 
(6)  Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 
(7)  Scrap metal processors; 
(8)  Pawnbrokers; 
(9)  Food service establishments; 
(10)  Dealers in precious metals; 
(11)  Firearms dealers; 
(12)  Peddlers; 
(13)  Parking lots; 
(14)  Nursing and personal care homes; 
(15)  Newspaper vending boxes; 
(16)  Modeling agencies; 
(17)  Massage parlors; 
(18)  Landfills; 
(19)  Auto and motorcycle racing; 
(20)  Boarding houses; 
(21)  Businesses which provide appearance bonds; 
(22)  Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
(23)  Hotels and motels; 
(24)  Hypnotists; 
(25)  Handwriting analysts; 
(26)  Health clubs, gyms and spas; 
(27)  Fortunetellers; 
(28)  Garbage collectors; 
(29)  Escort services; 
(30)  Burglar and fire alarm installers; and 
(31)  Locksmiths. 
(c)  Regulatory fees—Schedule of fees. The amount of such regulatory fees shall be established in a separate resolution adopted from time to time by the governing authority. 
(d)  Fees for photographs and fingerprints. All requests for photographs shall be charged an amount established by the governing authority by resolution from time to time, and all requests for fingerprints shall be charged an amount established by the governing authority from time to time, where such requests are not covered under other ordinances of the city or federal or state law. 
(e)  Processing and investigation fees. Where, pursuant to any other provision of this Code, there is imposed a monetary fee for the processing and investigation of any business or employment application, such monetary fee is deemed to be a regulatory fee and not a tax. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-5. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-2 to 48-13-5. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed pursuant to general and local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-6. - Occupation tax levied; structure; restrictions. 
(a)  Levy of tax. 
(1)  An occupation tax shall be levied, assessed and collected upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city or upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state falling within the criteria of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 and upon real estate brokers, agents or companies that sell real property located in the city. The occupation tax amount shall be determined by the sum of two (2) components: 
a.  A nonrefundable annual administrative fee; and 
b.  An amount to be determined by applying tax rates, as determined in (2) below, upon gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(2)  Occupation tax schedules. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be shall be established in a separate resolution adopted from time to time by the governing authority. The finance director shall classify the entire gross receipts by dominant service or product. 
(3)  Each new or renewal occupation tax certificate holder shall pay an annual tax in an amount determined by the occupation tax schedule. 
(4)  In addition to payment of the occupation tax, any and all other assessments owed to the city by the business owner or owners, whether related to the business and/or real property of the owner/owners must also be paid at or before the full payment of the occupation tax before an occupation tax certificate will be issued. Any certificate issued without the payment of all such assessments shall be revoked if the outstanding assessments are not paid within thirty (30) days of the business owner being notified by the director of the department of finance or other designee of the outstanding assessments. For purposes of determining the demand date or the notification date, the demand/notification date shall be the date that is three (3) days after the date of mailing of the demand/notification, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
(5)  Businesses in the city which do not generate gross receipts and businesses that generate gross receipts that are not subject to calculation of the occupation tax shall be assessed a flat fee and a per employee rate to be established by the governing authority from time to time; provided, however, that any business paying according to this subparagraph shall be required to provide information to the city that there are no gross receipts for the business. 
(b)  Restrictions . The following restrictions apply to this tax: 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one (1) occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than one hundred (100) percent of a business's gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on gross receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(5)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the city or in the State of Georgia. 
(6)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
(7)  Real estate brokers, agents, or companies that sell real property located in the city, but do not maintain a principal or branch office within the city, shall only have occupation taxes levied upon them based on the administrative fee and profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. 
(8)  For purposes of determining occupation tax, it is assumed that every business or practitioner has at least one (1) employee. 
(c)  Construction regarding other business or professional regulations. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to repeal or conflict with any general laws which allow or require regulation of businesses, occupations or professions by local governments. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-7. - Location of business; applicability of certificate. 
An occupation tax certificate issued under this chapter shall apply only to the location, owner and the business included within the certificate. Only one (1) occupation tax certificate shall be issued for a location. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-8. - Change of location. 
Any person moving from one (1) location to another shall notify the city's director of finance or other designee, in writing, of the move and the new address no later than three (3) days before the date of moving. Upon surrender of the original occupation tax certificate to the city, and upon submission of the required information, a new certificate will be issued for the new location as long as the new location conforms to the zoning and fire codes and other applicable regulations of the State of Georgia, Clayton County, and the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-9. - Transfer of occupation tax certificates. 
(a)  Occupation tax certificates shall not be transferable, except for a change in location. A transfer of ownership shall be considered to be the same as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business, both requiring a new occupation tax certificate for the new owner of the business. 
(b)  In the event there is a change in the ownership of a business which also possesses an alcohol license, the alcohol license is not transferable, and the new owner will have to qualify for and obtain a new alcohol license. 
(c)  A person must first obtain an occupation tax certificate prior to obtaining an application for an alcohol license. Where there is a transfer of ownership of a business which has an alcohol license and same is sought to be continued by the new owner, the new owner must present a copy of the document(s) which effectuated the transfer of ownership to the department of finance or other designee, along with an application for an occupational tax certificate, and tender an administrative fee in an amount established by the governing authority by resolution from time to time, along with the applicable regulatory fee established under the ordinances and resolutions of the city. The department of finance shall then, if there are no outstanding assessments due to the city by the new owner, issue a temporary, conditional occupation tax certificate for the sole purpose of allowing the new owner to be vetted by the chief of police or other designee for an alcohol license. Upon approval of the issuance of the alcohol license by the governing authority, the new owner shall pay the required occupational tax as calculated in this chapter, along with an administrative fee, and upon payment of same, shall be issued both an occupation tax certificate and alcohol license. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-10. - Occupation tax certificate qualifications. 
(a)  No occupation tax certificate required by this chapter shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or a registered resident alien. Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers, and majority stockholders. 
(b)  Where an applicant is a corporation, a certificate will be issued jointly to the corporation, president or chief executive officer, and to the majority stockholder. Where the applicant is a partnership, the certificate may be issued to a partner or general partner. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-11. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee shall be levied upon any state or local authority or nonprofit organization, as defined under this article pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5). Nonprofit organizations only may apply annually for an exemption from the occupation tax. Such application shall be in the format required by the director of finance or other designee, and shall contain such supplemental information, as required by the director of finance, including without limitation, a copy of the organization's approval of exemption from federal income taxation. The exemption shall be effective for that taxable year. Any number of locations may be granted such exemption, provided however that a separate application shall be required for each location for which an exemption is sought. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-12. - Yard sales, garage sales, bake sales. 
A private individual or group may conduct, not more than once in any six-month period, a sale of used items, baked goods or other food items, and which shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter except as herein provided. Such events shall be limited to three (3) consecutive days per event and subject to any health, zoning or other regulatory laws and ordinances as may be in effect, and shall be subject to regulatory fees. The exclusion granted in this section shall not be available to flea market operators, promoters, performances or other such enterprises or any other business-related operations. The director of finance or other designee shall promulgate the necessary administrative regulations to implement this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-13. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more persons or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-14. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the finance director or other designee and that line of business being noted by the finance director or designee upon the occupation tax certificate form which is to be displayed by the business owner in a conspicuous place at the business location at all times. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-15. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the payment of the occupation tax levied under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-16. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions are as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), the same being: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Georgia Code; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Georgia Code; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors; 
(19)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in paragraph (1) of O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622; 
(20)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78; 
(21)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(22)  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(b)  Each of these shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with the profitability ratios set forth in section 3-3-6 of this chapter and related ordinances or resolutions; or 
(2)  A flat fee to be established by the governing authority by resolution from time to time, not to exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed by the State of Georgia to provide the service, such tax to be paid at that practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subparagraph shall not be required to provide information to the city relating to gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's guidelines and framework; and 
(3)  The election set forth in this section shall be made on an annual basis and must be done by October 1 of each year. If no election is made, the tax shall be levied as if subsection (b)(1) above were elected. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-17. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, an instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a business license or pay an occupation tax under this chapter for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-18. - Transient or nonresident business owners. 
Any transient or nonresident person, firm, or corporation doing business within the city shall have in his possession proof of registration from where the business is domiciled upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement or police officer. This section shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-19. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year based upon gross receipts from the previous year and in successive years unless otherwise provided. The occupation tax levied herein shall be payable October 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by November 15 of each year, be subject to a ten (10) percent penalty for delinquency. An administrative fee will accrue at the rate of one and a half (1.5) percent per month on the entire unpaid balance of any delinquent taxes. 
(b)  On any new profession, trade, or occupation begun in the city, the registration and occupation tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) percent penalty shall be imposed. 
(c)  If any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the types of businesses, professions, or trades subject to this chapter without having first obtained an occupation tax certificate, such offender shall, if and upon conviction by the municipal court judge, be subject to the penalty provisions as set forth in sections 3-3-25, 3-3-40, and 3-3-41 of this chapter, and shall not be issued a business license and/or alcohol license, if applicable, for the current year. The current year shall be the year for which the occupational tax certificate is required. 
(d)  In addition to the above remedies, the chief of police or their designee may proceed to collect all sums due the city under this chapter in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(e)  If any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to register and obtain an occupation tax certificate shall transact or offer to transact in the city any of the types of businesses, professions, or trades subject to this chapter without having first obtained an occupation tax certificate, such offender upon conviction by the municipal court judge, shall be subject to the penalty provisions as set forth in section 1-1-8 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-20. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each location within the city. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-21. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-22. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, certificates of occupancy, or any other similar regulatory certifications, shall first, before the issuance of a city occupation tax certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-23. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary occupation tax certificate for such business as described in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain an occupation tax certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the occupation tax certificate as provided herein before commencing the business, and any person transacting, or offering to transact any kind of business, trade, profession or occupation in the city without first having so obtained said occupation tax certificate, shall, if and upon conviction by the municipal court judge, be subject to the penalty provisions as set forth in section 1-1-8 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-24. - Certificate expiration; renewal. 
(a)  All occupation tax certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Certificate holders who desire to renew their occupation tax certificates shall file an application with all applicable fees with the department of finance on the form provided for renewal of the occupation tax certificate for the following year. Applications for renewal must be filed before the established due date of each year, with payment of the applicable tax being due on October 1. No renewal shall be granted after December 31. Applications for renewal received after December 31 shall be subject to the regulations for the granting of occupation tax certificates as if no previous occupation tax certificate had ever been held in this city. 
(c)  All occupation tax certificates granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year and are not subject to proration. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the renewal applicant to obtain renewal permits as may be required by this chapter or any other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-25. - Penalty for violating chapter. 
Any person violating any provision of this article to register and pay shall be subject to penalties as authorized under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. Except, however, that this article shall in no manner authorize the city's municipal court, or any court, to punish or penalize, by incarceration, practitioners of professions and occupations who fail to comply with this article. For practitioners of professions and occupations, the fine, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), is to be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes in section 3-3-41. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-26. - Enforcement. 
The police officers and code enforcement officers of the city shall continue to be empowered with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-27. - Businesses not covered by this chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46, Chapter 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Those businesses where the general laws of the State of Georgia, the United States, or the Code of Ordinances of the city permit or require taxation in some other manner. 
(12)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the United States armed forces was involved, whether under United States' command or otherwise. 
(13)  Blind persons. 
(14)  Veterans of peace-time service in the United States armed forces having a physical disability which was incurred during that service. 
(15)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state. 
(16)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor acting pursuant to a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair. 
(17)  Real estate brokers, except at the principal or branch office of a real estate broker. 
(18)  Motor vehicles required to be registered with the department of public safety. 
(19)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-28. - Exceptions. 
The following types of businesses, occupations and professions shall be exempt from the general provisions of this chapter and shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  Insurance companies. 
a.  Insurers' license fees. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per class. For each separate business location in excess of one (1), not covered by subsection (1)b., which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per class. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). 
b.  Insurance agency; license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed . There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each separate business location from which insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fees imposed by subsection (1)a. hereof, in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such location within the city. 
c.  License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations . For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per location. 
d.  Gross premiums tax imposed on certain insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (1)a. of this section. 
e.  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers . There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city, in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
f.  Due date. The license fees imposed herein shall be due and payable on April 1 of each year. 
g.  Enforcement . The fees and taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. A violation of this section shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violations of other city ordinances. 
(2)  Depository financial institutions. 
a.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon depository financial institutions, at the rate not to exceed one-fourth of one (0.25) percent of the gross receipts of such institutions as defined therein. The amount of such tax shall be established by the governing authority by resolution from time to time. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this subsection shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection, "gross receipts" shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d), as the same currently exists or as it may be amended from time to time by the Georgia General Assembly. 
c.  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts within the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this subsection shall be assessed and collected based upon information provided in such return. 
d.  The due date of taxes levied by this subsection shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Secs. 3-3-29, 3-3-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-3-31. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-32. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this chapter are levied on the amount of business transacted during the preceding calendar year. Each business subject to the occupation tax levied in this chapter shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the city's department of finance the application for occupation tax form hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts for the preceding year. This return shall be supported by a signed copy of the applicable federal or state income tax return and shall be used as the basis for making payment of the estimated occupation tax for the current calendar year. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business subject to such occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, on or before October 1 of the current calendar year, file with the department of finance of the city, on a return form furnished by that department, a signed return setting forth the amount of actual gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year, said return to include a signed copy of the applicable federal or state income tax return as attached documentation to support said amount. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  In the case of a business or profession subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, for which the business or profession was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding calendar year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business or profession liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of gross receipts from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid pursuant to requirements of this article. For the following year, the actual amount of gross receipts for such part of the prior calendar year shall be reported in the return supported by a signed copy of the applicable federal or state income tax return, and further payment made or refund provided within sixty (60) days of the date of the return. 
(d)  The owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, on or before October 1 of the current calendar year, file with the director of finance, on a form furnished by said officer, the following information required by O.C.G.A § 48-13-20.1: 
(1)  The legal name of such business and any associated trade names; 
(2)  The mailing address of such business and the actual physical address of each location of such business if different from the mailing address; and 
(3)  The sales and use tax identification number assigned to such business if such business is required to have such number. 
Failure or refusal to provide such information shall not toll or extend the time of payment of such occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-33. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
Dates . Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, the following deadlines are applicable: 
(1)  Applications for renewal of occupation tax certificates are due not later than October 1 of each year. 
(2)  The amount of occupational tax for the current year shall be payable on October 1 and shall become delinquent if not paid by November 15 of that year. 
(3)  Final payment of underpaid prior year's tax is due within thirty (30) days of being notified of same by the city. 
(4)  Applications by newly established businesses are due prior to commencing business operations, and payments are due at the time of filing of the application and return. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-34. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-3-35. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of audits, judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner to any person not needing such information for the discharge of official city duties, the amount of gross receipts or related financial information disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this chapter. For purposes of this section, independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of official statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States, and other local governments. Any employee of the city who violates the confidentiality of this information shall be subject to discharge or other disciplinary action. However, ownership, identity of registered agent, business locations and other nonfinancial data shall not be confidential, and tax deficiency, failure to file returns or pay taxes when due, shall not be confidential. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-36. - Inspections of books and records; penalty for understating financial information. 
At any time during the taxable year, or for up to three (3) years thereafter, the department of finance of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, representatives, or independent auditors, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. Any such officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand, in writing, by the director of finance, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within ten (10) business days of said demand. Failure to submit such books or records within the time required shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing. Adequate records shall be kept within the city for examination by the department of finance at its discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the difference between the tax initially paid and the tax finally determined to be due, may be imposed. The amount due shall be the difference between the tax initially paid and the tax finally determined to be due, plus the penalty, and said amount must be paid by the offending business within thirty (30) days of receiving notification from the director of the department of finance. For purposes of determining the demand date or the notification date, the demand/notification date shall be the date that is three (3) days after the date of mailing of the demand/notification, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-37. - Tax certificate to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books, or upon submission of false or incomplete information. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay such occupation tax or any final installment or part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true and complete return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon the submission of false information, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books or records as provided for within this chapter, any occupation tax certificate granted by the city under this chapter shall be suspended or revoked. The director of finance or other designee shall notify the responsible business official of any such violation, omission, or infraction, and of the intended sanction. Further, no new occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the city for any business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the director of finance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-38. - Administration and appeals. 
Appeals regarding tax certificate decisions of the director of finance or designee and appeals regarding work permit decisions shall be filed with the clerk of the city and shall be heard by the city manager of the city or designee. Any subsequent appeals shall be taken by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-39. - Notices. 
For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, as of three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-40. - Effect of failure to comply with chapter provisions; continuing in business after tax certificate revocation. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, said business shall be in violation of this article. No new occupation tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit the information and records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in this article. 
(b)  Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, any person, his manager, agent, or employee, who does business in the city after the occupation tax for said business becomes delinquent, or who is required to make occupation tax returns, and who fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or who refuses to amend any such return so as to set forth the truth, or who makes false returns, and, any person, his manager, agent, or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when the officer, agent, employee, or representative of the city requests such inspection, during business hours, and under the terms and conditions set forth herein, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties and administrative fees as provided in sections 3-3-19 and 3-3-25 and as authorized under the laws of this state. 
(c)  Practitioners of professions and occupations who fail to pay the occupation tax, who fail to make returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article or who refuse to amend each return as to set forth the truth, or who make a false return shall be subject to penalties as provided in sections 3-3-19 and 3-3-25 and as authorized under the laws of this state, including actions by lien and garnishment. Except, however, that this article shall in no manner authorize the city's municipal court, or any court, to punish or penalize, by incarceration, practitioners of professions and occupations who fail to comply with this article. For practitioners of professions and occupations, the fine is to be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes in section 3-3-41. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-41. - Execution for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the director of finance, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, may issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, which such execution shall bear interest at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21 from the date when such tax becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, all as provided by the ordinances of the city and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the police chief of the city or designee upon the property of the offender located in the city or in any other location if no property remains in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and Charter of the City or Clayton County and the laws of the State of Georgia, and the offender in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by ordinance or the laws of the State of Georgia in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the director of finance against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution has issued pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may request a refund of any fees and charges paid by him or her as a result of the default as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-42. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the governing authority to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed and authorized by law. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax ranges of any occupation. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-43. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the director of finance or designee, to see that the provisions of this chapter relating to occupation taxes are observed, and, where applicable, to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court of the city. It is hereby the further duty of the director of finance or designee, to inspect all certificates issued by the city, along with the books and records of the various businesses holding certificates, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or designee, to make diligent background investigations and searches of records of criminal conviction in those cases as required in the ordinances of the city, and to furnish timely information to the director of finance in furthering the administration of these provisions. The chief of police or designee, and code enforcement officers, shall also have the authority to check businesses within the city for proper certificates issued by the city and to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-44. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing authority. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the governing authority. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-45. - Requirement of public hearing. 
(a)  The governing authority shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the governing authority shall hold one (1) or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-46. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-47. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-48. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The governing authority may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in such ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-49. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this chapter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this chapter as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid or the application of this chapter to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent of the city that this chapter would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-50. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-3-51. - Refunds; final returns. 
(a)  Each and every business that ceases operations in the city or has otherwise been required to register and pay the occupation tax must file a final return with the director of finance or designee and pay an administrative fee for the processing of the final return. 
(b)  If a business ceases operation within a year for which an occupation tax has been paid or credited, the tax shall be refundable, upon request, if, after a final return is filed and after the actual tax liability is calculated, the business tax credited exceeds that liability. If the final return requires a payment, such payment must be made with the final return. 
(c)  Taxes are also refundable upon written request after a valid amendment is accepted and the business tax credited exceeds the tax liability. 
(d)  In the case of erroneous tax collection, or when a taxpayer has voluntarily or involuntarily overpaid occupation taxes, the taxpayer may proceed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(e)  Refund claims shall contain a summary statement of the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any additional information the city may request. 
(f)  After receiving a written refund request, the city shall process the request in a manner consistent with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, § 3 (Exh. A), 10-3-2016) 
Secs. 3-3-52—3-3-60. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing of alcoholic beverages, Title 9, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 3-4-1. - Taxes assessed. 
In addition to the license fees required in title 9, chapter 2, and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, all alcoholic beverage licensees shall pay to the city the taxes imposed in this chapter, to be collected as set forth hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83) 
Sec. 3-4-2. - Malt beverages. 
There is hereby imposed an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages served as tap or draft beer from a barrel or bulk container shall pay a tax of six dollars ($6.00) per container of not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on any smaller containers. 
(2)  Malt beverages sold in cans or bottles shall bear a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. 
This tax is authorized by Official Code of Georgia Section 3-5-80. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 94-003, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 08-11, § 8, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 3-4-3. - Wine. 
There is hereby imposed an excise tax on the sale or use of wine by the package, which tax shall be twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter proportionate to any fractional part of a liter. 
This tax is authorized by Official Code of Georgia Section 3-6-60. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 08-11, § 9, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 3-4-4. - Distilled spirits; retail package. 
There is hereby imposed an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package, excluding the sales of fermented beverages, which tax shall be twenty-two cents ($.22) per liter and a proportionate tax upon any fractional part thereof. 
This tax is authorized by Official Code of Georgia Section 3-4-80. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 08-11, § 10, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 3-4-5. - Payment of tax. 
(a)  The excise taxes provided in sections 3-4-1 through 3-4-4 of this chapter shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. 
(b)  The taxes shall be paid on or before the 10th day of the month following the calendar month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold by the wholesale dealer. 
(c)  Each licensee responsible for the payment of excise tax shall file a report with the city itemizing for the preceding calendar month all information pertaining to sales during said month within this municipality. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 83-277, 5-2-83) 
Sec. 3-4-6. - Distilled spirits; consumption. 
There is, in addition, imposed a tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent (3%) of the charge to the public for the beverage. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages. Each licensee shall collect, report and remit said tax to the city as provided hereinafter. 
This tax is authorized by Official Code of Georgia Section 3-4-130. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 08-11, § 11, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 3-4-7. - Itemized billing by licensee; liability for payment of taxes. 
Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83) 
Sec. 3-4-8. - Collection of tax; information to city. 
Every licensee or its agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city manager to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83) 
Sec. 3-4-9. - Payment of tax by licensee; collection fee. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent hereunder shall be due and payable to the city on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth herein. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the 20th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the city manager in such form as the city manager may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city manager, or his designated representative. 
(d)  Additional to other taxes or license fees. The excise tax provided for hereinabove shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at wholesale within the corporate limits of this city. 
(e)  Penalty and accrued interest on late reports and delinquent payments; city clerk to issue execution. The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to 10 percent of the total amount due, plus interest accrued at the rate of 12 percent per annum. The clerk of the city shall issue an execution against the said wholesale dealer, firm, or corporation so delinquent on his or its property, for the amount of the excise tax due and delinquent, plus penalty and interest accrued, and shall proceed to collect same in the same manner as is done in the case of executions issued for collection of city ad valorem property taxes. 
(f)  False reports or non-payment declared grounds for revocation of licenses of wholesale dealers of alcoholic beverages. At any time it is found that false and fraudulent reports have been made by the wholesale dealer, his agents, officers, or employees, and upon which payment of alcoholic beverages excise tax was reported or paid to the city, and at any time the monthly report and payment called for in section 3-4-9(b) is past due over 30 days, the wholesale licensee shall be given not less than three (3), nor more than 10 days notice of a hearing before the mayor and council to show cause why his license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city should not be suspended or revoked because of such false and fraudulent reports, or non-payment of taxes past due more than 30 days. 
(g)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for, and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Georgia Laws, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83, as amended by Ord. No. 83-277, 5-2-83) 
Sec. 3-4-10. - Determination if no return made. 
Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the city manager shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city manager. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city manager shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83) 
Sec. 3-4-11. - Collection of delinquent tax by city; duty of assignees to withhold taxes; liability, offsetting erroneous collections. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city showing that he has been paid, or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the necessary amount from the purchase price as heretofore required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the city shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall begin at the time the licensee sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the licensee becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83) 
Sec. 3-4-12. - Administration; enforcement; rules; records; confidentiality of reports. 
(a)  Authority of the city manager. The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city manager shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations pursuant to section 2-3-2 not inconsistent with this chapter or other ordinances of the city and the laws of the State of Georgia, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city manager or the chief of police, or any person authorized in writing by the mayor, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports, contents. In the administration of the provisions of this chapter, the city manager may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of sales, and such other information as the city manager may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business of operators, etc.; limitation on rule. The city manager or any person having an administrative duty under this chapter, shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this chapter, except in the case of judicial proceedings, or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, upon satisfactory proof of interest, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 83-275, 3-21-83) 
CHAPTER 5. - HOTEL, MOTEL, LODGING EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 3-5-1. - Assessment. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1)(A) there is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room, lodging or accommodations furnished by any person licensed by the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. Said tax shall be three (3) percent of the charge to the public for such rooms, lodgings or accommodations. This tax shall not apply to the charges for the use of meeting rooms or for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished to and occupied by the same person for a period of more than ten (10) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 87-019, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 05-36, § 1, 6-20-2005) 
Sec. 3-5-2. - Owner/operator to collect taxes. 
The owner or operator of the lodging facility shall collect the excise taxes as set forth in this chapter and shall remit the same to the city as hereinafter provided. Any owner or operator who shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect the tax herein provided shall be liable for and pay the tax personally. 
(Ord. No. 87-019, 11-2-87) 
Sec. 3-5-3. - Returns and payment of taxes. 
The owner or operator liable for the taxes set out herein shall on or before the 20th day of each month, for the preceding calendar month, transmit to the city clerk a statement showing the gross sales and gross taxes collected by authority of this chapter. Along with said statement, the owner or operator shall submit payment to the city clerk for the net taxes due. 
(Ord. No. 87-019, 11-2-87) 
Sec. 3-5-4. - Compensation for collecting tax. 
For the purpose of compensating the owner or operator for collecting, accounting for and remitting the tax levied by the chapter, such owner or operator shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the city in the form of a deduction when submitting the report and paying the amount due. 
(Ord. No. 87-019, 11-2-87) 
Sec. 3-5-5. - Penalty for failure to make return for payment. 
When any owner or operator shall fail to make any return or pay the full amount of the tax required by this chapter, there shall be imposed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than ten (10) days, with an additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional ten (10) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. 
(Ord. No. 87-019, 11-2-87) 
Sec. 3-5-6. - Records inspection. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and to collect all of the tax imposed, all owners or operators are hereby required to keep a record of all sales and charges for rooms or lodging and the taxes collected. Said records shall be open for inspection by any duly authorized agent of the city at all reasonable hours during the day. 
(Ord. No. 87-019, 11-2-87) 
CHAPTER 6. - BUDGET 

Sec. 3-6-1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the City of Forest Park shall commence on July 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 89-002, 1-16-89) 
Sec. 3-6-2. - Budget ordinance. 
The final budget, when approved by the governing body, shall be adopted as the city's budget by ordinance. This ordinance shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(Ord. No. 89-002, 1-16-89) 
Sec. 3-6-3. - Budget contents. 
(a)  The scope of any and all budgets acted upon by the governing body shall address itself to the projected revenues and expenses to be incurred by the city for the upcoming fiscal year. 
(b)  Content of the budget. The final budget, as well as the preliminary budgets and worksheets shall contain a breakdown of projected revenues by fund source and a breakdown of departmental expenses for the upcoming fiscal year. They may also contain any item that the department head deems appropriate for inclusion in its budget. 
(c)  The form of the final budget, when passed and adopted by the governing body, shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance and shall set out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and make appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity, so that the budget, in its final form, will contain a complete and accurate disclosure of the city's anticipated revenues and expenses for the upcoming fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 89-002, 1-16-89) 
Sec. 3-6-4. - Preparation of annual budget. 
The annual budget for the city shall be prepared substantially as follows: 
(1)  On or before February 10 of each year, budget worksheets and preliminary budget instructions shall be distributed to operating departments for use in preparing their respective budget requests. 
(2)  The city manager shall publish, or cause to be published, a calendar schedule for various elements and phases of preparation and review essential to the completion of a proposed annual budget for the city. 
(3)  Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the first regularly scheduled council meeting in June of each year, the city manager shall provide the mayor and council with a proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year commencing July 1. 
(4)  Not later than the first regularly scheduled council meeting in June of each year, the city manager shall provide the mayor and council with a recommended budget for the next fiscal year commencing July 1. 
(5)  Along with a general operating budget for the city, the city manager shall prepare, in accordance with the same schedule, a capital budget for the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-002, 1-16-89) 
Sec. 3-6-5. - Capital improvement budget. 
In the event that same becomes necessary, a budget shall also be prepared following the procedures set forth [in section 3-6-4] above for a capital improvement program. 
(Ord. No. 89-002, 1-16-89) 
Sec. 3-6-6. - Line item transfers by the city administrator. 
(a)  Subject to the exception contained in subsection (c) below, the city council, by majority vote, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. Any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus, with the same reflected in the minutes. Subject to the exception contained in subsection (c) below, the council only shall have the authority to make changes in the adopted budget to shift funds from one (1) line item to another. 
(b)  Changes to the original budget ordinance. In the event that the financial affairs of the city require material alterations from the original budget ordinance, then, upon a finding by the governing body that changes need to be made in the budget, the governing body is authorized to change the budget by the enactment of an ordinance which shall set forth the reason that the change is being made and what part or parts of the budget are to be changed. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) above, the city manager shall be authorized, without further action by the mayor and council, to transfer funds from one (1) line item in a department to another line item within the same department. His authorization to transfer funds from one (1) line item to another line item shall be limited to the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less. Further, this authorization shall not be used directly or indirectly to add positions of employment with the city. 
Any such transfer of funds shall be promptly reported to the mayor and council at the next regular meeting or work session. 
(Ord. No. 89-002, 1-16-89; Ord. No. 99-004, 3-1-99) 
CHAPTER 7. - RATES FOR FEES, TAXES, ASSESSMENTS, AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 3-7-1. - Fees, taxes, assessments and penalties, arranged according to city code section numbers. 
The following fees, taxes, assessments, and penalties are hereby adopted and arranged according to City Code section numbers: 

 
Excise Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages: 
Malt Beverages: in accordance with Georgia law, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
City Code Reference: Section 3-4-2. 
Wine: in accordance with Georgia law, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
City Code Reference: Section 3-4-3. 
Distilled Spirits; retail package: in accordance with Georgia law, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
City Code Reference: Section 3-4-4. 
Distilled Spirits by the drink, consumption on premises: in accordance with Georgia law, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
City Code Reference: Section 3-4-6. 
Annual Permit Fees for recycling roll-off container service: $250.00 annually. 
City Code Reference: Section 5-2-11(e). 
Drop Fee for each individual recycling roll-off container dropped or left in the city: $25.00. 
City Code Reference: Section 5-2-11(e). 
The total amount the Director of the Department of Public Works may expend in the use of City Equipment and Labor without additional approval By the Mayor and City Council. 
Per City Code Section 5-3-2: ..... $5,000.00 (formerly $2,500.00) 

 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 2-21-2011; Ord. No. 14-16, § 3, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 16-16, §§ 1, 2, 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 3-7-2. - Fees and charges, department of public works. 
That certain document entitled "Public Works Department," identified as Addendum A, and attached hereto, is hereby incorporated herein by reference, and each of the fees, charges, and penalties is hereby adopted and approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 3-17-2008) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Addendum A reference above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 3-7-3. - Fees and charges, department of parks, recreation and cultural affairs. 
That certain document entitled "Department of Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Affairs," identified as Addendum B, and attached hereto, is hereby incorporated herein by reference, and each of the fees, charges and penalties is hereby adopted and approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 3-17-2008) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Addendum B reference above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Title 4 - Police and Fire Services 
Chapter 1.  Law Enforcement 
Chapter 2.  Fire Prevention and Protection 
Chapter 3.  Civil Defense 
Chapter 4.  Alarm Systems; False Alarms 
Chapter 5.  Emergency Management 
CHAPTER 1. - LAW ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-1-1. - Department established; powers; duties and responsibilities of director. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department of police services for the city. The department shall be composed of a director and such other officers and employees as are from time to time deemed necessary by the mayor and council. The director of the department of police services shall be appointed by the city manager in accordance with the provisions of section 3.14 of the Charter of the city. The director of the department of police services shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager and the mayor and council. 
(b)  The director of police services shall be the head of the department of police services and responsible for overseeing the organization, operation and administration of the department of police services and be responsible for overseeing the enforcement of all criminal violations of the Code of Ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. Among other duties of the director, by himself or his designee, he shall oversee the equipment and personnel training, and see that equipment is maintained in a proper condition, and all rules and regulations of the department are carried out. The director shall in person or by duly designated representative, attend all meetings of the governing authority and see to the fulfillment of all other duties and responsibilities imposed upon the department of police services and the director of the department of police services for the city by city charter, state law, ordinances of the city and any and all other lawful charges upon the department of police services. Wherever, in the city charter, this code or in any state law, the chief of police or marshal is directed to perform a certain duty or exercise a certain power, the director shall be responsible for the performance of such duty or the exercise of such power, unless otherwise provided by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 96-003, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 99-021, § 1, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 4-1-2. - Traffic division; established. 
There is hereby established in the department of police services for the city a traffic division to be under the supervision and control of a police officer appointed by and directly responsible to the director of police services. 
(Ord. No. 96-003, § 2, 2-5-96) 
Sec. 4-1-3. - Same—Duty of traffic division. 
It shall be the responsibility and duty of the traffic division to see to the enforcement of all applicable city and state traffic and motor vehicle laws, rules, regulations and ordinances, to enforce criminal violations of city and state traffic and motor vehicle ordinances, statutes, rules and regulations, to investigate and prepare all required reports relating to traffic accidents and to cooperate with city traffic engineer and other officers and employees of the city in the administration of the traffic laws, rules and regulations and in developing methods to improve traffic and to carry out all other duties and responsibilities now or hereafter imposed upon this division by this chapter, or other traffic ordinances or state statutes, rules, and regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 20-39; Ord. No. 96-003, § 3, 2-5-96) 
Sec. 4-1-4. - Same—Investigate accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department of police services, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1959, § 20-40) 
Sec. 4-1-5. - Same—Traffic accident studies. 
The traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1959, § 20-41) 
Sec. 4-1-6. - Same—Traffic accident reports. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every member of the department of police services investigating a traffic accident to make a written report of his findings as soon as practicable after completing his investigation. 
(b)  The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic reports, as required by this section. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 20-42) 
Sec. 4-1-7. - Traffic division to submit annual traffic safety report. 
The director of police services shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the governing body. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; and 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1959, § 20-43; Ord. No. 96-003, § 4, 2-5-96) 
Sec. 4-1-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-06, adopted Mar. 1, 2010, repealed § 4-1-8, which pertained to alarm systems and derived from Code 1959, § 9A-5). 
CHAPTER 2. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE A. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Additional charges for false alarms, § 4-1-8. 

Sec. 4-2-1. - Powers and duties of director of fire and emergency medical services. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department of fire and emergency medical services for the city which shall include the city's emergency management administration. The department shall be composed of a director of fire and emergency medical services and such other officers and employees as may from time to time be appointed and authorized by the mayor and council. The director of the department of fire and emergency medical services shall be appointed by the city manager in accordance with section 3.14 of the Charter of the city. The director of the department of fire and emergency medical services shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager and the mayor and council. The director shall oversee the day-to-day administration of the department. Assistant directors/assistant chiefs may be appointed, along with such other officers and employees as are deemed appropriate and authorized by the mayor and council. Wherever in the city charter, this or other city ordinance, the term "fire department" is used, it shall mean the department of fire and emergency medical services. 
(b)  The director/chief or designee shall be present at all fires or alarms of fire, fully equipped. It shall be his duty to visit the fire houses regularly and see that the houses, apparatus, personnel training and equipment are in proper condition, and that all rules and regulations established for the department of fire and emergency medical services are being carried out. Should the director/chief find anything out of order, or any member derelict in his duty, he shall have authority to recommend immediate suspension of such member. The director of fire and emergency medical services shall report such matter to the personnel director who shall proceed to hear and determine the issues in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the personnel board. The director/chief shall exercise all power and authority conferred upon him by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-003, § 6, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 99-021, § 2, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 4-2-2. - Department rules and regulations. 
The city manager, pursuant to section 2-3-2 of this Code shall establish rules and regulations for the general operation of the department, which shall be obeyed by all members of the department. Any member of the department who violates any such rule or regulation shall be subject to immediate suspension as provided in section 4-2-1. 
Sec. 4-2-3. - Training of firefighters. 
Each and every firefighter shall undergo special training and study in order to be able to better perform his duties, and a training schedule shall be established by the fire chief. 
(Code 1959, § 8-18) 
State Law reference— Firefighter standards and training act, O.C.G.A., § 25-5-14 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2-4. - Persons allowed in vicinity of fire. 
No person, except firefighters, members of the governing body of the city, members of the department of police services, the owners of the property, their agents, and the agents of insurance companies, shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire without being ordered there by the fire chief or officer in charge of the department of fire services at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief or other person in charge at the fire shall be arrested, and on conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 8-8) 
Sec. 4-2-5. - Electric wires, authority to cut. 
The fire chief, or other authority acting under him, is hereby authorized to cut any electric wire which he shall deem necessary to cut on the occurrence of any fire, without expense to the city for doing so; provided that nothing herein contained shall imply that the city authorizes any person to undertake the risk of cutting any such wires or renders itself liable for any injury to the person so doing. 
(Code 1959, § 8-5) 
Sec. 4-2-6. - Obstructing fire house. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or knowingly to put trash or obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any engine house or hook and ladder house or place where fire equipment is located. 
(Code 1959, § 8-9) 
Sec. 4-2-7. - Obstructing fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building material or in any other manner whatsoever any cistern or fire hydrant which would obstruct approaches to the same by any member of the department of fire services. No person shall put any posts or installation of any nature whatsoever nearer than eighteen (18) inches to any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the fire chief. 
Sec. 4-2-8. - Fire lanes. 
Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings that are set back more than one hundred fifty (150) feet (45.75 m) from a public road or exceed thirty (30) feet (9.14 m) in height and are set back over fifty (50) feet (15.25 m) from a public road. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 1-18-2000) 
Sec. 4-2-9. - Turnaround for fire apparatus. 
Fire lanes shall be not less than twenty (20) feet (6.1 m) of unobstructed width, able to withstand live loads of fire apparatus and have a minimum of thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches (4.1 m) of vertical clearance. An approved turnaround for fire apparatus shall be provided where an access road is a dead end and is in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet (45.8 m) in length. The turnaround shall have a minimum centerline radius of fifty (50) feet (15.3 m). The grade of the fire lane shall be within the limits established by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 1-18-2000) 
Sec. 4-2-10. - Marking of fire lanes. 
Fire lanes shall be marked with freestanding signs or marked curbs, sidewalks, or other traffic surfaces that have the words "FIRE LANE—NO PARKING" painted in contrasting colors at a size and spacing approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 1-18-2000) 
Sec. 4-2-11. - Fire lanes to be free from obstructions. 
Fire lanes shall be maintained free of all obstructions at all times, including parking of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct a fire lane at any time. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 1-18-2000) 
Secs. 4-2-12—4-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE AND SAFETY STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, adopted Apr. 5, 2010, deleted in its entirety and replaced the former Tit. 4, Ch. 2, Art. B, §§ X—X, and enacted a new Art. B as set out herein. The former Art. B pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, § 8-2; Res. No. 84-181, adopted Sept. 4, 1984; Ord. No. 96-012, adopted Aug. 5, 1996; Ord. No. 99-002, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1999; Ord. No. 05-29, adopted May 27, 2005; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, adopted June 19, 2006; Ord. No. 08-11, § 12, adopted Mar. 17, 2008. 

Sec. 4-2-21. - Fire prevention code; adoption. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards, 2009 edition, which shall include referenced publications and their appendices in their entirety, with all subsequent revisions and updated editions thereto, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which code is to be filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city; provided, however, that should any provisions of the fire prevention code as adopted hereby be in conflict with any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances shall prevail and be controlling. 
Additionally, the city hereby adopts the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing requirements for sprinklers and energy efficiency standards for residential properties, with all subsequent revisions and updated editions thereto, and same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 4-2-22. - State safety fire rules and regulations adopted. 
The rules and regulations promulgated for the prevention and destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the state safety fire commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon the state safety fire commissioner by O.C.G.A., Title 25, chapter 2, (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.) are adopted as the rules and regulations of the city. The rules and regulations of such statute shall govern inspections made for the purpose of eliminating fire hazards in the city. 
The city also adopts all amendments, which the state safety fire commissioner may make from time to time to the rules and regulations promulgated by that office unless such amendments are specifically excluded or superseded by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 4-2-23. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 4-2-24. - New processes, materials or occupancies which may require permits. 
The building inspector, fire marshal, fire chief, and the city manager shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said Code. The city clerk shall maintain such list with the fire prevention code for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 4-2-25. - Outdoor burning. 
There shall be no open burning after sunset till sunrise. All other open burning shall be performed only after notification and permission of the fire department, and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions as required by the department. Open burning, as used in this section, shall not include fireplaces, charcoal grills or small recreational campfires provided they create no fire hazard or smoke nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 4-2-26. - Power to cite for violations. 
(a)  The following persons shall have the power and authority to issue citations for violations of any and all provisions of this article: 
(1)  Fire chief; 
(2)  Fire marshal; and 
(3)  Deputy fire marshal. 
(b)  The municipal court of the City of Forest Park shall have jurisdiction over violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Secs. 4-2-27—4-2-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-11, §§ 1—5, adopted Aug. 17, 2016, repealed §§ 4-2-27—4-2-31, which pertained to sprinklers. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-2-32. - Penalties. 
Any person or legal entity, upon being found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violation of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished in accordance with section 1-1-8. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Secs. 4-2-33, 4-2-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-11, §§ 6, 7, adopted Aug. 17, 2016, repealed §§ 4-2-33, 4-2-34, which pertained to appeals and standards of review. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-2-35. - Automatic sprinkler system not to be disabled. 
No person shall shut off or disable any automatic fire sprinkler system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, a sprinkler system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire department. 
A fire watch may be required during the time the water-based fire protection system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire officials, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 4-2-36. - Fire alarm systems. 
No person shall shut off or disable any fire alarm system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, an alarm system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire department. 
A fire watch may be required during the time the water-based fire protection system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire officials, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 4-2-37. - Key boxes. 
Key boxes shall be required on all new and existing commercial building sites and any and all gated facilities to allow public safety personnel to enter a building quickly in case of an emergency. The key boxes shall be marked, conspicuous, and accessible. The fire officials shall approve the key boxes used and locations. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Secs. 4-2-38—4-2-49. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-2-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 2015, repealed § 4-2-50, which pertained to prohibition of fireworks, and derived from Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 4-5-2010. 
CHAPTER 3. - CIVIL DEFENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency powers of mayor, § 2-1-11. 
State Law reference— Emergency management responsibilities of local governments, O.C.G.A., § 38-3-27. 

Sec. 4-3-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter the term "civil defense" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than the functions for which the state and federal governments are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy nuclear attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or by acts of nature, fire, explosion, civil disorders or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, law enforcement services, medical and health services, rescue services, engineering services, warning services, communications, defense from radiological fallout, welfare services, evacuation when and where necessary, emergency transportation, plant and utility protection, restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to protection and well being of the population of the city, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparation for the carrying out of the above functions. 
(Code 1959, § 7-1) 
Sec. 4-3-2. - Office of the city civil defense director. 
There is hereby established for the city of an office of emergency management administration. The mayor and council shall nominate for appointment by the governor, the city administrator for emergency management administration for the city. The appointed administrator of emergency management administration shall serve under the supervision and direction of the director of fire and emergency medical services. When appointed, the administrator of emergency management administration is charged: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to civil defense. 
(2)  With assisting city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  With developing in conjunction with other city departments, the plan for emergency functions set forth in section 4-3-1 of this chapter. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the mayor and council for approval and thence to the state director for approval. 
(4)  With maintaining the civil defense office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the civil defense and disaster program including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management office. 
(5)  Rendering reports such as financial, daily activities, etc., as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)  Procuring, with authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the city emergency operating center. 
(7)  During periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of governing officials, coordinate the activities of the city emergency operating center staff. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2) 
Sec. 4-3-3. - City civil defense organization. 
(a)  The city civil defense organization shall be established around existing city departments and agencies, and the emergency functions listed in section 4-3-1 above are assigned as provided in the annual program papers as approved by state and federal agencies. 
(b)  Heads of departments are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Such plans will be submitted through the civil defense director to the mayor and council for approval. 
Sec. 4-3-4. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of an actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other disaster which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor, or in his absence, his legally appointed successor, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers in addition to those emergency powers granted by section 2-1-12 of this Code: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to civil defense and to assume direct operational control over all civil defense forces. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city, to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 7-4) 
Sec. 4-3-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Code 1959, § 7-5) 
State Law reference— Immunity of emergency management workers, O.C.G.A., § 38-3-35. 
Sec. 4-3-6. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by law for the punishment of violators of city ordinances. 
(Code 1959, § 7-6) 
Cross reference— General penalty for code violations, § 1-1-8. 
Sec. 4-3-7. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 7-7) 
Sec. 4-4-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to use and maintain alarms and alarm systems properly and to reduce or eliminate false alarms, which unduly divert Forest Park law enforcement and fire personnel from responding to actual threats and emergencies. This article governs systems intended to summon law enforcement and fire fighter responses, requires registration, establishes fees, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration and sets conditions and procedures for revocation of registration. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city chief of police to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts, and to administer this article A. 
Alarm company means any business, whether operated by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity, which is in the business of, or is licensed to, sell, lease, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace, remove, move, install or monitor alarm systems at an alarm site. 
Alarm dispatch request means a notification to the city police department or fire department that an alarm, whether manual or automated, has been activated at an alarm site. 
Alarm site means a single fixed location served by an alarm system or systems. 
Alarm or alarm system means any mechanized and/or electronic device or set of devices intended to detect and signal the need for police or fire personnel at the premises or the alarm site within or upon which such device or set of devices is installed. 
Alarm user means, with respect to any premises or alarm site, any person who owns, leases, manages, or otherwise controls such premises or alarm site, whether such ownership, leasing, management, or control is shared with other persons and whether it is direct or indirect. 
Applicant means the individual who signs and files an application for an alarm registration certificate under this article. 
Automatic dialer or auto-dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device designed or intended to call a pre-designated telephone number in the event of activation of an alarm system. 
Chief of police shall mean the director of the department of police services as set forth in Section 4-1-1 of this Code of Ordinances. 
City or Forest Park shall mean the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
City police department or police department shall mean the city's department of police services as set forth in Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening situation or crime in progress requiring law enforcement response. 
False alarm means an alarm dispatch request resulting in the responding police officer or fire fighter finding no evidence of a criminal offense, attempted criminal offense, or fire, smoke, or other life or property threatening situation after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Individual means an individual human being. 
Local alarm system means any alarm system that annunciates an alarm only by an internal or external audio device. 
Notice or notification means sending written notice via U.S. mail, First Class postage pre-paid, addressed to the address provided by the addressee to the city under this article, including but not limited to the address provided to the city by an applicant for an alarm registration certificate as provided in Section 4-4-3 of this Code. 
Panic alarm means an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
Premises means an individual parcel of real estate devoted to a common land use, or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with customary accessories and open spaces devoted to such use. There may be more than one (1) alarm site on a single premises. 
Response means whenever an alarm is activated in the city, police personnel or fire personnel respond to and inspect the alarm site, and determine whether the response was in fact necessary or whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user assumes control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-3. - Registration required. 
(1)  No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at any alarm site within the city without first obtaining a valid alarm registration certificate issued by the city police department. A separate registration certificate is required for each alarm site. 
(2)  A tenant of any commercial or residential unit within a multi-unit complex shall obtain an alarm registration certificate from the city police department before operating or causing the operation of an alarm or an alarm system in the tenant's individual unit. The owner or property manager of a commercial or residential multi-unit complex shall obtain a separate alarm registration certificate for any alarm system operated in an office or in any common areas of the multi-unit complex. Each individual unit within a commercial or residential multi-unit complex shall be considered an alarm site if served by a separate alarm or alarm system. 
(3)  A registration application must be submitted to the city within thirty (30) days after any alarm installation or alarm takeover. An alarm registration certificate cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a completed application and applicable fee, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant and issue a registration certificate unless the applicant has: 
(a)  Failed to pay a fine or fee assessed under this article; or 
(b)  Had an alarm registration certificate revoked and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected. 
(c)  Each alarm registration application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete address and telephone number(s) of the individual who will be the registration holder and who will be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees and fines assessed under this article; 
(2)  The alarm site shall be identified as either residential (includes condominium, mobile home, apartment home, separate dwelling, etc.) or commercial (includes churches, schools, offices, businesses, retail establishments, etc.); 
(3)  The classification of each alarm system (i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, panic or other) at the alarm site; 
(4)  The complete physical address of the alarm site to include any suite, building or apartment number, letter, and any other identifying information; 
(5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site; 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of at least two (2) individuals who are able and have agreed to: 
a.  Receive notification of an alarm activation at any time; and 
b.  Respond to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes; and 
c.  Grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if necessary. 
(7)  The type of business, if any, conducted at the alarm site; 
(8)  A signed certification from the alarm user stating: 
a.  The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm system; 
b.  The name, address, phone number and low voltage license number of the alarm company performing the alarm system installation, conversion or takeover and which is responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system, and whether the alarm company will be responsible for monitoring the alarm system; 
c.  The full name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing alarm company; 
d.  That the applicant possesses a current set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms; 
e.  That the alarm company has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms. 
(d)  Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration or to revoke a registration previously granted. 
(e)  An alarm user shall inform the city's alarm administrator of any change that alters any information listed on the alarm registration application within thirty (30) business days following the change. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-4. - Government immunity. 
Registration of an alarm system is not intended to, nor does it, create any contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of a response, or any particular level or time of response, by the city's police department or fire department. Any and all liability and damage resulting from the failure to respond to an alarm dispatch request is disclaimed and all governmental immunity as well as official immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering an alarm system, the alarm user acknowledges that law enforcement response and fire fighter response may be based on numerous variable factors, including but not limited to availability of police units, fire units and equipment, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions and staffing levels. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-5. - Duties of an alarm user. 
(1)  An alarm user shall: 
(a)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms; and 
(b)  Arrive or cause a representative to arrive, at an alarm site within thirty (30) minutes following a request from any city police officer or fire fighter so as to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, or to provide access to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises. 
(c)  An alarm user shall adjust the alarm system or cause the alarm system to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated, or fifteen (15) minutes for alarm systems operating under Underwriter Laboratories, Inc. Standards 365, 609, and 611. 
(d)  An alarm user shall have an alarm company inspect the alarm system after two (2) false alarms in any calendar year. In such instances, the alarm user must submit to the city's alarm administrator written certification from an alarm company stating that the alarm system has been inspected and that repairs or modifications, if necessary, have been made so as to prevent or minimize false alarms in the future. The alarm administrator may waive an inspection requirement if he or she determines that a false alarm(s) could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system. After four (4) false alarms within any one (1) calendar year, the alarm user must have an alarm company modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant and/or to provide additional alarm user training as appropriate. 
(2)  An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site a set of written operating instructions for each alarm or alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-6. - Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to: 
(a)  Operate an alarm system during the period in which the applicable alarm registration is revoked or suspended or otherwise not in effect; or 
(b)  Transmit or cause to be transmitted a false alarm; or 
(c)  Activate, except in the event of an actual emergency, any alarm system for the purpose of summoning a law enforcement or fire fighter response; or 
(d)  Notify the city police department through the E-911 system of any alarm activation by means of an auto-dialer, or telephonic recording, message, signal or warning; or 
(e)  Aid or abet in the commission of any act prohibited in this section. 
(2)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article may be summoned to the city's municipal court for each violation and/or instance of noncompliance and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both, for each individual offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-7. - Fees and fines. 
For each police or fire fighter response to a false alarm under this article, a city police officer may issue a written citation for the offender to appear in the city's municipal court at a designated time and place to answer the charge or charges against him or her for violating this article; in lieu of or in addition the issuance of a citation, the police officer or the fire fighter shall also notify the alarm administrator of the false alarm, who shall then charge and collect fees from the alarm user as follows: 
Alarm registration fees: 
*Residential alarm systems: Free 
*Commercial alarm systems: $25.00 
Registered alarms fines: 
*First, second, and third false alarm in a calendar year: No fee. 
*Fourth false alarm in a calendar year: $50.00. 
*Fifth false alarm in a calendar year: $75.00. 
*Sixth and each subsequent alarm thereafter in a calendar year: $100.00. 
Un-registered alarms fines: 
*For the first false alarm in a calendar year, a registered or certified letter will be sent via U.S. mail giving the person ten (10) calendar days to register his or her alarm or alarm system. If the person fails to register the alarm or alarm system within the time allotted, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be assessed. 
*Second false alarm in a calendar year: $100.00. 
*Third false alarm in a calendar year: $200.00. 
*Fourth false alarm and each subsequent alarm thereafter in a calendar year: $300.00. 
Such fees shall be remitted to the alarm administrator not later than thirty (30) days after the date on which notification is mailed to the alarm user. 
In the event an alarm user is convicted for transmitting a false alarm pursuant to this article and is thereby required to pay a fine assessed by the city's municipal court, the alarm user shall nevertheless be required to pay any fees under this article in addition to the criminal penalty assessed. 
Failure to remit payment of fees or fines assessed pursuant to this section within thirty (30) days following notice may result in a citation to appear in the city's municipal court, and may also result in the revocation of the applicable registration certificate under this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-8. - Duties of the alarm administrator. 
The city's alarm administrator shall be appointed by the chief of police. The alarm administrator shall: 
(1)  Designate the manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; and 
(2)  Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. 
(3)  The alarm administrator shall establish procedures for recording and maintaining information on alarm dispatch requests, and procedures for notifying alarm users of false alarms. 
(4)  If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and/or the alarm company to review the circumstances of each false alarm. Failure to participate in such a conference may result in revocation of the alarm user's alarm registration. 
(5)  The alarm administrator shall oversee the creation and implementation of an alarm user awareness class for the purpose of informing alarm users of problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to operate their alarm system without generating false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-9. - Multiple false alarms; notice and revocation. 
(1)  The alarm administrator shall notify in writing the alarm user of any fees assessed under this article. Notice shall be deemed received if sent via United States mail, First Class postage pre-paid, addressed to the alarm user at the address that has been provided to the city by the alarm user pursuant to this article. The notification shall include the amount of the fees for each false alarm, notice that the alarm user can attend alarm user awareness class to abate the fee for the second false alarm, if applicable, and a description of the appeals procedure. 
(2)  The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing that the applicable alarm registration is revoked and the reasons therefore as listed in Section 4-4-10. This notice of revocation shall include a description of the appeals procedure. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-10. - Revocation. 
An alarm registration may be revoked if: 
(1)  The alarm user has five (5) or more false alarms in any calendar year; or 
(2)  The alarm user habitually fails to comply with Sections 4-4-5 or 4-4-6, or both; or 
(3)  There is a false statement of a material fact in the application for registration; or 
(4)  The alarm user has failed to make timely payment of a fine or fee assessed under Section 4-4-7 of this article; or 
(5)  The alarm user has failed to timely submit to the alarm administrator a written certification from an alarm company, in compliance with the requirements of this article, stating that the alarm system has been inspected, and repaired if necessary, by the alarm company; or 
(6)  The commission of one (1) or more of the acts prohibited under Section 4-4-6. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-11. - Appeals. 
(a)  An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a fee, the denial of alarm registration, or the revocation of alarm registration by the alarm administrator, to the chief of police. An appeal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany the appeal. The appeal fee will be returned to the alarm user if the appeal is successful. The filing of an appeal with the chief of police shall stay the assessment of a fee or suspension or revocation until the chief of police can make a decision on the appeal. 
(b)  Appeals must be submitted to the chief of police within ten (10) days of the date on which notice of a fee, revocation, or denial of alarm registration is mailed. 
(c)  If the appeal is denied, the chief of police shall send written notice to the appellant of the action and a statement of the right to further appeal. An alarm user may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city manager by filing a written request within ten (10) days of the date of the decision by the chief of police. 
(1)  Upon receiving an appeal, the city manager shall conduct a hearing and consider evidence presented by interested parties. The city manager shall make his decision in writing based upon his determination of all relevant facts based on a preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing and shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing. The city manager shall affirm or reverse the action of the chief of police. The decision of the city manager shall be final and binding upon the parties to the appeal, but either party may appeal the city manager's decision by applying for a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia, within the time allowed by Georgia law. 
(2)  The filing of a request for appeal to the city manager shall stay an action by the alarm administrator or the chief of police until the city manager reaches a decision. If a request for appeal is not made to the city manager within the ten-day period, the decision of the chief of police will be final. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-12. - Reinstatement. 
(a)  A person whose alarm registration has been revoked may submit a request for reinstatement of an alarm registration to the alarm administrator. The request shall be granted if the person: 
(1)  Submits an updated application; 
(2)  Pays all outstanding alarm fees and/or fines that have been assessed under this article; 
(3)  Submits certification from an alarm company showing proof, including the nature and cost, of repairs intended to eliminate the incidence of false alarms; 
(4)  Successfully completes the alarm user awareness class; 
(5)  Pays a reinstatement fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); and 
(6)  Submits proof of judicial resolution of charges, if any, which were made under this article and which resulted in the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-13. - Confidentiality. 
Information obtained by the city pursuant to this article shall be held in confidence by employees or representatives of city, and access to such information shall be permitted only to the extent required by the Georgia Open Records Law, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(11.2). 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-14. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the City of Forest Park, Georgia, or to any city agency, board, or authority. This article shall apply to other governmental agencies and entities. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-15. - Implementation. 
Any alarm system installed in any location prior to the effective date of this article, must register upon receiving notification. However, any alarm system that is unable to meet the standards contained in this article, must meet such standards on or before September 1, 2010. Proof of such compliance must be submitted to the alarm administrator. Failure to comply with this section will result in revocation of registration as outlined in Section 4-4-10. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 4-4-16. - Standards for installation and alteration of alarm systems. 
The installation and alteration of alarm systems shall be in accordance with Article 760 "Fire Protective Signaling Systems" of the National Electrical Code, NFPA #70-1975 and the following NFPA standards: 
(1)  Standard 71—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of central station signaling systems. 
(2)  Standard 72-B—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of auxiliary protective signaling systems for fire alarm service. 
(3)  Standard 72-C—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote station protective signaling system. 
(4)  Standard 72-D—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote station protective signaling systems for watchman, fire alarm, and supervisory service. 
(5)  Standard 72-E—Standard on automatic fire detectors. 
(6)  Standard 74—Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of household fire warning equipment. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
CHAPTER 5. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 4-5-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 1, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-5-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for City of Forest Park. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance . The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the clerk of the city a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than thirty (30) days unless renewed by the mayor. The city council may by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the city emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Forest Park Emergency Management Agency (EMA) Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the city council. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: Section 4-5-5 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and section 4-5-6 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the City of Forest Park and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city council is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 4-5-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City of Forest Park. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The Mayor of the City of Forest Park shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids or substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare, and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct or city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, City of Forest Park, Clayton County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; and 
WHEREAS, in judgment of the Mayor of the City of Forest Park, with advice from the Forest Park Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in the City of Forest Park requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Forest Park, Clayton County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the City of Forest Park Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)  That the following sections of the City of Forest Park Code be implemented: [if deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 4-5-5 Registration of Building and Repair Services to be effective only if the Governor has declared a state of emergency; and/or Section 4-5-6 Closed or Restricted Areas or Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from subsection (a)(4)d. of this section or other such measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [time] on [date] 
[Signed] 
Mayor, ____________ City of Forest Park 
(c)  Contracts with other agencies. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the city's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city council may contract with any other agencies for the administration of an emergency response program. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 2, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-5-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the City of Forest Park Police Department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the mayor or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties . Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the mayor or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement . Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the EMA director and Forest Park Police Chief. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 3, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-5-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Mayor of the City of Forest Park, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two (2) members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Mayor of the City of Forest Park, the city council may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four (4) weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any e-verify affidavit or other state required affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. 
(c)  Purchasing . Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Mayor of the City of Forest Park, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or the Mayor of the City of Forest Park, the city council may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees . Upon declaration of state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or the Mayor of the City of Forest Park, the city council may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" includes fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or Mayor of the City of Forest Park, the city council or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and development services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the city council or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 4, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-5-5. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the corporate city limits designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the Forest Park Planning, Building and Zoning Department and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the incorporated areas of the city without complying with this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $_____ per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past twelve (12) months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the secretary of state, if required; 
(10)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1; and 
(11)  At least one (1) secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city council, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 5, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-5-6. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the city emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the city emergency management agency; 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; and 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA and/or the chief of police. 
(d)  Enforceability . This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 6, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-5-7. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this chapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 7, 8-19-2013) 
Title 5 - Public Works 
Chapter 1.  Streets and Sidewalks 
Chapter 2.  Solid Waste 
Chapter 3.  Drainage Improvements 
Chapter 4.  Stormwater Utility Ordinance 
CHAPTER 1. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5-1-1. - House numbering—Assigning by city manager; duty of property owner or tenant. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide a uniform numbering system for all houses and structures, including business establishments, in the city. It shall be the duty of all owners and/or tenants of all houses and structures in the city to obtain from the city manager or his designated representative the correct number assigned to his house or structure, and thereafter to post the assigned number in a conspicuous place on the house or structure, or on the property, so that the same may be seen from the street. 
Sec. 5-1-2. - Same—Prerequisite to issuance of building permit. 
The building inspector is hereby prohibited from issuing any permit for the construction of any house of any kind to any person until a number shall have been assigned to such structure by the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 16-2) 
Sec. 5-1-3. - Dedication of streets. 
No dedication to the city by any owner of property to be used as a street, alley or other public use shall be valid until the same shall have been accepted in writing by the governing body. The director of public works shall be charged with the responsibility of inspecting streets that are to be offered for dedication to the city. 
Sec. 5-1-4. - Downspouts and drains of water on sidewalks. 
No person shall erect any drain, gutter, downspout, valley or any flat or sloping roof of any character that will in any manner drain or shed water on any sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 16-4) 
Sec. 5-1-5. - Obstructing drainage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in any street or alley, any dirt, trash or other material so as to interfere with the drainage or use of said street or alley, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the director of public works. 
Cross reference— Obstructing drains with solid waste, § 5-2-6. 
Sec. 5-1-6. - Disposing of liquids on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall cause any water or other liquids to be disposed of on the streets or sidewalks of the city without the written permission of the director of public works. 
(b)  The terms of this section shall not be applicable to the members of the fire department or any officer, agent, or employee of the city in the performance of a designated municipal duty. 
Sec. 5-1-7. - Sidewalks, cleanliness responsibility of abutting property owners, enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of all occupants of improved property and owners of vacant property, in front of which the sidewalks have been paved, to keep such sidewalks clean, and to do such sweeping and scraping as may be necessary to remove clay, dirt and trash therefrom, and to render the same passable, comfortable and sightly. In addition, it shall be the duty of the city manager, after five (5) days' written notice to any such person of the necessity for cleaning such sidewalk, to have done such work as may be necessary to render such walk clean and to render a bill covering the cost of such cleaning to the owner or agent of such property in person, or if such person or agent be a nonresident, then by mail. Upon the nonpayment of such bill within ten (10) days after service of same as aforesaid, the city clerk shall issue an execution therefor against the owner of the abutting property, and such execution shall be a lien upon such property and shall be collected as other executions issued by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 16-7) 
Sec. 5-1-8. - Driveway installations. 
(a)  New driveways shall be installed at the expense of the property owner after obtaining the approval as to curb cut and driveway design by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(1)  The following are the design requirements for residential developments, whether single or multiple dwellings. 
(2)  All driveways shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or the like and subject to the specifications on file in the public works department. Gravel mix, two-track driveways and shared parking in residential developments may be built pending approval from the city manager or his/her designee. As employed in this section, the phrase "two-track driveway" means a driveway made of two (2) narrow, parallel, paved wheel tracks that are separated by an unpaved area containing stone, grass or other low growing landscaping. Wheel tracks in any two-track driveway must be installed flush with the ground and constructed with materials capable of supporting all vehicle/equipment tires without driving onto or over an unapproved parking surface. 
Note: Illustration of two-track driveway below: 

(3)  All buildings, structures and uses of land shall provide off-street parking in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land. 
(4)  All off-street parking shall be on a dust-free surface. 
(5)  All impervious areas shall comply with maximum ground coverage and setback requirements in accordance with the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(6)  Parking on the street, sidewalk or grass is prohibited. 
(7)  Parking in any multiple residential development is permitted only in designated parking spaces. 
(b)  Where driveway repairs are needed on that portion of the driveway which is on the city right-of-way, such repairs will be made only in those cases where the property owner pays in advance for the materials and the city performs the repairs. The repairs performed by the city shall only extend to the property line of the subject property. 
(c)  The city shall bear all costs of material and labor for the replacement and maintenance of any driveway drainage pipe located within the city right-of-way. Excepted herefrom are any repairs which are needed due to any negligent act or willful destruction of said drainage pipe by the property owner or his lessee. Driveway drainage pipes willfully destroyed or damaged by the negligent acts of the property owner will be replaced by the city at the expense of said property owner. The property owner shall bear the cost of administration, labor, and materials needed for this purpose. 
(d)  The city shall assume the responsibility when performing new construction of tying the driveway to the existing property owner's improvements on the city's right-of-way in a workmanship manner at no cost whatsoever to the property owner. The city assumes no responsibility or liability which may result from any change in the water flow or any damage that may occur in the future due to the placement of said tie. 
(Res. No. 83-157, 6-6-83; Ord. No. 05-45, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-1-9. - Sidewalk design. 
Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed with a minimum width of four (4) feet and will be sloped towards front yards when practicable. Alternate mediums for pedestrian travel, such as paving stones, may be substituted for sidewalks when they are not located adjacent to a road. When possible, a two-foot grass strip shall be included. Final approval of sidewalk widths will be determined in accordance with the recommendations of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, § 2, 1-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-1-10—5-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 5-1-21. - Definition. 
The phrase "public place," as employed in this article, shall be construed to mean a street, alley, sidewalk or other public property owned by the city or under its supervision. 
(Code 1959, § 16-16) 
Sec. 5-1-22. - Permit to excavate; required. 
(a)  No person shall dig or excavate in any public place within the city or install, repair or replace any of his property or equipment in such public place, or do any other work in or on any public place, which requires the removal or breaking of the surface or underpart of any such public place, unless and until such person shall have first secured, in the manner provided in this article, permission to do so. 
(b)  If any person shall do any of the acts referred to in this section without first having secured in the manner provided in this article, permission so to do, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
(Code 1959, § 16-17) 
Sec. 5-1-23. - Same; application. 
Each person desiring permission to dig or excavate in any public place shall file with the director of public works or his designated representative, a printed application, as furnished by the director, setting forth the character and location of such work to be done in any such public place, the probable number of square yards of surface to be removed and the probable date of beginning and the completion of the work. 
Sec. 5-1-24. - Same; fees and deposits. 
In the event the applicant for the permit to excavate is authorized to perform the work himself, including replacing the street to its condition prior to the excavation, there shall be no charge for the issuance of the permit. But the director of public works, or his designated representative may, if the situation warrants it, require a deposit at the time of application. The deposit shall be in the sum of money that shall be fixed by the director of public works and it shall be based on the cost per square yard of replacement, plus 10 percent. 
Sec. 5-1-25. - Same; grant or refusal. 
Each application, as referred to in section 5-1-23, shall be received by the director of public works or his designated representative, who shall, without unreasonable delay, either grant or reject such application. In the absence of the director of public works or his authorized representative, the application may be delivered to the city manager, or his designated agent. Upon rejection of the application, the applicant shall have the right to present the matter to the governing body, the order of which shall be final in such matter, and upon final rejection, the deposit of money referred to in section 5-1-24 shall be returned to the person who deposited the same. 
Sec. 5-1-26. - Failure to complete or restore. 
Upon the failure of any person, whose application to dig or excavate shall have been granted and who shall have begun the work, to complete the same without delay, or upon the completion of such work, to restore the public place to the same or as good a condition as the same was before such work was done, or to comply with any reasonable rules or regulations of the director of public works from time to time given to such person for the completion and restoration of such public place, such person shall, upon conviction, in addition to other penalties, forfeit to the city any deposit of money so made with the city. All cuts shall be replaced with six (6) inches of 3,000 pounds per square inch concrete, plus two (2) inches of asphalt topping, provided that on residential streets there may be a variance from these standards on approval of the director of public works. 
Sec. 5-1-27. - Restoration by city. 
Upon the failure of any person to make such repairs as herein required in the manner or in the time required, the director of public works is empowered and authorized to cause such repairs to be made and such public place to be restored to its original condition, and the cost thereof, plus 10 percent thereof, shall be charged to and paid by such person who so failed to make such repairs, and such sum of money shall constitute and be a debt due from such person to the city. 
Sec. 5-1-28. - Use or refund of deposit. 
The deposit of money made under section 5-1-24 shall stand as a guarantee and may be employed by the city for the replacement of such public place in as good condition as the same was immediately before the excavation or digging, and upon default of the person so making such deposit to restore immediately the public place to as good condition as the same was immediately before such excavation or digging was done by him, the director of public works may employ the whole or any part of such deposit of money necessary for such restoration. Upon the restoration of the public place to such condition as the same was immediately before such digging or excavating, the director of finance, or his designated representative shall, upon the certificate of the city manager, restore to the person so making such deposit such sum of money so deposited, or in case any part thereof is employed by the city for such restoration of such public place, upon such certificate, the director of finance, or his designated representative, shall refund such part of such sum of money so remaining. 
Sec. 5-1-29. - Prompt work. 
All digging or excavating to be done, as provided in this article, shall be promptly started and completed without delay after permission shall have been granted, and such public place shall be, immediately upon the completion of such work, restored to the same or as good condition as the same was before such work was done thereon. Such work or restoration shall be at all times and in all respects in compliance with the orders and supervision of the director of public works, or his designated agent, from time to time given to such person for such purpose. 
Sec. 5-1-30. - Warning devices; posting permit. 
Upon the granting of an application for permission to dig or excavate in any public place, and in all other cases provided for in this article, it shall be the duty of the applicant, before beginning any such work, to enclose the place where such work is being done or otherwise afford adequate protection to street traffic. He shall post and keep posted at such place a placard showing that the work is being done under a permit granted by the city, with sufficient other information thereon to give ample warning to those using such public place that the same is out of repair or being repaired, and in addition thereto, he shall place sufficient markings at night by an amber light, to notify those having the right to use the same that such public place, or part thereof, is closed. The contractor shall furnish the director of public works, or his designated representative, with a telephone number of someone that can be contacted twenty-four (24) hours a day in the event a problem arises due to the street being cut. 
Sec. 5-1-31. - Decision of governing body final. 
Any controversy between the person making a deposit in order to dig or excavate in any public place and the finance director or director of public works, or the city manager, respecting any of the duties to be performed by any of them, may be submitted to the governing body by any of the parties, and when so submitted, the action of the governing body thereon shall be binding on all the parties. 
CHAPTER 2. - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 5-2-1. - Short title and applicability of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Forest Park Sanitation Ordinance of 1971." It shall apply to the preparation, storage, collection and disposal of all refuse and shall prohibit unsanitary conditions in the corporate limits as presently or hereafter established. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1) 
Sec. 5-2-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, works in the plural number include singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(1)  Approved receptacle: The approved receptacle is a ninety-five-gallon cart capable of being emptied by mechanical means. All garbage in the cart shall be in plastic bags so that loose garbage is in the approved receptacle. The approved receptacle will be furnished by the city and issued by the department of public works or the city's designee. 
(2)  City: Forest Park, Georgia. 
(3)  Commercial container: A manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director of public works. 
(4)  Commercial establishment: Any hotel, motel, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit or multiple dwelling units. 
(5)  Compactor: A mechanical devise to shred or compact solid waste. 
(6)  Compactor container: Any manufactured container of any size, which is used in conjunction with a mechanical devise, which shreds and/or compacts refuse. 
(7)  Garbage: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and servicing of food and the storage and sale of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
(8)  Garbage container: A durable plastic container of a capacity not less than sixty-five (65) gallons and not to exceed ninety-five (95) gallons as approved and issued by the director of public works or the city's designee. 
(9)  Multiple dwelling: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) or more families. 
(10)  Owner: Any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the city. 
(11)  Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, trust, corporation, company, instruction, society, organization, executor, administrator, trustee or other legal entity. 
(12)  Refuse: Garbage and trash collectively. 
(13)  Residential unit: Any structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one (1) family. 
(14)  Sanitary landfill: Any refuse disposal area operated by the city. 
(15)  Scavenger: Any person collecting or disposing of refuse. 
(16)  Special industrial waste container: Any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
(17)  Trash: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible material such as, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, glass, crockery and similar materials. 
(18)  Classification "A": This classification shall consist of commercial establishments as defined in subparagraph (4) of this section, excepting apartment houses and rooming houses. 
(19)  Classification "B": This classification shall consist of multiple dwellings as defined by subparagraph (9) of this section. 
(20)  Classification "C": This classification shall consist of all residential units as defined in subparagraph (13) of this section. 
(21)  Handicapped/disabled customer: Household with no able-bodied member capable of transferring garbage container to curb for pickup. Handicapped/disabled household must be certified by a physician and by signed affidavit of the customer. 
(22)  Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 1959, § 9-2; Ord. No. 95-005, § 2, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 97-011, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 15-12, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 5-2-3. - Unhealthy and unsanitary conditions prohibited. 
To protect the health and property of persons in the city and to prevent conditions which might lead to fire or the breeding of reptiles, rodents, and insects, it shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in the city to allow garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, stagnant water, filth, carrion, weeds, debris, vines, grass or other vegetation to accumulate thereon. 
(Code 1959, § 9-3) 
Cross reference— Keeping junk, abandoned appliances, etc., on property, § 11-1-1. 
Sec. 5-2-4. - Notice to remove. 
When the director of public works or his designee determines that conditions as described in section 5-2-3 above exist in the city, it shall be the director's or his designee's duty to notify the owner and/or the occupant of the premises of such conditions. Such notice shall be in writing and posted at the address and shall advise the addressee of the condition or conditions complained of, shall advise the addressee that such conditions must be eliminated within seventy-two (72) hours, and that addressee's failure to act accordingly may result in prosecution under this chapter and correction by the city at the expense of the owner and/or occupant. 
(Code 1959, § 9-4; Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 11-4-2002) 
Sec. 5-2-5. - Failure to correct within time specified. 
If the owner or occupant fails to act in accordance with the notice given him, the city may issue a citation charging him with a violation of this chapter and in addition thereto, the city may, at its option, proceed to remedy the situation and accomplish the necessary work. The owner or occupant or both shall be liable to the city for the actual costs of such work. 
(Code 1959, § 9-5; Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 4-4-2005) 
Sec. 5-2-6. - Diverting natural flow of water and obstructing drains and gutters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any rocks, dirt, or any other object in any stream, drain, drainage ditch, culvert, catch basin, or drainage easement in the city in such manner as to divert or obstruct the natural flow of water therein. 
(Code 1959, § 9-6) 
Cross reference— Placing of similar objects in streets or sidewalks, § 5-1-5. 
Sec. 5-2-7. - Collection of refuse generally; conditions for collection by the city; prohibited refuse. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city, or its designee, except as otherwise expressly authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  The city, or its designee, will collect refuse in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the mayor and council and kept on file in the department of public works and the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Dead animals, other than dogs and house pets, will not be collected. 
(d)  Acid, explosive material, flammable liquids, and dangerous or corrosive material of any kind will not be collected, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place any such item, product or material in any refuse can or container for collection. 
(e)  Except for the roll-off container services and compactor services provided by the city or its designee in accordance with section 5-2-11 of this Code, neither the city nor its designee shall be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building materials, dirt, broken concrete, bricks, rock or other debris resulting from construction or similar activities in the city, and any such materials shall be disposed of in a safe and lawful manner by the owner of the real estate on which such activities are conducted or his contractor. 
(f)  Neither the city nor its designee shall be responsible for collecting or hauling of trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors or building contractors. The hauling of the debris is the sole responsibility of the property owner or the owner's contractor. 
(g)  Collection service for classification "C" customers shall be curbside unless household is disabled or customer has elected to pay an extra charge for continued back door service. Such collection service will be for periods of one (1) year as measured from January 1 through December 31. All new customers applying for first time collection service will be offered curbside service only unless the occupant is disabled and there is no person residing on the premises physically able to pull the container curbside. All disabled persons requesting back door service shall provide a written notice from a physician indicating such disability to the department of public works. The city may charge an additional fee for such services as established by the mayor and city council. 
(h)  It shall be a violation of the City Code to place any refuse items on the right-of-way at any time other than the designated times for collection. Such violations shall be subject to the issuance of a citation punishable under the general penalty of Code section 1-1-8. 
(Ord. No. 97-011, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 07-39, § 2, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 5-2-8. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection. 
(a)  Garbage shall be stored in an approved receptacle. Each household may be issued two (2) approved containers which shall remain the property of the city or its designee. Each household may choose to be issued two (2) approved receptacles for the collection of refuse or, alternatively, may choose to be issued one (1) approved receptacle for the collection of garbage and one (1) approved receptacle for the collection of recycling materials. Customer is responsible for maintaining in good condition each approved receptacle issued to him. Customer is solely responsible for the replacement of any approved receptacle that occurs within five (5) years following the issuance of that receptacle. Customer is responsible at a prorated cost for the replacement of any approved receptacle that occurs more than five (5) years, but less than ten (10) years, following the issuance of that receptacle. Any customer who has been issued any approved receptacle, subsequently moves outside the city's limits, and takes the approved receptacle with him may be prosecuted for theft by the city or its designee. 
(b)  Garbage containers shall be placed curbside no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day before collection and must be removed from curbside no later that [than] 8:00 p.m. the day of collection. Violation of this Code more than three (3) times per year will result in a citation by public works officials or code enforcement that shall carry a minimum twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine. Exception will be handicapped/disabled customers and customers that have elected to continue back yard service and pay additional fees. 
(c)  Large amounts of trash must be placed at curb beside the wheeled garbage container. Trash should be bagged or boxed. 
(d)  Refuse containers that are inside secured fenced areas will not be picked up. 
(e)  Pet liter must be placed in a securely tied plastic bag. 
(f)  Garbage containers shall be stored in the rear of the residential structure. "Rear" shall be considered as any area of the property behind the parallel face of the structure facing the roadway, or side street if it is a corner lot. Any deviation or change of the storage allocation from what is required herein must be approved. Such approval shall be at the discretion of the public works director or his designee. 
(g)  Yard trimmings shall not be mixed with household garbage or trash, but shall be placed curbside no sooner than the day before pickup is scheduled. Leaves, pine straw and grass clippings shall be disposed of in paper recycle bags manufactured for yard trimming disposal and when full not to exceed thirty (30) pounds in weight, or in a separate container marked "yard waste". Limbs, twigs and heavy brush shall not exceed four (4) feet in length and four (4) inches in diameter and shall be bundled and tied with rope or string. Bundles may not exceed thirty (30) pounds and must be stacked in a compact pile on the owner's property in front of the residence adjoining the curb or curb line, but such pile shall not extend into the street or onto the sidewalks or driveway and shall not be located so as to impede or obstruct or divert the flow of traffic, surface water or block drains. There shall be a weekly limit of fifteen (15) recycle paper bags, bundles or a combination of the two (2). Violations will delay pickup of these items and could result in the issuance of a citation for noncompliance. 
(Code 1959, § 9-8; Ord. No. 97-011, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 01-11, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 15-12, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 5-2-9. - Preparation and storage of industrial, commercial and multiple dwelling refuse for collection. 
(a)  The building inspector of the city shall not issue a building permit for industrial, commercial or multifamily dwellings until the director of public works gives his approval to proposed plans for the storage of refuse. 
(b)  The city will not collect refuse from industrial, commercial or multifamily dwellings unless the refuse is placed in containers approved by the director of public works and located at a place approved by the director. Cardboard boxes must be flattened and placed in containers. 
(c)  Commercial front and rear load containers' doors and lids are to be left closed at all times except when loading or unloading. 
(Code 1959, § 9-9; Ord. No. 05-14, § 1, 4-4-2005) 
Sec. 5-2-10. - Regulation of private transportation of refuse. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport his own refuse or with a permit to transport the refuse of another over the streets of the city when the material transported is inadequately secured and allows any of the material to fall, leak, or be blown from the vehicle. The operator of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 9-10; Ord. No. 82-267, 6-12-82) 
Sec. 5-2-11. - Roll-off container service, compactor service and "special needs" roll-off container service. 
(a)  The city or its designee shall be the exclusive provider of all roll-off container and compactor services within the limits of the city. This subsection shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A "special needs" roll-off container service or compactor service as determined and permitted by the director of public works under the terms and the conditions set forth in this section; 
(2)  A roll-off container service that consists entirely and exclusively of recycling materials in lieu of otherwise disposing of them, or an open top container; or 
(3)  An open-top container, such as those used by residential contractors, roofers, and construction or renovation companies, used in conjunction with a residential construction project. 
(b)  "Special needs" roll-off container service or compactor service may be permitted by the director of public works under this Code section whenever, in his judgment, the solid waste to be generated shall be of a kind and character, or in such form, size or bulk, that it cannot be safely and adequately handled or transported by the city or its designee. In order for the director of public works to make such determination in each case, the person or firm who plans to generate such solid waste shall make application to the director for a permit under this Code section, accompanied by a detailed plan for removal and transportation of such solid waste to a safe and legally authorized disposal site. If the director of public works shall determine that the plan is sufficient and adequate to provide for the orderly, timely, and safe disposition of the solid waste, then he shall approve such plan and issue the permit or permits requested in conjunction with such plan, as provided in this Code section. 
(c)  In the event that the director of public works shall issue a permit under this code section, or shall determine that the city or its designee does not offer or provide the equipment or service to meet the needs of any industrial or commercial establishments operating within the city, then he may grant a permit, on a case by case basis, for "special needs" roll-off container service or industrial or commercial compactor service, in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Code section. 
(d)  Any person or firm granted a "special needs" roll-off container service or industrial or commercial compactor service shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Such person or firm shall file an appropriate application for such a permit on forms provided by the director of public works and shall pay an application fee for such permit in an amount fixed by the governing body of the city. 
(2)  In addition to the application fee, such person or firm shall also pay a monthly fee as established by the governing body of the city for each such "special needs" roll-off container service or compactor service. A document identifying the location of each such roll-off container or compactor shall accompany the payment of such fees. 
(3)  Any firm or person who shall obtain a permit for operating a "special needs" roll-off container service or an industrial or commercial compactor service shall not be required to pay a sanitary service fee or charge, except for the fees provided for in subsections (d)(1) and (2) above. 
(4)  Each "special needs" roll-off container and compactor container authorized under this Code section shall carry in a conspicuous place the name, telephone number, and address of the person or firm who is responsible for the roll-off container or compactor. 
(5)  The city shall not be responsible for placing, emptying or maintaining any roll-off container or compactor permitted under this Code section, and each person or firm who is granted a permit to use or service such roll-off container or compactor shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability for personal injury or property damage arising out of such use or service. 
(6)  Prior to being granted a permit, each person or firm permitted to use and operate a roll-off container or compactor under this Code section shall provide to the director of public works satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage in amounts determined by the city. 
(e)  "Recycling roll-off container service" (that is, roll-off container service that consists entirely and exclusively of recycling materials instead of otherwise disposing of them), shall be permitted in the city under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Any person or firm desiring to provide "recycling roll-off container service" in the city shall first obtain an annual permit to do so from the director of public works by making application on forms to be prepared and made available by the director and by paying the application fee required for such permit in an amount fixed by the governing body of the city. 
(2)  In addition to the annual permit fee specified above, any person desiring to provide "recycling roll-off container service" in the city shall also pay a "drop fee" for each single "recycling roll-off container" each time a "recycling roll-off container" is dropped or left in the city. Said "drop fee" shall be in an amount to be determined by the governing body of the city in a separate ordinance. 
(3)  Any person or firm who has obtained an annual permit for providing "recycling roll-off container service" shall not be required to pay any additional fees for providing such recycling service other than the annual fee specified in subsection (1) above and the "drop fee" specified in subsection (2) above, but no person or firm shall be relieved of paying any sanitary service fees and charges when applicable and due to the city. 
(4)  Each "recycling roll-off container" authorized under this Code section shall carry in a conspicuous place the name, address, telephone number, of the person or firm who is responsible for the recycling roll-off container service. 
(5)  The city shall not be responsible for placing, emptying, or maintaining any "recycling roll-off container" authorized under this subsection. 
(6)  Each person or firm granted an annual permit to provide "recycling roll-off container service" in the city shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all of its officers, agents, and employees from any and all liability for personal injury or property damage arising out of the provision of said service. 
(7)  Prior to being granted the annual permit provided for in subsection (1) above, each person or firm permitted to provide "recycling roll-off container service" in the city shall provide to the director of public works satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage in amounts determined by the city. 
(8)  Not later than ten (10) calendar days after being issued a drop permit under this section, the holder of the drop permit shall provide to the director of public works a true and correct copy of the manifest that was issued to allow or accept the delivery of the recycling materials that were collected in the recycling roll-off container. Failure to provide the manifest within the time required by this subsection shall be grounds for the director of public works to deny any future drop permits to the person or firm failing to provide said manifest, until all outstanding manifests have been provided to him. 
(f)  Except as provided in this Code section, no person or firm shall use or contract for the use of any roll-off containers or compactors within the city, and the city or its designee shall be the exclusive provider of all roll-container services and compact or services in the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-14, § 1, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 07-39, § 1, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 11-07, §§ 1, 2, 2-21-2011; Ord. No. 15-12, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 5-2-11.1. - Stop work order for violation of section 5-2-11, roll-off container services. 
(a)  Whenever the director of public works or any of his designees shall find any activity ongoing in the city for which a permit is required under Title 8, Chapter 2 of this Code, and shall find a roll-off container being used in connection with such activity in violation of section 5-2-11, then the director or any of his designees shall be authorized to issue a stop work order in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The stop work order shall be in writing and may be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to any person performing the work. 
(c)  Upon issuance of the stop work order, the work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state clearly the reason for the order and shall state the conditions under which the work shall be allowed to resume. 
(d)  The stop work order may be appealed to the Construction Codes Board of Adjustments and Appeals in accordance with section 8-2-3 of this Code. 
(e)  Any person who shall continue to perform any work after having been served with a stop work order, except for work necessary to comply with any of the conditions specified in subparagraph (c) above, shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 2-21-2011) 
Sec. 5-2-12. - Disposal of refuse and garbage generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump or to cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the incorporated area of the city, except as may be permitted by city ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump or cause to be dumped or buried on any private property any garbage, refuse or other materials described in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) above do not apply to dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken bricks, blocks or broken pavement or other suitable material for use as a fill to raise the elevation of the land provided the same is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner or owners of the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment, and to cover it with dirt, upon direction of the governing body of the city. 
(d)  If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) above can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person, firm or corporation prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, such identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that such owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 9-12; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 11-4-2002) 
Sec. 5-2-13. - Operation of private landfills. 
In accordance with section 5-2-12, no sanitary landfill or dump shall be operated within the city without written approval of the governing body. 
(Code 1959, § 9-13) 
Sec. 5-2-14. - Charges for sanitary service. 
(a)  A sanitary service charge shall be made to occupants, tenants and property owners for the collection services outlined in this chapter. The charge will be made and collected where the service is available unless the service is performed under a permit from the director of public works (see section 5-2-11). Each residential unit and each business establishment in the city is required to use the sanitary services provided by the city; provided, if the solid waste created by any commercial entity be in such form, size or bulk that it cannot be physically handled by equipment employed by the city, or its designee, for the removal of such waste, then, upon application to the city for a plan of private removal, and upon the approval of such a plan, such commercial establishment may be allowed to remove such oversized solid waste material, along with any other waste normally generated by such establishment. The application for permission to make private disposition of such solid waste shall be made through the director of public works, who shall approve any plan designed to make orderly and timely disposition of such outsized solid waste that cannot be collected and disposed of by the city or its designee. Such permit must be renewed annually. 
(b)  Sanitary service charges shall be made by the city in accordance with the schedule as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(1)  Fees shall be billed according to the classification of the subscriber as follows: 
a.  Classification "A" subscribers shall be billed on the first day of each month and said bill shall be directed to each individual subscriber. 
b.  Classification "B" subscribers shall be billed on the first day of each month and said bill shall be directed to the owner of record of the real estate as reflected in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia, Land Records. This bill shall contain the monthly fee for each apartment or space rented therein or available for rent. In the event a building or section of the apartments or spaces are no longer available for rent, the owner shall notify the department of public works, in writing by certified mail, no later than the tenth day of the month preceding the net billing cycle in order to receive an adjustment for the number of apartments no longer available for rent. 
c.  Classification "C" subscribers shall be billed on an annual basis. Said bill shall be provided to the owner of the real estate at such time as the owners receive their annual tax bill. The charge for the annual billing shall be reflected on said tax bill as a "sanitation fee." 
(2)  In the event any charge remains unpaid after the fifteenth day of each month for classifications "A" or "B", a late charge will be assessed as may be determined from time to time by the mayor and council. In the event any class "C" subscriber charge remains unpaid after the date for which the annual taxes become delinquent, a late charge will be assessed as may be determined from time to time by the mayor and council. Negotiable checks mailed at the Forest Park Post Office and postmarked prior to midnight of the next day prior to the assessment of a late charge will be acceptable and no late charge assessed. 
(3)  Classification "C" subscribers who are suffering under an economic hardship, (which shall include, but not be limited to, recipients of Social Security old age benefits, social security disability benefits, or retirement benefits, so long as such individuals have no other substantial income or substantial assets, other than their principal residence) may pay their sanitation fee for their principal residence over a twelve-month period that shall begin on the date of the issuance of the tax bill, provided such classification subscribers obtain a certificate of appreciation from the finance director. The holder of said certificate may elect to pay his/her sanitation fee monthly, quarterly, biannually, or as otherwise agreed upon by the certificate holder and the finance director. Subscribers seeking to obtain a certificate must present proof of economic hardship to the finance director or such other person designated by the finance director to issue certificates. Proof shall be in the form of any legal document evidencing the limited income of the applicant and a sworn statement by the applicant that he/she has no other substantial assets, other than a principal residence, or income, other than the limited income delineated. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the exception of subparagraph (3) above, the schedule of charges, fees and deposits for sanitation services shall be in accordance with those fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and shall be kept on file in the offices of the city clerk and the city's public works department. 
(5)  Any other provisions of this section notwithstanding, a charge shall be fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and same will be added to the sanitation bill when the same is paid with a check which fails for any reason to clear the payer's bank when presented for payment. 
(6)  In the event any sanitation charges remain unpaid that were provided to the real estate owner of record as reflected in the officer of the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia, Land Records, said charge shall constitute a lien against the real estate. In the event the sanitation charges herein have been provided to a subscriber who is not he owner of record title as referenced above, said charges shall constitute a lien against the personal property of the subscriber. The city shall be authorized to accomplish collection pursuant to chapter 3 of title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(7)  In the event the owner, as defined in section 5-2-2-(11) of this Code fails to pay sanitation fees as same become due on more than three (3) occasions within a period of one (1) year, as measured from January 1 through December 31, the director of public works may require the owner to post a deposit in the amount sufficient to cover the next twelve (12) months' charges. Upon notice to the director of public works, in the event the owner transfer his interest in the property, the city shall promptly refund any unused part of the aforesaid deposit. 
(c)  For those residential users whose collection needs are greater than those specified below, a special rate will be agreed upon by the customer and the director of public works, or his designee, and the customer charged accordingly. 
(1)  Residential trash: Three (3) additional bags or boxes per each pickup. This means any items that will not fit inside the residential container and shall include bagged items, boxes, or other disposable containers. 
(2)  Residential garbage: One (1) residential container as described in section 5-2-2(8) emptied twice weekly. Residential customers requesting and being assigned more than one (1) such container shall pay, prior to receiving such additional residential container, the city, a refundable deposit for such container as may be set from time to time by the mayor and council and pay an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month for collection of said additional container. 
(3)  Residential garbage: Nonhandicapped customers who elect to continue back yard service will pay an additional fee as determined from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(4)  Bulk trash items; i.e. furniture, sofas, chairs, appliances, etc. will be picked up on Wednesdays. These items must be placed curbside no earlier than Tuesday after 12:00 noon and requires a call to the public works department for the scheduling of a pickup. Limits on the amount of bulk items will be set from time to time and additional fees may be required per item. 
(d)  Monthly charges for commercial users will be assessed according to weight, volume and type of refuse to be disposed of. 
(e)  The city shall impose and collect an additional fee for the pickup of used tires. Such fee is based on disposal fees charged the city by the landfill. 
(f)  Failure to pay any sanitation charges will be a violation of this Code. Citation(s) for violation(s) of this article will be issued by the city, and said citation(s) will be returnable to and tried before the environmental court of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-14; Ord. No. 88-007, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 93-026, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 95-007, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 96-017, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 97-011, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 05-16, § 1, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 4-18-2016) 
Cross reference— Billing and collection of utility charges, § 6-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-2-15. - Sanitary service outside the corporate limits. 
The public works department is not authorized to extend sanitation service to residences or commercial establishments outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-15; Ord. No. 02-13, § 1, 11-4-2002) 
Sec. 5-2-16. - Night collection. 
Should the best interest of the public be served by collection of refuse from certain areas in the city at night, the city manager shall be authorized to make such collections. The occupants of all residences or places of business within the designated area shall be notified of the hours of such collection. All person[s] so notified shall comply with such order and shall place the containers as designated within such hours. 
(Code 1959, § 9-16) 
Sec. 5-2-17. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  The director of public works shall be responsible, subject to the supervision of the city manager, for the administration and enforcement of the provision of this chapter. He may call upon the chief of police for assistance. 
(b)  The director of public works shall have the right to appoint sanitation supervisors who shall have the authority, and whose duty it shall be, to make routine inspections of garbage cans, containers and garbage collection areas and determine the serviceability and conditions of the same. The director or the sanitation supervisors shall issue a written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises informing the owner or occupant of an unacceptable condition, specifying same. The owner or occupant shall be given a reasonable time to correct the condition which the notice specifies, and upon failure to correct same, the director or the supervisor shall have the duty of issuing a summons directed to the responsible party to appear in the Forest Park Municipal Court, Environmental Division to answer the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter. Supervisors appointed by the director of public works shall have concurrent authority with the said director to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and any such person shall have the authority to issue a summons to any violator of any provisions hereof to appear in the Forest Park Municipal Court, Environmental Division of the city to answer to the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter. 
(c)  Any homeowner who violates any section or provision of this chapter, shall, upon failure to correct the specified condition after being given notice thereof to do so, be issued a citation for said violation and be required to appear in the Forest Park Municipal Court, Environmental Division, to answer said citation, and after trial and if convicted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and required to pay a fine in an amount not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) on a first conviction; a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on a second conviction; and a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on a third or more conviction; and/or imprisoned for a period not to exceed six (6) months and one (1) day. Each container obtained in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and offense hereunder, and punished accordingly. 
(d)  Any commercial establishment or entity or any of its agents, who violate any section or provision of this chapter, shall, upon failure to correct the specified condition within twenty-four (24) hours after being given notice thereof to do so, be issued a citation and required to appear in the Forest Park Municipal Court, Environmental Division, to answer said citation, and after trial and if convicted, shall pay a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Additionally, for any such violation by the commercial establishment or entity or any of its agents, the director of public works may also cause said establishment or entity to cease operations, construction, or development, as the case may be, until the violation has been corrected by said establishment or entity or its agents. Each container obtained in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and offense hereunder, and punished accordingly. 
(Code 1959, § 9-17; Ord. No. 05-17, § 1, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 10-22, § 1, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 14-21, § 2, 9-2-2014) 
CHAPTER 3. - DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 5-3-1. - Legislative findings. 
(a)  Due to the type and age of development in Forest Park, and also due to the lack of coordinated engineering ensuring that the drainage improvements would not cause an undue problem downstream, numerous properties in Forest Park are now experiencing or are expected to experience in the future a partial or complete failure of the drainage structures located thereon. 
(b)  While most of these drainage structures were built according to accepted engineering practices at the time of construction, experience in urban development has revealed serious flaws in surface-water management for both individual properties and for the City as a whole. 
(c)  The failure to properly manage the flow of surface water has the potential to adversely affect the following public interests: 
(1)  The health and safety of citizens, including minors and others laboring under disabilities, is imperiled by the creation of flooding conditions and situations conducive to the attraction of vermin, rats, disease-transmitting insects, and other waterborne and airborne-health risks; 
(2)  Periodic flooding conditions may undermine public improvements such as roads, streets, sanitary-sewer systems and other city facilities with the resulting impediment to the delivery of emergency and other city services; and 
(3)  The integrity of the city-wide drainage system may be affected by the failure, refusal or inability of individual property owners to deal with situations that create adverse conditions either upstream or downstream. 
(d)  While some of these unsatisfactory conditions exist on private property, they may have adverse implications on both public and other private property. 
(e)  From time to time, situations arise for which sufficient justification exists for the city to participate in resolving or ameliorating the adverse conditions. 
(f)  The mayor and council find that an analytical process may be designed to enable the staff to identify those conditions that warrant action by or the participation of the city, and that the utilization of such process should ensure that the city funds are not utilized to improve private property in those circumstances where legitimate public interests do not exist. 
The sections set out in this chapter are enacted in reliance upon these findings. 
(Ord. No. 91-002, 4-15-91, ¶ 1) 
Sec. 5-3-2. - Drainage improvements on public right-of-way. 
The director of public works shall have the authority to improve drainage structures on public right-of-way immediately adjacent to public streets under the following conditions: 
(1)  The drainage structure is working improperly resulting in an actual or threatened public safety hazard; or 
(2)  If both of the above conditions do not exist, and if the adjoining property requests improvement: 
a.  Provided the adjoining property owner agrees to furnish at his or her own expense all required materials, including but not limited to pipe, concrete, grates, blocks, grass, seed and fertilizer; and 
b.  Provided installation of the improvement would not, in the judgment of the director, increase the likelihood of a drainage system malfunction either upstream or downstream; and 
c.  Provided sufficient funds have been budgeted to complete such repairs and also carry on all other budgeted functions of the department. 
Then the director may use city labor and equipment to complete such repairs provided that the projected expense for the use of such equipment and the cost of such labor does not exceed an amount established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. Requests for improvements with a projected equipment and labor expense in excess of the amount established by the governing body shall be approved individually by the governing body on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 91-002, 4-15-91, ¶ 2; Ord. No. 08-11, § 13, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 5-3-3. - Drainage improvements on nonpublic property. 
(a)  The city of Forest Park cannot use public funds to improve private property. However, as a consequence of the conditions delineated by section 5-3-1, the mayor and council may approve, at their sole discretion, the utilization of the city assets to ameliorate existing or potential public safety hazards. 
(b)  The following provisions shall control the exercise of discretion by the mayor and council: 
(1)  No affirmative obligation shall exist, nor should one be construed to be created, to address all drainage failures or malfunctions in the city. The mayor and council retain sole discretion to determine if the costs to the city are justified by a corresponding benefit to the public. 
(2)  No improvements, installations, modifications or repairs shall be performed by the city unless the property owner thereof shall agree in advance to furnish at his or her expense all materials, supplies, studies or reports, including, but not limited to, surveys and legal expenses. 
(3)  The property owner shall execute in advance of any work all legal documents deemed necessary by the city including a release and indemnification. 
(4)  The department of public works shall prepare and submit a report based on the criteria outlined in section 5-3-4 for consideration by the mayor and council. Based upon this report, the mayor and council may approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the proposed project. 
(Ord. No. 91-002, 4-15-91, ¶ 2) 
Sec. 5-3-4. - Report by the department of public works. 
(a)  For each request for drainage improvements on nonpublic property, the department of public works shall prepare for consideration by the mayor and council a report of feasibility and necessity based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  What, if any structure, public improvements or persons remain at risk without the proposed project; 
(2)  Is the proposed project designed to prevent or lessen flooding and consequential destruction of private or public property that might occur under normal rainfall conditions; 
(3)  Are the existing flooding conditions and consequential destruction of property limited to the property of the owner or are they also expanding or contain the potential to expand onto adjoining public or private property; 
(4)  What potential public health and safety risks would be reduced by the project; 
(5)  Is the project to be performed for purely aesthetic purposes; 
(6)  Is the project designed to address only astatic movement of a creek or drainage ditch; 
(7)  Is the proposed project likely to positively affect, adversely affect or neutrally affect upstream and downstream drainage; 
(8)  What is the projected costs to the city; 
(9)  Has the project been made necessary as a consequence of the negligence or inattention of the owner of the property and could it have been avoided by the exercise of reasonable diligence by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 91-002, 4-15-92, ¶ 2) 
CHAPTER 4. - STORMWATER UTILITY ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-15, § I, adopted Apr. 3, 2006, amended the former Title 5, Ch. 4, §§ 5-4-1—5-4-14, and enacted a new Title 5, Ch. 4 as set out herein. The former Title 5, Ch. 4 pertained to stormwater management for new development and redevelopment. Formerly, Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, adopted Mar. 30, 2004, deleted the former Title 5, Ch. 4 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Title 5, Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-002, § 1 adopted Apr. 3, 1995. 

Sec. 5-4-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Forest Park Stormwater Utility Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-2. Findings. 
The mayor and city council make the following findings: 
(a)  Stormwater management is needed throughout the City of Forest Park. While specific service and system demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(b)  Addressing the stormwater management needs in the City of Forest Park is essential to protecting the public's health, safety, and welfare. Provisioning of stormwater management programs and systems results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways. 
(c)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff can result in flooding, streambank and ditch erosion, property damage and degradation of water quality, aquatic habitat and biological communities. Failure to manage these impacts can put the city's ability to receive state and federal grants and permits at risk. 
(d)  The volume and quantity of stormwater generated by a development has been proven to be most closely associated with the amount of impervious surface on the property, therefore, the square footage of impervious surface is the most appropriate factor for calculating stormwater utility fees. 
(e)  Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Lake City, Lovejoy, Morrow, and Riverdale, presently own and operate stormwater management systems which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by these entities, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the entities to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems in Clayton County in concert with the management of other water resources in the county. In order to do so, there must be adequate and stable funding for Clayton County's stormwater management program's operating needs and capital. 
(f)  The feasibility report submitted to the county, cities, and Clayton County Water Authority (CCWA) properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities of the stormwater utility. 
(g)  As a result, the city's governing authority finds that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and the city's governing authority finds that a utility fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding stormwater management services in the City of Forest Park. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter. Any word or phrase not defined below, but otherwise defined in the Code of Ordinances, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by a property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The basis of such credits, if granted, will be defined by a specific written agreement at the determination of the stormwater official in accordance with the stormwater utility. 
Customer shall mean all persons or entities to whom the stormwater service charge is billed. 
Detached dwelling unit shall mean developed land containing one (1) structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one (1) or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one (1) family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one (1) or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar non-residential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by persons or entities other than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
Developed land means real property which has been altered from its "natural" state by addition of any improvements, such as grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures or impervious surfaces greater than two hundred (200) square feet, or drainage works so that hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped conditions. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this chapter upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
Hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surfaces shall mean those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. The following types of surfaces will be considered "impervious surfaces" for purposes of the stormwater utility: the projected area of buildings; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; compacted gravel and soil surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
Multi-family residential shall mean developed land where more than one (1) attached or detached residential dwelling units are located, including, but not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which more than one family group commonly and normally reside or could reside. 
Service charges shall mean the stormwater management service charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by CCWA Stormwater Utility. The charge shall be used to fund the City of Forest Park Stormwater Utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and systems. Service charges are based on measurable parameters that influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one (1) or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by CCWA. 
Single-family residential shall mean a developed lot containing one (1) dwelling structure with its principal use being residential. 
Stormwater development guidelines are those guidelines established by CCWA which specify approved design criteria, construction materials, and construction methods for components of the stormwater management system. 
Stormwater management system means any one (1) or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or conveyance of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, lakes, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, streams, culverts, pipes, catch basins inlets, collection, or drainage. 
Stormwater official is the CCWA General Manager or their appointee, who has direct responsibility for the management of the CCWA Stormwater Utility. 
Stormwater unit (SU) shall mean the unit of measurement which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by customer's developed land with that generated by another's. An SU shall be the average impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single-family residential lots in City of Forest Park. A stormwater unit has been determined through engineering and analysis to be two thousand nine hundred fifty (2,950) square feet of impervious surface. This unit will be used to determine and compute the service charge for all developed land served by the CCWA Stormwater Utility. 
Stormwater utility guidebook shall mean the document that defines the basis for the stormwater utility, policies and procedures for operating the utility, and other necessary information determined to help document how the utility was developed and how it is operated. 
Undeveloped land is land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures in excess of two hundred (200) square feet which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-4. - Establishment of a utility. 
(a)  The City of Forest Park hereby consents to the establishment of a county-wide stormwater utility (the "stormwater utility") by the CCWA which shall be responsible for stormwater management county-wide, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems. Specific areas of regulation and maintenance are established in the stormwater utility guidebook so long as they are not in conflict with the terms of this chapter or that certain intergovernmental agreement dated July 5, 2005, as amended from time to time, between CCWA and the City of Forest Park. 
(b)  Pursuant to the terms of this chapter and that certain intergovernmental agreement dated July 5, 2005, as amended from time to time, between CCWA and the City of Forest Park, the CCWA shall carry out and perform on behalf of the City of Forest Park, all of the city's duties and responsibilities with respect to stormwater management services, enforcement, and systems heretofore owned and operated by the City of Forest Park. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-5. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection, construction, and use of all stormwater management systems in the county. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the city and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. The stormwater utility shall provide services which relate to the: 
• Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the City of Forest Park; 
• Maintenance, repair, and replacement of existing city or county owned stormwater management systems; 
• Planning, development, design, and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
• Maintenance and/or improvement of water quality in waterways throughout the City of Forest Park; 
• Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, and systems; 
• Compliance with federal and state regulations related to stormwater management, including the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) watershed management requirements; and 
• Education of the public regarding stormwater issues. 
The stormwater utility shall not provide stormwater services related to Erosion and Sedimentation Control (E&SC). 
(b)  The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater systems and public stormwater systems not owned by the county. The design and construction of public or private stormwater management facilities will be governed by the CCWA's Stormwater Development Guidelines which specify design criteria, construction materials, and construction methods. The CCWA Stormwater Development Guidelines will supersede any previously adopted stormwater design or construction guidelines. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of private stormwater systems, only when such services have been agreed to, contracted for, and approved by the governing authority of the utility. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private stormwater systems to ascertain that the stormwater systems are functioning as designed and approved. The MNGWPD Post-development Stormwater Ordinance has been adopted by Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Morrow, Lake City, Lovejoy, and Riverdale. Property owners who fail to maintain their stormwater systems will be notified of the violation. If within thirty (30) days (or twenty-four (24) hours if there is an immediate danger to public safety), no actions are taken, the CCWA may enter the property and correct the failure. The cost for the repair work may be a charge on the customer's water, sewer, and stormwater bill, or a lien on the property that may be placed on the tax bill. 
(d)  The CCWA owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  On public land which is owned by the county, cities, or other governmental entity, and to which CCWA has agreements for the operation, maintenance, improvement, and access to the stormwater management system; 
(3)  Operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of stormwater management systems which are located on private or public property not owned by the county or cities, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights of-access, rights-of-use, or other form of dedication thereof to CCWA for operation, maintenance, improvement, and access of such stormwater management systems, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States; and 
(4)  It is the express intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the county or cities. CCWA has expressly reserved the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the CCWA, its directors, and employees arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(e)  The stormwater utility shall provide for effective management of a uniform stormwater plan and program throughout the City of Forest Park and provide compliance with the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer NPDES Permit issued to each jurisdiction, including but not limited to, the following components: 
• Public education and outreach on stormwater issues; 
• Public involvement and participation; 
• Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
• Post-construction stormwater management; 
• Pollution prevention; and 
• Floodplain management; 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-6. - Stormwater service charges authorized. 
The CCWA is authorized to impose a service charge on each customer of the stormwater system, provided that such charge is closely associated with the amount of impervious surface associated with a particular property for which the service charge is imposed. The stormwater utility guidebook shall provide for the rate structure which shall determine overall charges for properties served by the stormwater utility, based, in part, on the number of stormwater units each property is determined to consist of. The stormwater service charge and rate structure may be amended from time to time by official action of the CCWA Board of Directors. The CCWA shall review the stormwater service charge and rate structure on an annual basis and any rate changes will be approved by the CCWA Board of Directors. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-7. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
The CCWA may begin collecting the stormwater service charge on or after September 1, 2006, and shall bill no more frequently than monthly thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-8. - Exemptions. 
The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)  Undeveloped land; 
(2)  All public road rights-of-way; and 
(3)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-9. - Credits. 
(a)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained, and performed to CCWAs standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate, or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities, or to private stormwater management systems which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems. 
(b)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The specific credits will be determined based on the guidelines in the stormwater utility guidebook. Credits for structural controls will be based on best management practices performance as defined by the design criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, First Edition, August, 2001. 
(c)  Credits may be partial or full credits and property owners can receive a maximum forty (40) percent credit. 
(d)  Property owners seeking stormwater service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal of a stormwater service charge credit application to the CCWA. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the CCWA shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit have been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within forty-five (45) days of the date the completed application was received by CCWA. 
(f)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on (1) continuing compliance with the CCWAs design and performance standards as may be updated or amended from time to time; and (2) upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The CCWA may revoke any credit at any time for non-compliance with this chapter. 
(g)  Stormwater utility fees may be adjusted retroactively to the date that CCWA received the completed application. 
(h)  Applicants receiving credit for a structural control as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual must have an approved maintenance plan on file with CCWA and the applicant's property must have on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities. 
(i)  A customer shall reapply every five (5) years for the credit granted, however, CCWA may terminate the credit if CCWA finds the facility does not comply with the original approved credit application. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-10. - Inspection of private facilities. 
Continuing compliance with the CCWA's design and performance standards may be verified by CCWA inspection of the systems or facilities upon which the credit is based. No credit shall be given under this chapter unless the property owner agrees in writing in its application, that the CCWA shall have the right for its designated officers, representatives, agents, and employees to enter upon private and public property, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering testing on such property in order to assure compliance with the design and performance standards and the applicant's credit application. On-site systems or facilities determined to no longer comply with the county's design and performance standards or the applicant's original credit application shall subject the property owner to revocation of all, or a portion of, stormwater service charge credits based on the CCWA inspector's estimate of capacity reduction for a period of not less than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-11. - Stormwater service charge, billing, delinquencies, and collections. 
The CCWA is authorized to establish and/or utilize its own policies with respect to the billing and collection of the stormwater utility service charge and the treatment of delinquent accounts. The stormwater utility service charge may be billed separately or on a customer statement, and collected along with other utility services provided by CCWA, at the CCWA's sole discretion. The CCWA is authorized to apply partial payments proportionately among the water, sewer, and stormwater fees charged by the CCWA. The CCWA is authorized to use existing CCWA procedures for shutting off water with respect to non-payment. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-12. - Stormwater utility enforcement. 
(a)  Every owner of developed real property located in the City of Forest Park, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the City of Forest Park, shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, treat, control, and discharge stormwater in a safe manner, consistent with all City of Forest Park ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
(b)  When the stormwater official determines that a public nuisance exists, the stormwater official shall send a notice of violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or owners of the property described, as their name and address are shown on the latest ad valorem tax records of the county property appraiser. This notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepaid. The notice of violation shall: inform the property owner that a violation of this chapter exists on the identified property, with the description of the public nuisance; that the property owner is responsible for maintaining the identified private stormwater system; that the property owner may allow the city access to the property to abate the nuisance at the expense of the property owner; and that formal enforcement action will be taken if the violation is not corrected within the time period indicated on the notice. The stormwater official shall determine a reasonable period of time for correction of the nuisance. In determining a reasonable period of time, the stormwater official shall consider the following: practicality and ease of correction; the owner's ability to correct the violation; the severity of the violation; the nature, extent, and probability of danger to the public, and other relevant factors. 
Notice, as required under this provision, shall not be required: (a) when the stormwater official determines that the public nuisance presents an imminent endangerment to persons or property; (b) when a notice of violation has been sent to the same property owner or owners for the same violation within the previous three (3) months; or (c) when notice by certified mail cannot be effected on the owners of record. 
The notice of violation shall contain substantially the following information and may be in the following form or other appropriate form: name of owner; address of owner; description of property; inspection date; determination made by the stormwater official that the condition on the property is creating adverse conditions so as to constitute a violation of the this chapter; describe the conditions that caused the property to be in violation and any recommended actions that may be necessary to remedy the nuisance; specify a reasonable time period to proceed and remedy the nuisance; or provide written permission to the city to enter the site and abate the nuisance at the owner's expense. 
Within the reasonable period of time for compliance specified in the notice of violation, the property owner shall either abate the nuisance or file a written request with CCWA for a hearing before the stormwater official to show that the condition alleged in the Notice does not exist or that such condition does not constitute a public nuisance in violation of the chapter. 
(c)  Any failure to meet the obligation set forth in this section shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or the City of Forest Park in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the CCWA may enter upon the property and cause such work, as is reasonably necessary, to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the CCWA shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the General Execution Docket of the Superior Court of Clayton County or Municipal Court of the City of Forest Park. CCWA shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this chapter, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the City of Forest Park, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 5-4-13. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter may have been applied in error, may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the stormwater official within thirty (30) days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  The CCWA shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within thirty (30) days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the CCWA may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(4)  All decisions by the CCWA shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the stormwater official may be appealed by application for Writ of Certiorari in the Superior Court of Clayton County or Municipal Court of the City of Forest Park, filed within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the decision of CCWA. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § I, 4-3-2006) 
Title 6 - Public Health[1] 
Chapter 1.  Public Health Codes, Rules, and Regulations 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, Ord. No. 95-003, adopted May 1, 1995, repealed Chs. 1—5 of Tit. 6, which contained provisions pertaining to general provisions relative to public services, the water and sewerage systems, assessments and water conservation, and which derived from provisions presumably enacted during the initial codification; Code 1959, §§ 23-4.1, 23-9—23-13, 23-16, 23-20, 23-25—23-27, 23-41.1, 23-41.3; Code 1985, § 6-1-2; Code 1986, § 6-2-1; and from the following: 

 

 

 

CHAPTER 1 - PUBLIC HEALTH CODES, RULES, AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-1-1. - Clayton County Board of Health On-Site Sewage Management Systems Rules Adopted. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations pertaining to on-site sewage management systems in the city, there is hereby adopted the "On-Site Sewage Management Systems Rules" adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Health on or about July 19, 2006, including but not limited to the Regulations attached thereto as Attachment A, which were adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Health on or about October 18, 2006, together with all amendments thereto, if any, adopted by the Clayton County Board of Health through and including the effective date of this chapter, a true and correct copy of all of which is currently on file in the Office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set forth herein in its entirety, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects contained therein within the corporate limits of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, except that in the event that any of the provisions thereof are in conflict with any other provisions of this City Code or any state law or regulation, then in such event the other provisions of this City Code or the state law or regulation shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  In addition to and independently of subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if the same were set forth herein in their entirety, any future amendments, additions, deletions, and editions of said "On-Site Sewage Management Systems Rules" which may hereafter be adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Health, copies of all of which shall be filed with the office of the city clerk and available for inspection and copying by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 10-09, § 1, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 6-1-2. - Clayton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Tourist Accommodations Adopted. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations pertaining to Tourist Accommodations in the city, there is hereby adopted the "Clayton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Tourist Accommodations" adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Health on or about October 25, 2000, together with all amendments thereto, if any, adopted by the Clayton County Board of Health through and including the effective date of this chapter, a true and correct copy of all of which is currently on file in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set forth herein in its entirety, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects contained therein within the corporate limits of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, except that in the event that any of the provisions thereof are in conflict with any other provisions of this City Code or any state law or regulation, then in such event the other provisions of this City Code or the state law or regulation shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  In addition to and independently of subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if the same were set forth herein in their entirety, any future amendments, additions, deletions, and editions of said "Clayton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Tourist Accommodations" which may hereafter be adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Health, copies of all of which shall be filed with the office of the city clerk and available for inspection and copying by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 10-09, § 1, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 6-1-3. - Clayton County Food Service Rules and Regulations Adopted. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations pertaining to food service in the city, there is hereby adopted the "Clayton County Food Service Rules and Regulations" adopted and recommended by the Clayton County Board of Health and adopted by the Clayton County Board of Commissioners on or about February 5, 2008, together with all amendments thereto, if any, adopted by the Clayton County Board of Commissioners through and including the effective date of this chapter, a true and correct copy of all of which is currently on file in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set forth herein in its entirety, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects contained therein within the corporate limits of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, except that in the event that any of the provisions thereof are in conflict with any other provisions of this City Code or any state law or regulation, then in such event the other provisions of this City Code or the state law or regulation shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  In addition to and independently of subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if the same were set forth herein in their entirety, any future amendments, additions, deletions, and editions of said "Clayton County Food Service Rules and Regulations" which may hereafter be adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Commissioners, copies of all of which shall be filed with the office of the city clerk and available for inspection and copying by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 10-09, § 1, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 6-1-4. - Clayton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks Adopted. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations pertaining to swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks, there is hereby adopted the "Clayton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks" adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Health on or about March 29, 2001, together with all amendments thereto, if any, adopted by the Clayton County Board of Health through and including the effective date of this chapter, a true and correct copy of all of which is currently on file in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set forth herein in its entirety, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects contained therein within the corporate limits of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, except that in the event that any of the provisions thereof are in conflict with any other provisions of this City Code or any state law or regulation, then in such event the other provisions of this City Code or the state law or regulation shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  In addition to and independently of subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if the same were set forth herein in their entirety, any future amendments, additions, deletions, and editions of said "Clayton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks" which may hereafter be adopted and approved by the Clayton County Board of Health, copies of all of which shall be filed with the office of the city clerk and available for inspection and copying by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 10-09, § 1, 5-3-2010) 
Title 7 - Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs 
Chapter 1.  General Provisions 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Permission of director of parks and recreation for archery practice, § 11-1-24. 

Sec. 7-1-1. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager, pursuant to section 2-3-2 of this Code, shall have the authority to establish reasonable rules and regulations covering the operation of the city's recreation and park facilities. This authority shall include the establishment of the hours said facilities shall be open for use by authorized persons. When the rules and regulations are posted or displayed on the facility involved, such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law and any person committing any action in violation thereof shall be deemed to have violated this section and shall be punished as provided by law (section 1-1-8 of this Code). 
(1)  Use of grounds and facilities in general. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation using the city parks, ballfields, facilities and grounds to fail to clean up debris, extinguish all fires when fires are permitted (section 4-2-24), and leave the premises in as good an order and the facilities in as neat and sanitary condition as when they began use of facilities. 
(2)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation using the city parks, ballfields, facilities or grounds to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
a.  Willfully mar, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any buildings, tables, benches, signs, notices, placards, permanent monuments, monuments, statues, boundary markers, structures, fixtures, equipment, facilities, park property or appurtenances thereof whatsoever, either real or personal. 
b.  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof. 
c.  Bring in, dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in storm sewer, drains, waters or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided, and where not provided all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person(s) responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
d.  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language. 
e.  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
f.  Take part in or abet the playing of any game involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, basketball, handball and soccer is prohibited, except on fields, courts or areas provided thereof. 
g.  Vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park area or facility, unless authorized by the city or director or parks and recreation. 
h.  Bring any dangerous animal into any park area; it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash not more than six (6) feet long. It shall be unlawful for any animal to be on the jogging track area. 
i.  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or cause to be ridden any horse, mule or pony on any property in the park areas, except as provided by special permit when such activity(s) shall be a part of any approved special event. 
j.  Drive or park any automobile or off-road vehicle, except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
k.  Set up tents, shacks or other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used for such purposes, such as [a] house trailer, camp trailer, wagon or the like in the park area after closing hours, unless authorized by the city. 
l.  To tamper with, break into or enter any facility or park area that is secured by locks or padlocks. 
m.  To have any motorized vehicle or bicycle on the jogging track or ballfields. 
n.  To carry or use firearms in any park. 
o.  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
p.  Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the city. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area of any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Ord. No. 86-019, 10-6-86) 
Sec. 7-1-2. - Nonresident fee. 
The director of parks and recreation is authorized and directed to charge an annual and restricted fee as fixed and approved from time to time by the mayor and council from each non-resident of the city, who uses the recreational facilities of the city. Funds collected from this source shall be remitted promptly to the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 86-019, 10-6-86) 
Sec. 7-1-3. - Reservation of facilities by groups. 
(a)  (1)  Groups of fifteen (15) or more persons desiring to use any recreational facility, including but not limited to, picnic shelters, gymnasium, community buildings, or meeting rooms in the recreation center, shall make application for such use in the office of the director of parks and recreation at least ten (10) days in advance of the date of desired use. The director shall grant the application if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the general use of those facilities by members of the general public, except in accordance with the requirements of this section and applicable departmental regulations. 
(2)  Such permits shall contain a fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Picnic areas (conditional use). No person(s) shall use any portion of any picnic area(s) or any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons if there is space available, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded, except in situations where the person(s), group, association or organization has met the requirements as listed in section 7-1-3(a). 
(c)  Organized league play. 
(1)  In recognition of the fact that the city's facilities may be more fully utilized by all citizens of the city if a non-profit organization or organizations maintain a continuing program of league play under the direction of the parks and recreation department, the director of parks and recreation may from time to time lease any ballfield to such organization(s) upon terms and conditions to be agreed upon by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Any organized league requesting a lease agreement with the city shall apply for such at least 90 days prior to the beginning of such activity. Decisions on granting lease may and can be based on prior record in maintaining the park premises and the programs offered for the well being of all citizens. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, corporation or organization to prevent any person(s) from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such unless in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use. 
(Ord. No. 86-019, 10-6-86) 
Sec. 7-1-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 2016, repealed § 7-1-4, which pertained to alcohol use. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 7-1-5. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The park(s) shall be open to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m.; and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons other than city personnel conducting city business therein to come into or be present in such park(s) during any other hours. For tournament play an exception shall be allowed such that activity may continue until 11:30 p.m. provided approval has been received from the director of parks and recreation. All field lights shall be extinguished by 10:30 p.m. (except for allowable tournament play) and no field lights may be used on Sunday. 
(b)  [The] outdoor jogging track shall be open daily to the public twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  [The] recreation center shall be open to the public during the following hours of operation: administrative offices 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Seasonal operating hours shall be duly posted in an area accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 86-019, 10-6-86) 
Sec. 7-1-6. - Advertising and sponsorship. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, [or] corporation to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands, highways, or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any team sponsorship advertising, properly displayed on recreational field fences. 
(b)  Advertising permitted in (a) above must be maintained in a secure manner and no signs, placards, etc. shall exceed an area greater than nine (9) square feet (three (3) feet by three (3) feet typical). 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or impede the posting of any notice by any government official acting in the authorized capacity of his office. 
(Ord. No. 86-019, 10-6-86) 
Title 8 - Planning and Development 
Chapter 1.  General Provisions 
Chapter 2.  Building Regulation and Code Enforcement 
Chapter 3.  Signs 
Chapter 4.  Mobile Homes, Portable Structures and Tents 
Chapter 5.  Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control 
Chapter 6.  Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 7.  Subdivisions 
Chapter 8.  Zoning 
Chapter 9.  Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 10.  Telecommunication Towers and Antennas 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE A. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission's hearing of flood prevention appeals, § 8-6-7. 

Sec. 8-1-1. - Membership; appointment; terms of office; vacancy; compensation. 
The municipal planning commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be residents of the city and shall not be members of the city governing authority, and shall be appointed by the mayor and council. The terms of office held by the appointed members shall be for four (4) years. Each member is to serve until his successor is appointed. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority who shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a hearing has been held by the governing authority. All members shall be compensated in an amount as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, and each may be further reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in direct connection with official duties when said expense has the prior approval of the mayor or city manager. 
Editor's note— Planning commission members serve staggered terms as established under the Ordinance of 11-19-62. 
Sec. 8-1-2. - Officers; meetings; records; personnel; expenditures. 
The municipal planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be for one (1) year, however, he shall be eligible for reelection to succeed himself. The municipal planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The commission may make its own rules of procedures and determine the hour of meeting, however their regular meeting shall be on the same day each month (for example, the first Wednesday in each month) in order that the public may be well informed as to the regular meeting of the commission. All meetings of the municipal planning commission shall be open to the public, provided that the planning commission may meet in executive session in those instances authorized by state law; and all records of the municipal planning commission shall be public records. The commission may appoint from time to time and whenever necessary such personnel as may be required to carry out their duties in keeping with the law, however, before making any commitment for expenditures, they shall have the written authority from the governing authority or the city manager. 
State Law reference— Georgia Sunshine Law, O.C.G.A., § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-1-3. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of its political jurisdiction. In particular, the planning commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a zoning ordinance or resolution and map for the city. 
(3)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council regulations for the subdivision of land within the city, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council, a plat or plats or an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof. 
(b)  The planning commission may make, publish, and distribute maps, plans and reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the city to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of the city programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. The planning commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon, provided, however, that the planning commission shall be liable for any injury or damage to property resulting therefrom. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning of its political jurisdiction. 
Sec. 8-1-4. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this title shall be deemed an offense and shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. Each day's continuance of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Secs. 8-1-5—8-1-10. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 2. - BUILDING REGULATION AND CODE ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-2-1. - Building inspector. 
There is hereby created the position of building inspector within the department of public services. The building inspector shall administer and enforce the provisions of all technical codes adopted in this chapter, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, and shall perform such other duties as directed from time to time by the director of public services. The building inspector, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in charge of any property covered by a permit under this chapter, may enter any building, structure, dwelling, apartment, apartment house, or premises, during all reasonable hours for the purpose of enforcing the technical codes adopted in this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prevent the mayor and council from designating, by contract, a qualified person to serve as building inspector for the city. 
Sec. 8-2-2. - Permits. 
(a)  Any person obtaining a permit for the construction, repair or demolition of any structure shall, at the time of making application for such permit, list the name and address of the person or business securing such permit, and the names and addresses of all contractors and subcontractors who shall perform any service in connection with the construction, repair or demolition of the structure for which such permit is sought. If, at the time of applying for such permit, any of such contractors and subcontractors have not been employed or contracted with, then upon the employment or entering into the contract with such contractors and subcontractors and before the performance of any service by same, such person shall immediately list their names and addresses on the form to be secured from the building inspector and file same with the building inspector. 
(b)  No permit covering electrical, plumbing or mechanical installations and fixtures shall be issued to a contractor who does not possess a current certification and license from the state construction industry licensing board, provided that nothing in this section shall prevent a homeowner from installing or maintaining electrical, plumbing or mechanical work within his own property boundaries provided the work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him and his family. This owner's privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, neither is it to be construed as exempting the property owner from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected nor from paying the required fees therefor. 
(c)  In addition to the inspection of building sewer lines and connections required under the plumbing code and performed by the building inspector, final approval of line installations shall be conditional on the inspection and approval of sewer lines from point of connection to within five (5) feet of the building by the director of public services, or his designated representative. 
(d)  Permits issued for the installation of fireplaces or wood burning stoves shall require final inspection and approval by the city fire marshal. 
(e)  For all permits as set forth in this article, a fee shall be charged, which fee or fees shall be determined by a resolution of the mayor and council, which resolution shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(f)  (1)  Churches shall be exempt from paying building inspection permit fees for construction occurring within the incorporated city limits of the City of Forest Park. 
(2)  For the purposes of this subsection, a church shall be defined as: A place used primarily for religious worship which is not used for the purpose of producing private or corporate profit and income distributable to shareholders in corporations owning such property or to other owners of such property and where any income from such place shall be used exclusively for religious, educational or charitable purposes and/or for the purpose of maintaining the religious, educational, and/or charitable place of worship. 
(Code 1986; Ord. No. 88-004, 2-15-87; Ord. No. 99-006, § 1, 3-15-99) 
Cross reference— Building permit issuance conditional on assignment of building number, § 5-1-2; on approval of solid waste plan for certain structures, § 5-2-9; additional requirements for after hours construction, § 11-1-26(b)(9). 
Sec. 8-2-3. - Appeals. 
(a)  There is established a construction codes board of adjustments and appeals for the city. Such board shall consist of four (4) persons appointed for three (3) year staggered terms of office. Of the initial members appointed to this board, two (2) persons shall be appointed for a three (3) year term, one (1) person for a two (2) year term, and one (1) person for a one (1) year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a three (3) year term. 
(b)  The board shall have the powers and duties of the boards of adjustments and appeals established under the various technical codes adopted in this chapter. The manner of taking appeals and conducting hearings shall be as provided in each of the respective technical codes. 
(c)  Upon its organization, the board shall select an advisor to provide technical assistance and direction to the board. Such technical advisor may be an engineer or architect. The name of the advisor selected shall be submitted to the city manager for the approval by the city. Expenditures for the professional services of such advisor shall be within the amounts approved from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the building inspector may appeal such order or decision to the construction codes board of adjustments and appeals. All such appeals shall be filed in writing and delivered to the city clerk no later than 10 days from the date of the order or decision appealed from. Procedures for the conduct of such hearings shall be in conformance with such rules of procedure as adopted from time to time by the construction codes board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 91-012, § 1 6-17-91; Ord. No. 91-017, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 92-025, 11-2-92) 
Sec. 8-2-4. - Houses moved into city to conform to housing code. 
(a)  No building shall be moved into the city for occupancy as a dwelling unless it meets the standards of the housing code adopted in section 8-2-61; provided that if the building is in such condition that repair is practical to bring the building into conformity with such housing code, the moving permit may be issued upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The permit holder shall begin repair and/or restoration work within thirty (30) days of the location of the building at the new site. 
(2)  All repair and/or restoration work shall be completed within six (6) months of the location of the building at the new site. 
(3)  All repair and/or restoration work shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the various technical codes adopted by this chapter, including, but not limited to, securing of permits and inspections by the city. 
(b)  No building shall be moved into the city for occupancy as a dwelling without full compliance with the city zoning requirements of the district in which the building will be situated, including, without limitation, yard requirements, floor area requirements, height limits and lot coverage. Additionally, orientation of the building on the lot shall correspond to the orientation of the building as originally constructed, i.e., the "front" of the building shall face the street upon which the lot fronts. 
(c)  Permit applications for moving buildings along public streets shall be submitted to the chief of police for approval. Procedures and times for the moving of buildings shall comply with all terms and conditions imposed by the chief of police. 
(d)  Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this section shall be deemed an offense and shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  It is unlawful to construct an established driveway located on a single-family residential lot or to alter an existing established driveway on a single-family residential lot where such established driveway, after construction or alteration, fails to meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The impervious surface area of the entire lot is no more than forty (40) percent of the total surface area of such lot; 
(2)  The width of the established driveway along any public roadway is no more than twenty-four (24) feet; and 
(3)  For a lot located at the corner of the intersection of two (2) public roadways, the entrance or exit of the established driveway may abut only one (1) of those roadways. 
(Ord. No. 91-006, § 5-20-91; Ord. No. 17-14, § 2, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 8-2-5. - Inspection of rental properties. 
(a)  An owner of real estate shall give written notice to the city building inspector of the commencement of any agreement or arrangement for the rental or lease of real estate within the incorporated city limits. Notice shall be made no later than five (5) days after any express agreement is reached regarding such lease or rental, or within five (5) days after the tenant has taken possession of the property, whichever is earlier. Upon receipt of the notice required under this section, or as soon as is practical, the building inspector shall conduct an inspection of the property in accordance with section 8-2-1. 
(b)  Notice shall not be required under this section when the owner of the real estate and all tenants are members of the same immediate family, or when an agreement or arrangement for the rental or lease of real estate is merely a continuation of a previously existing lease or rental, and there is no change as to the identity of the owner, tenant or property. 
(c)  No fee shall be charged for each initial inspection of the rental property made after receipt of the notice required under subsection (a) of this section. If upon inspection it is determined that work must be performed or adjustments made in order to bring the rental property into compliance, then subsequent inspections shall be made to determine if the rental property is brought into compliance. A fee shall be charged to the owner of the property for all subsequent inspections, which fee or fees shall be determined by a resolution of the mayor and council. A copy of the resolution shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. Churches, as defined in section 8-2-2, shall be exempt from paying fees. 
(d)  Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this section shall be deemed an offense and shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. Each day's continuation of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Secs. 8-2-6—8-2-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - BUILDING 

Sec. 8-2-11. - Building code adopted. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, use, demolition and removal of buildings or other structures, or any appurtenances connected or attached thereto, there is hereby adopted the International Code Council Standard Building Code, being particularly the 2003 edition thereof, with any subsequent amendments, additions, deletions thereto and future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the International Code Council and the whole thereof, except the portions as may be hereafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which has been and is now filed in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects therein contained, within the corporate limits, except that in the event that any of the provisions are in conflict with other provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-003, § 1, 3-16-91; Ord. No. 04-73, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-12. - Fire districts. 
There are hereby established two (2) fire districts in the city. 
(1)  Fire District I shall consist of all business districts. 
(2)  Fire District II shall consist of all those portions of the city not included in Fire District I. 
(Code 1959, § 5-2) 
Sec. 8-2-13. - Residential code adopted. 
The Residential Code, the International Code Council Standard Construction Code, being particularly the 2003 edition, and any subsequent amendments, additions, deletions and future updated editions thereto, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which has been and is now filed in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects therein contained, within the corporate limits, except that in the event that any of the provisions are in conflict with other provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-008, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 04-74, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-14. - Violations of article; remedies. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this title shall be deemed an offense and shall be punished upon conviction, as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of the provisions of this article, the building inspector, or other appropriate authority of the city, or any adjacent or neighboring property-owner who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(c)  The remedies herein shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1959, Sec. 5-24; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Secs. 8-2-15—8-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 8-2-21. - Plumbing code adopted. 
The International Code Council (ICC) Plumbing Code, specifically the 2003, edition thereof, together with any subsequent amendments, additions, or deletions thereto and future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as the code of the city relating to the installation of all plumbing, including the pipes for distributing the water supply, the fixtures for using water and drainage pipe for removing waste water and sewage, together with fittings and appurtenances of various kinds, all within or adjacent to the buildings within the city or where connected to the city's water or sewerage system, and the whole thereof, except the portions as may be hereafter deleted, altered or amended, is incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length, and all plumbers shall be required to make installations in conformity with the code and the regulations contained therein, a copy of which code is on file in the office of the city clerk. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the plumbing code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions. 
(Ord. No. 92-006, 3-16-92, § 1; Ord. No. 04-75, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-22. - Metallic water system for replacement construction. 
Every structure in the city built prior to January 1, 1984, shall be required to maintain metallic water systems on all repairs and replacement parts of the water lines and fixtures. 
Sec. 8-2-23. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 to require the use of ultra low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction, or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings for the purpose of conserving water, to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and to reduce waste water flows. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, 6-17-91, § 1, as amended by Ord. No. 92-018, 8-31-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-24. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
(2)  Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
(3)  Plumbing fixture means any toilet, urinal, shower head, bathroom, lavatory or kitchen faucet, and replacement aerators. 
(4)  Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling unit, but does not include a hotel or motel. 
(5)  Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
(6)  Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl but not provided with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, 6-17-91, § 1, as amended by Ord. No. 92-018, 8-31-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-25. - Standards for plumbing fixtures. 
(a)  No plumbing fixture shall be installed within the city which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank type, flush-a-meter valve, or flush-a-meter tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one (1) gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two (2) gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  The flow restriction device in a shower head must be a permanent and integral part of the shower head and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirements listed in subsection (a) (4) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, 6-17-91, § 1, as amended by Ord. No. 92-018, 8-31-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-26. - Applicability of restrictions. 
(a)  The requirements of section 8-2-25 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement toilets or showers or both. 
(b)  Sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 shall not apply to any construction of a residential building, the contract for which was entered into prior to April 1, 1992, nor shall it apply to any construction of a commercial building, the contract for which was entered into prior to July 1, 1992. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, 6-17-91, § 1, as amended by Ord. No. 92-018, 8-31-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-27. - Exemptions. 
New construction and the repair or renovation of existing buildings shall be exempt from the requirements of section 8-2-25 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewerage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 were installed. This exemption includes, but is not limited to, showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as an emergency eye-wash station; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow system from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution, or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, 6-17-91, § 1, as amended by Ord. No. 92-018, 8-31-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-28. - Procedure of obtaining exemption. 
(a)  No owner shall be entitled to an exemption from the requirements of section 8-2-25 unless he shall first have obtained an exemption in writing from the office of the building inspector. Application for exemption shall be made on a form provided by the building inspector and shall include a listing of the specific exemption sought; the basis for such exemption; and, where such exemption is based on technological unfeasibility, shall provide the affidavit of a registered professional engineer or architect verifying the unfeasibility of the water conservation device for the particular existing structure. 
(b)  A fee, as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council of the city, shall be charged for issuance of such an exemption. 
(c)  The building inspector shall review the plans for the facility and may make inspections of existing premises where exemptions from the requirements of sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 are sought. 
(d)  If, upon the basis of such investigation and any inspections, the building inspector determines that the requested exemption falls within those parameters provided by section 8-2-27, he shall issue such exemption in written form, which form shall bear his signature and date. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, 6-17-91, § 1, as amended by Ord. No. 92-018, 8-31-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-29. - Enforcement responsibility. 
(a)  Sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 shall be enforced by the building inspector who shall have full authority to issue citations for violations of such sections. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of Sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 shall be deemed an offense and shall be punished upon conviction as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 92-018, § 1, 8-31-92; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-2-30. - Remedies for violations. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties provided in section 8-2-29, any building or plumbing contractor, developer, owner or other person who violates the provisions of sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 shall be subject to suspension of his business license for a period of up to ninety (90) days. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in section 8-2-29, the city may take such other actions as authorized by law to compel compliance with the requirements of sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30 and may specifically maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to comply with or restrain any violation of sections 8-2-23 through 8-2-30. 
(Ord. No. 91-014, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 92-018, § 1, 8-31-92) 
ARTICLE D. - ELECTRICAL 

Sec. 8-2-31. - Electrical code adopted. 
The National Electrical Code, the 2002 edition and any subsequent amendments, additions, or deletions thereto and future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as recommended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, together with local amendments, is hereby adopted as the minimum standard for the installation of all electrical wiring, devices and equipment in the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, and the same is hereby made a part of this article as fully and to the same extent as if copied herein in full. A copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the electrical code and the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-013, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 8-2-32. - Permit fees. 
Before any permit for electrical work shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay the permit fees as shall be determined by the mayor and council from time to time. 
Sec. 8-2-33. - Enforcement. 
The mayor and council shall designate, by contract, a qualified person to serve as electrical inspector for the city. The electrical inspector shall keep records of all permits issued and inspections made in the city, shall make periodic reports to the building inspector and shall perform such other duties as directed from time to time by the city. 
Editor's note— The county currently performs electrical inspections for the city. 
Sec. 8-2-34. - Certain cable types prohibited. 
Nonmetallic sheathed cable types NM and NMC shall not be permitted except for one-and two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, farm barns (not for use by the general public) and other structures of all wood interior construction located on occupied residential property. All other code requirements to conform. 
Secs. 8-2-35—8-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - GAS 

Sec. 8-2-41. - Fuel gas code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by and for the city, a gas code, known as the Standard Gas Code (International Fuel Gas Code), 2000 edition published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. (International Code Council), with Georgia amendments, together with any subsequent amendments, additions, or deletions thereto and future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, and which is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which code is on file in the office of the city clerk. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the gas code adopted by this section and any provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-004, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 04-76, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Secs. 8-2-42—8-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - MECHANICAL 

Sec. 8-2-51. - Mechanical code adopted. 
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Code Council Mechanical Code, 2003 edition, with any subsequent additions, revisions thereto or subsequent editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city to provide basic code requirements governing the safe installation and maintenance of all mechanical equipment so as to safeguard life, health and public welfare and the protection of property; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the mechanical code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set out at length herein with any additions, insertions, deletions and changes as may hereafter be prescribed. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the mechanical code adopted by this section and any provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-005, 3-16-92, § 1; Ord. No. 04-77, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Secs. 8-2-52—8-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE G. - HOUSING 

Sec. 8-2-61. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Code Council International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, with any subsequent additions, revisions thereto or subsequent editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, which is referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which code is filed of record in the office of the city clerk, the provisions of which shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units and/or structures within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the housing code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 04-78, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-78, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2004 deleted § 8-2-61 adoption of housing code and enacted a new section; International property maintenance code adopted. Formerly, Ord. No. 92-009, § 1, adopted Mar. 16, 1992 repealed and replaced § 8-2-62, updating the edition of the housing code to be used by the city. 
Secs. 8-2-62—8-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 8-2-71. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Code Council International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, thereof, and any subsequent amendments, additions or deletions thereto, or future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by International Code Congress which is referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, the provisions of which shall be controlling within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the International Property Maintenance code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 04-79, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-79, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2004 deleted § 8-2-71 standard unsafe building abatement code and enacted a new section; International property maintenance code adopted. This section bore no history note. 
Secs. 8-2-72—8-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE I. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 8-2-81. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Code Council International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, thereof, and any subsequent amendments, additions or deletions thereto, or future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by International Code Congress which is referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, the provisions of which shall be controlling within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the swimming pools code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 04-80, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-80, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2004 deleted § 8-2-81 swimming pool code adopted and enacted a new section; International property maintenance code adopted. Formerly, Ord. No. 92-012, § 1, adopted Mar. 16, 1992 repealed and replaced § 8-2-81, updating the edition of the swimming pool code to be used by the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-012, 3-16-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-82. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein; when not inconsistent with the context: 
(1)  Family pool is a swimming pool used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family, and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee. 
(2)  Swimming pool is a body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other container, whether located indoors or outdoors, used or intended to be used for public, semipublic or private swimming by adults or children, or both adults and children, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed upon such adults or children, operated and maintained by any person as herein defined, whether he be an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, exclusive of a family pool as defined herein, and shall include all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool, and also all swimming pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, motels, hotels, and community associations. 
Sec. 8-2-83. - Enclosures required. 
(a)  Every outdoor swimming pool or family pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger than four (4) inches in any dimension except for doors and gates; and if a picket fence is erected or maintained the horizontal dimensions shall not exceed four (4) inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
(b)  All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(c)  This requirement shall be applicable to all new swimming pools or family pools hereafter constructed, other than indoor pools, and shall apply to all existing pools which have a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches of water. No person in possession of land within the city either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or a licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool or family pool having a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches shall fail to provide and maintain such fence or wall as herein provided. 
(Code 1959, § 18-5) 
Sec. 8-2-84. - Safety precautions for bathers. 
All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the users of and bathers in swimming pools from injury or accident. Convenient means of ingress and egress shall be provided and the depth of water and any irregularities of the bottom shall be clearly indicated. Safety appliances such as lifebuoys, life hooks, bamboo poles, or ropes and equipment, including first aid kits shall be provided and be readily accessible in such manner and quantity as specified by the city. 
Sec. 8-2-85. - Shielding lights. 
Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool or family pool shall be arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises. 
(Code 1959, § 18-15) 
Secs. 8-2-86—8-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE J. - FENCES AND OTHER ENCLOSURES 

Sec. 8-2-91. - Required materials. 
All fences or enclosures of any type shall be constructed of decorative or conventional fence material only, such material being in the nature of chain link, wood, privacy, split rails or other materials such as brick. 
(Ord. No. 89-010, 5-15-89) 
Sec. 8-2-92. - Nonfence materials prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to erect a fence or other enclosure or to repair an existing fence or other enclosure with nonfence materials. Nonfence materials specifically include sheet metal, plywood and any other materials not specifically manufactured for fence construction. 
(Ord. No. 89-010, 5-15-89) 
Sec. 8-2-93. - Location restrictions. 
In no event may a fence be erected that will impair vision at any street intersection, nor shall any fence be erected except on or within the property line of the owner, and in no event upon any right-of-way of any public road. 
(Ord. No. 89-010, 5-15-89) 
Sec. 8-2-94. - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation and shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided by Section 1-1-8 of this Code. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 89-010, 5-15-89) 
Sec. 8-2-95. - Screening of junk yards. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Automobile grave yard means an establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
(2)  Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris or waste; junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof; or iron, steel or other old scrap, ferrous or nonferrous material. 
(3)  Junk yard means any establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying or selling junk or for an automobile graveyard; and the term shall include garbage dumps; sanitary landfills and scrap processor establishments. 
(4)  Scrap processor means any person, firm or corporation engaged only in the business of buying scrap iron and metals, including but not limited to old automobiles, for the specific purpose of processing into raw material for remelting purposes only, and whose principal product is ferrous and nonferrous scrap for shipment to steel mills, foundries, smelters and refineries, and who maintains an established place of business in this state and has facilities and machinery designed for such processing. 
(b)  Certain uses, such as junk yards, require the storage of equipment, vehicles or materials for prolonged periods of time and can present unsightly views or health hazards. To preclude this from occurring, the owners such properties shall completely enclose such operations by a fence which completely obscures views of the junk yard from adjacent sidewalks, streets and residential areas. Such fence shall be built to a height greater than that of the height of the highest piece of equipment or vehicle stored on the property; provided that no fence shall be less than eight (8) feet nor more than twenty (20) feet in height when measured from the crown of the adjacent street. Such fences shall be constructed of solid materials. Construction of cyclone fencing which utilizes metal inserts as screening shall be prohibited. Fencing along street frontages shall be located on private property. Fencing installed near the intersections of two (2) or more public streets shall be installed in such a manner so as not to impair visibility of traffic approaching the intersection of said streets. 
(c)  Uses existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section was derived which would require fencing under terms of the ordinance shall have six (6) months from the date of adoption of the ordinance to come into compliance herewith. 
(Ord. No. 96-001, § 1, 8-2-95) 
Secs. 8-2-96—8-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE K. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-2-101. - Short title. 
The provisions of this article shall be known as the Property Maintenance Ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-026, 12-7-92) 
Sec. 8-2-102. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and more specifically for the purpose of requiring the maintenance of premises to retain property values; to protect the general environment and appearance of neighborhoods, residential complexes and commercial and industrial areas; and to ensure safe and sanitary conditions in buildings, structures and premises. 
(Ord. No. 92-026, 12-7-92) 
Sec. 8-2-103. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Accessory building means a carport, attached or detached garage, storage building or any other building not intended for habitation and location on the premises. 
Derelict boat or derelict trailer type vehicle is a boat or trailer type vehicle which (i) is dismantled, partially dismantled, deteriorated or not safe for use due to disrepair or damage, and (ii) which constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard in that it provides a place for insects, rodents or other animals to exist; attracts children, vagrants or other individuals, or may cause injury to them. 
Derelict vehicle is a vehicle which (i) is unusable due to disrepair because one or more of the major parts needed for its operation has been removed, damaged or destroyed, or has been made not safe for operation through disrepair or damage, and (ii) which constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard in that it provides a place for insects, rodents or other animals to exist; attracts children, vagrants or other individuals, or may cause injury to them. 
Established driveway means an area that is covered by gravel, asphalt, concrete or other paving material commonly recognized in the paving industry and is clearly indicative of an area that is normally used for vehicles to enter onto, drive over, or exit from real property, from or to a public or private street. 
Established parking lot means an area that is paved or graveled and clearly discernible as an area which is reserved for the parking of vehicles on private property, and associated with the primary use of such property. 
Front yard means the yard extending across the front of the lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies and uncovered porches. If there is no building on the property, the entire property shall be deemed the front yard. 
Inoperable vehicle. A vehicle, or any part thereof, including vehicle trash and debris, which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power. 
Object shall be any item of personal property, other than a vehicle, boat or trailer type vehicle, and other than an item of personal property of a class normally intended for outdoor use and compatible with the use and occupancy of the primary structure located on the property. "Object" shall also include junk material (any item that is unsightly and has no significant value in its present form); machinery and equipment; appliances and other household items; lumber and building materials; dirt, sand, fill, rock, stone or other building materials not forming part of a structure or landscaping. "Object" shall also apply to abandoned tires, dilapidated buildings and other such unsightly accumulations of debris that may be placed on residential, commercial or industrial properties. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, authority created by statute, association or other entity, or combination thereof. 
To place means to establish the presence on property of an object which (i) is capable of being moved or removed and which is not affixed to the real property; and, (ii) is present on the property for a period of ten (10) consecutive days, whether or not the location of the item on the property is changed. 
Vehicle means an automobile, truck, van or other motor vehicle designed and intended for use in transporting people and/or goods. 
(Ord. No. 92-026, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 05-44, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 17-14, § 1, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 8-2-104. - Prohibited conditions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for either the occupant of premises or the owner of such premises to have or to place or to allow to be placed, any of the following on such premises to the extent and in a manner that could threaten or endanger the public health, safety or welfare or could adversely affect or impair the economic value of adjacent property: 
(1)  Any accumulation of litter, debris, refuse, garbage or animal excrement on any front, side or rear yard, or on any porch or underneath any building, or in any accessory building; 
(2)  Any object or objects on the front yard or the front porch of any residential, commercial or industrial property; 
(3)  Any object or objects, as defined, on the side or rear yard, or on side or rear porches, or underneath any building or in any accessory building, unless such objects are completely enclosed within the building, or are enclosed within a solid fence of such height that the objects are completely screened from the view of persons on adjacent property and to passersby on public rights-of-way. Concealment of objects in the manner described above shall in no way be interpreted to obviate or cure any other violation of this Code, or state or federal law. 
(4)  Any overgrown grass or weeds of a height of six (6) inches or more, or any unkept vegetation in any yard, front, side or rear; 
(5)  Any accessory building on the front yard, or any dilapidated accessory building on the side or rear yard. 
(6)  All clotheslines and other outdoor clothes drying equipment, shall be placed and maintained in only the rear yard of a residence or other residential property. In no instance shall clothes, sheets, towels, or other household materials be hung from any object other than a clothesline or other outdoor drying equipment. The placement or hanging of clothes, sheets, towels or other household materials, on fences, cars, hand railings, decks, porches, playground or other similar objects shall be considered a violation of this Code section and any such offender shall be subject to the provisions of Code Section 1-1-8. 
(b)  It is unlawful to place a vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer-type vehicle on the front yard of any premises, unless such vehicle, boat or trailer-type vehicle is placed on an established driveway or an established parking lot. 
(c)  It is unlawful to place, keep, store, or allow to remain any inoperable vehicle, any derelict vehicle, derelict boat, or derelict trailer-type vehicle, or parts thereof on a front yard, or on an established driveway in a front yard. It is unlawful to place, keep, store, or allow to remain any inoperable vehicle, derelict vehicle, derelict boat, or derelict trailer-type vehicle, or parts thereof, on the side or rear yard of property if visible from any street or lane or adjoining property, unless such inoperable vehicle, derelict vehicle, derelict boat, or derelict trailer-type vehicle is enclosed within an accessory building so as not to be visible from any street, lane, or any adjoining property. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to material which is being used in connection with construction activity is being diligently pursued and complies with all applicable ordinances and codes of the city. 
(e)  It is unlawful to clean or maintain private property located in the city by blowing, raking or otherwise moving objects, debris, yard waste or other items onto adjoining property or onto public rights-of-way. All such objects, debris, yard waste or other items shall be properly bagged or containerized for removal by the owner/occupant or, in the case of collectible solid waste, for removal by the city or its designee. 
(f)  Both the occupant and the owner of the premises shall be liable for compliance with the provisions of this article, and shall be responsible for violations thereof. Lease of property of an owner which purports to transfer responsibility for this provision shall be ineffective in shielding the owner for responsibility under this provision, and such owner shall remain liable along with the occupant of the leased premises. 
(Ord. No. 92-026, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96, Ord. No. 98-005, 4-6-98; Ord. No. 01-12, § 2, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 05-46, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 05-52, § 1, 8-1-2005) 
Sec. 8-2-105. - Notification of owner and/or tenant. 
(a)  Whenever it appears that any provision of this article is being violated, the code enforcement officer shall notify the owner and/or tenant of the alleged violation(s). Such notice shall specify the violation involved, the correction action needed, and shall state that if such corrective action is not completed within five (5) days, or such other time as the code enforcement officer, in conjunction with the city manager, may establish, that a citation will be issued for a violation of the article. Notice shall be by personal service or by certified mail. Any time period provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail. If the current whereabouts of the owner and/or occupant are unknown, or if service by certified mail cannot be effected, notice shall be mailed by first-class mail to such person's last known address, if any, and a copy of the notice shall be posted on the premises. 
(b)  Should an individual or business be found in violation of the same provision(s) of this Code within any twelve-month period, notwithstanding the requirements of part (a) of this section, a citation may be issued immediately, without any time allowed for corrective action. 
(Ord. No. 92-026, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 98-005, 4-6-98; Ord. No. 01-12, § 3, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 8-2-106. - Violations. 
(a)  The failure to abate the alleged violation as set forth in the written notice within the ten-day period or such other time as provided by the code enforcement officer, shall be deemed a violation of this article; and the code enforcement officer shall issue a citation for such violation commanding the person to appear before the municipal court to answer said charge. Upon conviction for the violation, or upon the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the code enforcement officer may cause the violation to be corrected by use of city equipment and/or employees. In the event the city does not have sufficient resources to correct the violation, the code enforcement officer, with approval of the city manager, may contract with outside persons or firms for the abatement of the violation. The cost to the city of abatement shall be a lien against the property as authorized by sections 6.16 and 6.18 of the charter of the city, and shall be placed on the tax records of the city and county. 
(b)  Penalties for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished upon conviction as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. Violations of this article shall be of a continuing nature with each day of noncompliance constituting a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 92-026, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 97-001, § 1, 1-21-97; Ord. No. 98-005, 4-6-98) 
Sec. 8-2-107. - Chapter 3, "General Requirements" of International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
Except where such general provision may otherwise conflict with specific provisions contained within the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park, Chapter 3 "General Requirements" of the International Property Maintenance Code (2003 edition), as published by the International Code Council, Inc. and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference thereto and incorporated herein as part of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Accordingly, except where such general construction requirements may otherwise conflict with specific construction requirements contained within the Code of Ordinances for the city, all property, buildings, and structures or portions thereof shall be constructed and otherwise conform in all respects to the minimum standards set forth in Chapter 3 "General Requirements" of the International Property Maintenance Code (2003 edition). Copies of Chapter 3 "General Requirements" of the International Property Maintenance Code as published by the International Code Council, Inc. shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 04-83, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-108. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Creation. There is created a board of appeals consisting of three (3) members. Members of the board of appeals shall not be elected officials, persons appointed to elective office, residents of Forest Park, full-time appointed officials whether exempt or nonexempt, or city employees. 
(b)  Qualification of members. All members shall possess a minimum of three (3) years experience and/or training related to property maintenance or building code enforcement. 
(c)  Composition of board; terms of office. Each member of the board shall be appointed by recommendation of the mayor and approval of the city council. Members shall serve four-year terms, and all members shall serve until their successors are duly qualified and appointed. 
(d)  Presiding officer. The board shall select its own presiding officer from among its members. 
(e)  Vacancy; removal from board. A vacancy of the board shall exist by reason of death, resignation or removal by the city council for cause. A member of the board may also be removed from the board during a term if the member becomes ineligible to hold civil office within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 and that ineligibility is established by a decision of the court of competent jurisdiction that declares the office vacant because of such ineligibility. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by recommendation of the mayor to city council. 
(f)  Compensation of members of the board of appeals. The chairperson of the board shall receive compensation in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per meeting. Members of the board shall receive compensation in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting. 
(Ord. No. 05-51, § 1, 7-18-2005; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 8-2-109. - Misdemeanor. 
Violation by any person of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Code Section 1-1-8. 
(Ord. No. 05-51, § 1, 7-18-2005) 
Sec. 8-2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE L. - ENERGY 

Sec. 8-2-111. - Energy conservation code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Code Council's Energy Conservation Code, being comprised of the 2003 edition thereof, together with any subsequent amendments, additions, and deletions thereto and future updated editions thereof, as the code of the city relating to the installation of all insulation, energy saving devices and equipment in the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, and the same is hereby made a part of this article as fully and to the same extent as if copied herein in full. A copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the energy code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-007, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 04-81, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-007 added § 8-2-111 to adopt the energy code to be used by the city. 
Secs. 8-2-112—8-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE M. - EXCAVATION AND GRADING 

Sec. 8-2-121. - Standard excavations and grading code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by and for the city the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, being particularly the 1978 edition thereof, and any subsequent amendments, additions or deletions thereto, or future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., which is referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which code is filed on record in the office of the city clerk, the provisions of which shall be controlling within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Standard Excavation and Grading Code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-010, § 1, 3-16-92) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-010 added § 8-2-121, adopting the standard excavation and grading code to be used by the city. 
Secs. 8-2-122—8-2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE N. - STANDARD EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 8-2-131. - Existing building code adopted. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, use, demolition and removal of buildings or other structures, or any appurtenances connected or attached thereto, there is hereby adopted the Existing Building Code, being particularly the 2003 edition thereof, with any subsequent amendments, additions, deletions thereto and future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except the portions as may be hereafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which has been and is now filed in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length therein, and provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects therein contained, within the corporate limits, except that in the event that any of the provisions are in conflict with other provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 92-011, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 04-82, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-011 added § 8-2-131, adopting the standard existing building code to be used by the city. 
Secs. 8-2-132—8-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE O. - ACOUSTICAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 8-2-141. - Acoustical standards adopted. 
These regulations shall apply to all new residential construction. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-142. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a citywide sound insulation ordinance for all new residential construction within the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Airport means any public use airport, including heliports, as defined by the ASNA Act, including: (a) Any airport which is used or to be used for public purposes, under the control of a public agency, the landing area of which is publicly owned; (b) any privately owned reliever airport; and (c) any privately owned airport which is determined by the Secretary to enplane annually two thousand five hundred (2,500) or more passengers and receive scheduled passenger service of aircraft, which is used or to be used for public purposes. 
(2)  Airport noise compatibility program and program means that program, and all revisions thereto, reflected in documents (and revised documents) developed in accordance with 14 CFR Part 150, et. seq. including the measures proposed or taken by the airport operator to reduce existing noncompatible land uses and to prevent the introduction of additional noncompatible land uses within the area. 
(3)  Background sound level means the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest. 
(4)  Commercial area means a group of commercial facilities and the abutting public right-of-way and public property. 
(5)  Commercial property means any premises, property, or facility involving traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not limited to: 
a.  Banking and other financial institutions; 
b.  Dining establishments; 
c.  Establishments for providing retail or wholesale services; 
d.  Establishments for recreation and entertainment; 
e.  Office buildings; 
f.  Transportation; and 
g.  Warehouses. 
(6)  Compatible use means suitable relative to a specific context, i.e., compatible with a residential neighborhood, compatible with a business district, or, in the case of proximity to an airport, compatible with an environment that has aircraft noise exposure. 
(7)  dBA means an A-weighted unit of sound level. 
(8)  Daytime hours mean the hours between 7:01 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(9)  Decibel (dB) means the unit of measurement for a sound pressure level and is equal to ten (10) times the common logarithm of the ratio of two (2) like quantities (see "sound pressure level"). 
(10)  DNL (day-night average sound level) is a noise metric, a single-number descriptor, that accounts for the magnitude and duration of single noise events, the frequency of occurrence of single noise events, and the time—day or night—of single noise events. It is a weighted energy average. Each single event occurring between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. has a ten (10) dB penalty added to it; each one (1) event is effectively counted as ten (10) events of equal magnitude and duration. 
(11)  Equivalent sound level (Leq) means the non-varying sound level that would contain the equivalent amount of energy as a varying sound level. Note that Leq can be weighted or unweighted and can be integrated over durations ranging from less than a second to many hours. The notation should indicate weighting used and duration, e.g., 85 dBA Leq (six min.) is an A-weighted 85 decibel equivalent sound level, integrated over a six-minute period. 
(12)  FAA means Federal Aviation Administration. 
(13)  14 CFR Part 150 means Code of Federal Regulations, Subchapter 1, Airports, Part 150, Airport Noise Compatibility planning. 
(14)  Industrial facility means any activity and its related premises, property, facilities, or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture, or production of durable or nondurable goods. 
(15)  Maximum sound level (Lmax) means the peak sound pressure level of a noise event. 
(16)  Multidwelling unit building means any building wherein there are two (2) or more dwelling units. 
(17)  Municipality means the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(18)  Nighttime hours means the hours between 10:00 p.m. of any given day, and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(19)  Noise means any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the city or in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazard within the confines of a place of employment. 
(20)  Noise disturbance means any sound that endangers the health, safety or welfare of any person, is detrimental to the peaceful enjoyment of private property, or endangers personal or real property. 
(21)  Noise exposure map means a scaled, geographic depiction of an airport, its noise contours, and surrounding area developed in accordance with section A150.101 of Appendix A of FAR 150, including the accompanying documentation setting forth the required descriptions of forecast aircraft operations at that airport during the fifth calendar year beginning after submission of the map, together with the ways, if any, those operations will affect the map (including noise contours and the forecast land uses). 
(22)  Noise level reduction (NLR) means the amount of noise level reduction in decibels achieved through incorporation of noise attenuation (between outdoor and indoor levels) in the design and construction of a structure. 
(23)  Noncompatible land use means the use of land that is identified under this part as normally not compatible with the outdoor noise environment (or an adequately attenuated noise reduction level for the indoor activities involved at the location) because the yearly day-night average sound level is above that identified for that or similar use under Appendix A (Table 1) of FAR 150. 
(24)  Plainly audible means any sound produced by a noise source, which can be heard by any person at prescribed distances. Measurement standards shall be the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and low frequency sound reverberations are included. 
(25)  Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway sidewalk, or alley that is leased, owned, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
(26)  Public property means any real property or structures thereon that is own leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
(27)  Residential area means a group of residential properties and the abutting public rights-of-way public property. 
(28)  Residential property means property used for human habitation, including but not limited to: 
a.  Private property used for human habitation; 
b.  Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for human habitation; 
c.  Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation; and 
d.  Community service property used for human habitation. 
(29)  STC means sound transmission class. 
(30)  Sound level (per ASTM C 634) means a sound pressure level obtained using a signal to which standard weighting has been applied. 
(31)  Sound pressure level (SPL) means the ratio in decibels of the square of the root mean square sound pressure divided by the square of the standard reference sound pressure of 20|gmPa. Mathematically, this is expressed as 10* log p2/P2 ref, = 20*log P/P ref, P ref, = 20/gmPa. 
(32)  Weekday means the time period of each week that begins at 11:00 p.m. on each Sunday and ends at 5:00 p.m. on each Friday. 
(33)  Weekend means the time period of each week that begins at 5:00 p.m. on each Friday and ends at 11:00 p.m. on each Sunday. 
(34)  YDNL means the yearly day-night average sound level (see DNL above), i.e., an average annual day. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-144. - Acoustical standards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct in the city and inside of the seventy-five (75) day-night average sound level (DNL) contour line, as now existing or hereinafter modified and approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, any new building for "R3" occupancy as that term is defined in the International Building Code 2003, Section 310, Residential Group R, Subsection 310.1. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person entity to construction in the city any new building for residential occupancy with an interior DNL in excess of forty-five (45) DNL. Adherence to the following standards shall provide evidence of conformance with this subsection for MINIMUM 30 DB NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION (NLR), OUTDOOR TO INDOOR. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-145. - Compliance. 
Compliance with the following standards shall be deemed to meet the requirements of the compatible-use noise zones in which an NLR 30 is specified. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  All exterior walls shall be constructed airtight. All joints shall be grouted or caulked airtight. 
(2)  At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall. 
(3)  Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units shall not be used. 
(4)  Operational vented fireplaces shall not be used. 
(5)  All sleeping spaces shall be provided with either a sound-absorbing ceiling or a carpeted floor. 
(6)  Through-the-wall/door mail slots shall not be used. 
(7)  Skylights are permitted provided they meet window requirements in section 8-2-147. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-146. - Exterior walls. 
(a)  Exterior walls other than as described below shall have a laboratory sound transmission class (STC) rating of at least forty-four (44). 
(b)  At least one (1) surface of concrete block walls shall be plastered or painted with heavy "bridging" paint. 
(c)  Stud walls shall be at least four (4) inches in nominal depth and shall be finished on the outside with siding-on-sheathing, masonry composite siding, stucco, brick, or brick veneer. For the purposes of this code, all brick or brick veneer must be at least four (4) inches thick. 
(1)  Interior surface of the exterior walls shall be of gypsum board or plaster at least five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch thick, installed on the studs. The gypsum board or plaster may be fastened rigidly to the studs if the exterior is brick or stucco. If the exterior is siding-on-sheathing, the interior gypsum board or plaster must be fastened resiliently to the studs. Providing three (3) layers of gypsum board with direct mounting to the studs is an acceptable alternative to resilient mounting of one (1) layer. 
(2)  Continuous composition board, OSB sheathing, plywood, or gypsum board, or plaster sheathing at least one (1) inch shall cover the exterior side of the wall studs behind wood, masonry composite siding, vinyl siding, metal siding, or any other kind of siding utilized. 
(3)  Sheathing panels shall be butted tightly and covered on the exterior with overlapping building paper. The top and bottom edges of the sheathing shall be sealed. 
(4)  Insulation material at least R-11 thick shall be installed continuously throughout the cavity space behind the exterior sheathing and between wall studs. Insulation shall be glass fiber or mineral wool. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-147. - Windows. 
(a)  Windows other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class (STC) rating of at least forty (40). 
(b)  The perimeter of window frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction with a sealant conforming to one (1) of the following federal specifications: TT-S-00227, TT-S-00230, or TT-S-00153. 
(c)  The total area of glass in both windows and doors in sleeping spaces shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the floor area. 
(d)  Windows shall remain in accordance with all applicable egress requirements. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-148. - Doors. 
(a)  Doors, or door/storm assemblies, other than as described in this section, shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 35. 
(b)  Double door construction is required for all door openings to the exterior. Openings fitted with side-hinged doors shall have one solid-core wood or insulated metal door at least one (1) inch thick separated by an airspace of at least four (4) inches from another door, which can be a storm door. Both doors shall be tightly fitted and weather-stripped. 
(c)  The glass of double-glazed sliding doors shall be separated by a minimum four-inch airspace. Each sliding frame shall be provided with an efficiency airtight weather-stripping material as specified in section 8-2-147(d). 
(d)  Glass of all doors shall be at least three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) inch thick and tempered or laminated. Glass of double sliding doors shall not be equal in thickness. 
(e)  The perimeter of door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction as indicated in section 8-2-147(b). 
(f)  Glass of doors shall be set and sealed in an airtight non-hardening sealant, or a soft elastomer gasket. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-149. - Roofs. 
(a)  Combined roof and ceiling construction other than described in this subsection and section 8-2-150 shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 44. 
(b)  With an attic or rafter space at least six (6) inches deep, and with a ceiling below, the roof shall consist of closely butted one (1) inch composition board, OSB sheathing, plywood, or gypsum board sheathing topped by roofing as required. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-150. - Ceilings. 
(a)  Gypsum board or plaster ceilings at least five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch thick shall be provided where the roof complies with section 8-2-149(b) above. Ceilings shall be substantially airtight, with a minimum number of penetrations. For sleeping areas, the requirements of subsection 8-2-145(a)(5) shall apply. 
(b)  Where roof construction is as described in subsection 8-2-149(b), the following applies for siding homes, provide one-inch resilient channel mounting and one (1) layer of five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch gypsum board, or three (3) layers of gypsum board mounted directly. For stucco and brick homes, provide two (2) layers five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch gypsum board with direct mounting. 
(c)  Glass fiber or mineral wool insulation at least R-19 shall be provided above the ceiling between joists. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-151. - Floors. 
(a)  The floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall be slab on fill, below grade or over a fully enclosed basement or crawlspace. All door and window openings in the fully enclosed basement shall be tightly fitted. If the basement is used as a habitable living area, the doors and windows must conform to the standards given above for these elements. All crawlspace vents must incorporate a plywood backing plate of baffle, which prevents a clear line-of-sight from inside to outside without blocking airflow. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-152. - Ventilation. 
(a)  A mechanical ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh-air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors, or other openings to the exterior. 
(b)  Gravity vent openings in attic shall not exceed building code minimum in number and size. The openings shall be fitted with transfer ducts at least three (3) feet in length containing internal sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall have a lined ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight from the exterior through the duct in the attic. 
(c)  If a fan is used for forced ventilation, the attic inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least twenty-gauge steel, which shall be lined with one-inch-thick coated glass fiber, and shall be at least five (5) feet long with at least one ninety-degree (right angle) bend. 
(d)  All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain at least a ten-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall be provided with a ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Domestic range exhaust ducts to the outside shall be prohibited (see section 8-2-152(f)). 
(e)  Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least one (1) inch thick. 
(f)  Range exhaust hoods should incorporate a filtered, air recirculation system rather than ducting to the exterior. Other kitchen exhaust ducts exhaust ducts to the exterior shall contain a baffle plate across the exterior termination that allows proper ventilation. The dimensions of the baffle plate should extend at least one diameter beyond the line-of-sight into the vent duct. The baffle plate shall be of the same material and thickness as the bent duct material. 
(g)  Building heating units with flues or combustion air vents shall be located in a closet or room closed off from the occupied space by doors. 
(h)  Doors between occupied space and mechanical equipment areas shall be solid core wood or twenty-gauge steel metal at least one (1) inch thick and shall be fully weather-stripped. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 8-2-153. - Substitution of materials. 
Upon written application from any applicant for a permit under this chapter, the city building inspector may allow substitute materials ("substitute materials") in lieu of those required in subsection (b) above (the "required materials") so long as both of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The substitute materials will have a STC rating equal to or greater than the STC rating of the required materials; and 
(b)  The city building inspector has been provided with written documentation demonstrating that the substitute materials will provide at least as much interior noise protection as the required materials. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Secs. 8-2-154—8-2-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE P. - EXTERIOR FINISHING STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS—RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS 

Sec. 8-2-160. - Single-family residential dwellings—Exterior construction standards and requirements. 
(a)  Exterior finishing requirements. All new construction for single-family residential dwellings in the City of Forest Park, Georgia, whether in a new subdivision or in infill lots in the city, shall have exterior finishing on the front side that is fully constructed of brick, stone, or stucco, or a combination of thereof. 
(b)  Windows, doors, etc. The requirement in subsection (a) of this section shall not prevent or prohibit the construction of windows, doors, shutters, or similar architectural features, if approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 1, 5-7-2007) 
Sec. 8-2-161. - Multifamily residential dwellings—Exterior construction standards and requirements. 
(a)  Exterior finishing requirements. All new construction for multi-family residential dwellings in the City of Forest Park, Georgia, shall have exterior finishing on at least fifty (50) percent of each exterior wall that is constructed of brick, stone, or stucco, or a combination of thereof. 
(b)  Windows, doors, etc. The requirement in subsection (a) of this section shall not prevent or prohibit the construction of windows, doors, shutters, or similar architectural features, if approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 1, 5-7-2007) 
Sec. 8-2-162. - Exterior stucco standards. 
All buildings utilizing stucco exterior finishings pursuant to sections 8-2-160 or 8-2-161 must have 7/16 OSB sheathing or 7/16 Densglass Silver Residential sheathing under the stucco on all exterior walls using stucco. Stucco must be Portland cement based stucco, installed over wire lathe with ten-pound felt. Porous filters, such as expanded plastic or foam, may not be added to any exterior stucco. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 1, 5-7-2007) 
ARTICLE Q. - FORECLOSED AND VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRY 

Sec. 8-2-163. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state in which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. The definition of "agent" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
Beneficiary means a lender or other entity under a note secured by a deed of trust. 
Department means the Department of Planning, Building and Zoning of the City of Forest Park. 
Director means the Director of the Department of Planning, Building and Zoning of the City of Forest Park. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. The definition of "foreclosed real property" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
Responsible party means the beneficiary that is pursuing foreclosure of a property subject to this chapter secured by a mortgage, deed of trust or similar instrument or a property that has been acquired by the beneficial interest at trustee's sale. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. The definition of "street address" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
Unoccupied means a building which is not being used for a legal occupancy. 
Unsecured means a building or portion of a building that is open to entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools. 
Vacant real property means real property that has one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least sixty (60) days, and/or has no evidence of utility usage within the past sixty (60) days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one (1) unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. The definition of "vacant real property" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-164. - Registration of foreclosed or vacant property. 
(a)  Owners or agents of foreclosed real property, that is not exempt from registration under section 8-2-165, are required to register such property with the department between ninety (90) and one hundred twenty (120) days after the property's transfer pursuant to a deed under power of sale or a deed in lieu of foreclosure. In no event shall owners or agents of vacant real property be required to register such property within ninety (90) days of such property's transfer pursuant to a deed under power of sale or a deed in lieu of foreclosures. 
(b)  Owners or agents of vacant real property are required to register such property with the department between ninety (90) and one hundred twenty (120) days after such property's transfer to the first subsequent transferee after such property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale or a deed in lieu of foreclosure or, if applicable, within thirty (30) days of the notice by the director of his or her belief such property is vacant in no event shall owners or agents of vacant real property be required to register such property within ninety (90) days of the real property's transfer to the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under a power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(c)  Registration shall be accomplished by registering with the clerk of the department on the "foreclosed or vacant property registration form" promulgated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Such forms will be available for completion from the department's clerk and will require the provision of the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address, tax parcel number, district/ward/zoning; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(d)  The city may register an unoccupied building as a vacant building when the city takes ordinance enforcement action or action to abate an ordinance violation against the unoccupied building or the grounds upon which it is located. In such case, the city shall complete all forms required by this section. 
(e)  Owners or agents of foreclosed real property that is not exempt from registration under section 8-2-165 or vacant real property shall be required to pay a one-time registration fee in an amount to be set by the city via resolution for each registered property, as identified by its tax parcel number. However, if the city registers a vacant property as provided in subsection (b) above, the city may assess all registration costs against such property. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-165. - Exemption from registration. 
(a)  Registration of foreclosed real property and payment of a registration fee pursuant to this article is not required of any transferee who acquires any real property by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160 or acquires any real property pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure if: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in section 8-2-164(c)(1)—(5); 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County within sixty (60) days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the department: 
a.  A filing date stamp or receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(b)  Registration is also not required for: 
(1)  A building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one (1) unit occupied with evidence of utility usage; or 
(2)  Property under active construction, rehabilitation, renovation or repair that has valid building permits. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-166. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Doors, windows, areaways, and other openings are weather-tight and secured against entry by birds, vermin, and trespassers, and missing or broken doors, windows, and other openings are secure; 
(b)  The roof shall be adequately supported and maintained in weather-tight condition; the gutters, downspouts, scuppers and appropriate flashing are sound and tight, in good repair and adequate to remove the water from the building and will not admit moisture; 
(c)  The building storm drainage system is adequately sized and installed; 
(d)  The interior and exterior is maintained in good repair, structurally sound, sanitary and free from accumulation of debris, rubbish, garbage, boxes, lumber scrap metal or any other materials that may produce any health, fire or safety hazard or provide harborage for rodents or other animals; 
(e)  Every floor, wall, stair, ceiling or other interior structural support shall be safe, free of deterioration and capable of supporting loads associated with normal usage and shall be kept in sound condition and repair; 
(f)  Any plumbing fixtures shall be maintained with no leaking pipes, and all pipes for water shall either be completely drained or heated to resist being frozen; 
(g)  The foundation, basement, cellar and crawlspace walls are plumb, free from open cracks and breaks, shall be maintained in sound and watertight condition adequate to support the building and protected against the entry of rodents or other animals; 
(h)  The exterior walls are free of holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or the interior spaces and any exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected against the entry of rodents or other animals; 
(i)  The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features are safe, anchored, and in good repair; 
(j)  All balconies, porches, stoops, decks, verandas, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar features are in good repair; 
(k)  Chimneys and flues, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances are structurally safe, sound, functional, weather-tight and in good repair; 
(l)  Openings in sidewalks are safe for pedestrian travel; 
(m)  Accessory and appurtenant structures such as garages, sheds, and fences are free from safety, health, and fire hazards; 
(n)  The property on which a structure is located is clean, safe, and sanitary and does not threaten the public health or safety; 
(o)  The exterior of the property shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation (any dead or broken trees, tree limbs or shrubbery shall be cut and removed from the premises), trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned; 
(p)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure; 
(q)  Insofar as there is existing or previously existing landscaping, all visible front and side yards shall be maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration was required. If no landscaping previously existed at the property in front and visible side yards, installation is not required under this chapter. Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, turf stain, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Landscape does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch (unless applied in conjunction with reseeding of turf areas), indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material; 
(r)  Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular watering, irrigation, staining, re-staining, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings; and 
(s)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(t)  Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/responsible party of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-167. - Security requirements. 
(a)  All points of possible ingress and egress on property subject to this section shall be secured to prevent unauthorized entry and maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other openings of such size that leave it accessible. Locking includes measures that require a key, keycard, tool or special knowledge to open or gain access. In the case of broken windows, securing means the re-glazing or boarding of the window. However, in the case of broken windows, boarding of such broken windows shall not exceed a period of thirty (30) calendar days, unless the property owner is under investigation with the office of the state fire marshal or any other state or federal public safety-related governmental agency. The roof shall be adequately supported and maintained in weather-tight condition; the gutters, downspouts, scuppers and appropriate flashing are sound and tight, in good repair and adequate to remove the water from the building and will not admit moisture. 
(b)  The owner, responsible party/beneficiary or their designee shall perform monthly inspections to verify that the requirements of this chapter are being met. 
(c)  If the owner or responsible party/beneficiary does not have a property preservation or real estate owned section/department, a field service provider, property manager or their designee shall be contracted to perform the inspection to determine if the property is in compliance and to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-168. - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in other sections of this Code, the director or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the responsible party/beneficiary of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any/all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-169. - Updates to registration. 
Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in section 8-2-164(c)(1)—(5) within thirty (30) days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-170. - Removal from registry. 
(a)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property may apply to the city to remove a vacant or foreclosed real property from the city registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes a vacant or foreclosed real property. 
(b)  Any application for removal allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall be granted or denied by the director within thirty (30) days, and if no such determination is made within thirty (30) days then the application for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-171. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of director in the administration of this article may appeal to the environmental court of the city. All appeals hereunder must be taken within thirty (30) days of the decision in question by filing with the director a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Appeals must be postmarked by the thirtieth day after the date of the director's decision to be timely. 
(b)  The director shall transmit the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the environmental court clerk who shall schedule an appeal hearing within sixty (60) days following the date of receipt of the written appeal by the director. 
(c)  The environmental court judge may call for further information to be provided within the next thirty (30) days following the hearing, and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the environmental court judge deems appropriate. 
(d)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the director certifies to the environmental court, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the environmental court judge on notice to the director, and upon due cause shown. 
(e)  The environmental court judge may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the director and may make such decision, requirement, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(f)  Any appeals of the decisions of the environmental court judge shall be taken to the Superior Court of Clayton County by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-172. - Administration. 
(a)  The foreclosed and vacant real property registry is subject to the Open Records Act of the State of Georgia and the city may make such registry information available online. 
(b)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  The director may develop guidelines and forms, make recommendations and take such other steps as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-173. - Nuisances. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of the city to enforce any applicable codes, as defined in state law, or to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. Such nuisances may include, but not be limited to dangerous or diseased trees, graffiti, illegal dumping, inoperable exterior lighting, junk cars or any walls and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-174. - City action. 
The city may take the following actions in relation to a vacant building. The building owner shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  The city may inspect the premises of the vacant building each month. 
(2)  The city may take any other action required to secure the building. Any additional costs shall be charged to the owner of the property. 
(3)  The city may mow the lawn, landscape or grounds of any vacant building as needed if the plant growth violates city ordinances and the owner fails to timely cut the lawn. The owner shall pay the city for mowing the lawn at the city's standard billing rate. 
(4)  The city may remove garbage, debris, objects or other materials from a vacant property, and take any other actions authorized by law to remedy an ordinance violation. 
(5)  The city may conduct site inspections of the property upon which the vacant building is located as needed to ensure that the building is secure, the grounds are maintained and compliance with the terms of this chapter is achieved. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-175. - Certification of unpaid service charges. 
In the event the building owner fails to reimburse the city within thirty (30) days of mailing of a bill by the city for costs incurred by the city pursuant to enforcement of this chapter against a vacant property, the city may certify such unpaid charges to the Clayton County auditor for collection with the next year's property taxes after ten (10) days' mailed notice to the property owner sent via first class U.S. mail to the owner's address as listed on the tax records at the Clayton County recorder's office. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2-176. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Fail to register in accordance with applicable provisions of this article; 
(2)  Fail to update a change in registry information; 
(3)  Fail to maintain and secure properties subject to this section; or 
(4)  Provide inaccurate or false information. 
(b)  Any owner or agent required but fails to register or update a change in registry information, maintain and secure property as required by this article or provide inaccurate or false information, upon citation or summons by an authorized city employee, and judgment or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the city environmental court, shall be subject to penalties not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per occurrence or for each month the violation remains. 
(Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
CHAPTER 3. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2000, deleted former Ch. 8-3, §§ 8-3-1—8-3-3, 8-3-5—8-3-18, 8-3-20—8-3-24, and enacted a new Ch. 8-3 as set out herein. The provisions of former §§ 8-3-1—8-3-25 derived from §§ 3-21—3-45 of the 1959 Code. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 

Sec. 8-3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as "Signs." 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-2. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetic appeal of the City of Forest Park, Georgia through reasonable regulation of signs, as defined herein, in support of the city's substantial governmental interest in preserving and improving the traffic safety of the city, and lessening the aesthetic degradation of the city. Further, it is not the intent of this chapter to regulate noncommercial signs. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-3. - Definitions. 
Where not otherwise defined below, words shall have their common meaning as found in any standard English dictionary. 
(1)  Advertising sign. Advertising sign means any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter, or illuminated service which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine, or merchandise whatsoever which is displayed in any manner whatsoever whether outdoors or indoors so as to draw the attention of a passerby and is further designated as the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed; provided, however, that any open space contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign, or between any component, panel, strip, or figure of any land composing the display face shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign whether such open space be enclosed or not, be it a frame or border. For projecting or double-faced signs, only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing sign area. If the two (2) faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face. 
(2)  Arterial street. For the purposes of this chapter only, a transportation system that carriers most of the trips entering and leaving the urban area, as well as most of the through movements of traffic by-passing the central city and including intra-area travel such as between central business districts and outlying residential areas, between major inner-city communities, and between major suburban areas. 
(3)  Awning. A roof like cover extending over or before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall or fascia sign bearing advertising or to draw attention for commerce. Such signs must be entirely supported from the building and must not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(4)  Banner. A banner is a temporary sign which is made of a piece or strip of cloth, paper, canvas, plastic, or similar material, on which a message, slogan, or emblem is painted, drawn, or otherwise projected, colored or shaped for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a product, object, or facility, to include, but not be limited to, such things as trash receptacle covers, tire covers, rack covers, changeable and/or removable paper, cardboard, cloth, canvas, or plastic displays advertising products, services or facilities obtainable or available on the premises. 
(5)  Billboard. Advertising sign or a sign which advertises a commodity, product, service, activity, or any other person, place, or thing which is not located, found, or sold on the premises upon which such sign is located; usually found along or near major roadways and of such size as to catch the attention of the motoring public and may sometimes be illuminated or animated. 
(6)  Collector street. For the purposes of this chapter only, a transportation system that provides both land access sendee and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas. Such a system differs from an arterial system in that it may penetrate residential neighborhoods, distributing trips from the arterials through an area to the traffic's ultimate destination. These streets also collect traffic in residential neighborhoods and channel the traffic into arterial streets. 
(7)  Construction (project) signs. A sign located on the property where construction or development is taking place and which usually identifies the contractors, engineers, architects, and financial institutions that are involved in the project. 
(7a)  Director. For purposes of this chapter only, this term shall refer to the director of planning, building and zoning, or his or her appointed designee. 
(8)  Freestanding sign. A sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, examples include monument or stanchion signs bearing advertising or drawing attention for commerce. 
(9)  Group development area. An area or parcel of property of sufficient size to allow for the construction or location of more than one (1) business type building or a cluster of businesses to be constructed or located thereon, whether under one (1) roof or several. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Reserved. 
(12)  Illuminated sign. A sign bearing advertising or drawing attention for commerce designed to give forth artificial light directly or through translucent material from a source of light which such sign or a sign illuminated by an external light directed primarily toward such sign and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible elsewhere than on the lot where said illumination occurs. 
(13)  Instructional sign. A sign used to give direction or specific instruction to the public, such as, but not limited to, "Center," "Exit," "No Parking," "Drive Through," "Rest Room," and so forth. Such signs shall contain only instructional information and shall not be used for the purpose of promoting a business name and/or advertisement. These signs include traffic control devices as defined in O.C.G.A. Title 40. 
(14)  Interstate sign. A permanent freestanding sign not to exceed one hundred (100) feet in height which advertises a produce or sendee of specific interest to the motoring public and which is not otherwise prohibited by this chapter. Such signs may be erected by any business located on land which it owns or leases, which property contained not less than a fifty-foot frontage contiguous to an interstate highway right-of-way. No interstate sign shall be erected, owned, operated, or leased by any business, whether or not its land lies contiguous to an interstate, that does not own at least one (1) acre of land, one side of which is lying immediately contiguous by no less than fifty (50) feet to the right-of-way of said interstate. Further, no sign shall be permitted to a land owner or lessee where there is insufficient footage between the proposed interstate sign location and that of property owners to either of its sides [See section 8-3-7(b) governing distances between signs]. 
(15)  Major shopping center. A group of five (5) or more contiguous stores which contain a minimum of thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet of covered floor space and has a minimum of three hundred-linear foot frontage on a major thoroughfare. 
(16)  Minor shopping center. Five (5) or more continuous stores containing a total square footage less than thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet of covered floor space, or which has less than three hundred-linear foot frontage on a major thoroughfare. 
(17)  Marketing sign. A sign which has, as its purpose, to promote, advertise or sell a product or service obtainable on the premises where the sign is located, and not to identify the premises. 
(18)  Mobile signs. A sign which is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, painted or drawn on any vehicle, whether motorized or drawn, which is placed, parked, or maintained at one particular location for the express purpose and intent of promotion, or conveying an advertising message. 
(19)  Monument sign. A freestanding sign conveying a commercial message and/or advertising mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. Such ground mounted monument signs must be in conformance with size and height restrictions imposed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(20)  Off premise real estate directional signs a/k/a real estate corner marker signs. A temporary communication device advertising the sale, rent, or lease of property not located where the device is located that directs traffic or person(s) toward the advertised property. 
(21)  Portable display sign. A temporary mobile electrical or non-electrical sign that is mounted on a trailer type frame with wheels, skids, or a portable wood base or metal frame and not permanently attached to the ground. 
(22)  Projecting sign. An advertising display device which is attached to a building which extends away from the immediate building surface by more than four (4) inches. 
(23)  Real estate sign. A temporary sign advertising the sale, rent, or lease of the property on which it is located. 
(24)  Roof sign. A sign conveying a commercial message and/or advertising erected upon and above a roof structure and wholly supported by the roof structure or a structure placed upon the roof. Roof signs shall also constitute any signage placed upon sloped building fascia intended to appear as or actually be roof elements of the building. 
(25)  Rotating sign. A sign conveying a commercial message and/or advertising set in a permanent location which utilizes electronic, mechanical and/or other motorized means to move any part of the sign. 
(26)  Sign. For the purposes of this chapter a device used for communication of commercial messages. 
(27)  Signature or logo identifier (SLI). A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground which presents to the general public a special type of identifier of an area of ten (10) acres or more that is a multi-business location for hotel(s), office(s), and/or rental shops generally found in such a complex. Such identifiers may not exceed height limitations of twenty-two (22) feet imposed upon other freestanding signs. Size limitations are specifications, and other regulations are further described in this chapter. 
(28)  Special sign. An advertising display device used for temporary communications for events of a limited duration such as grand openings and uncommon promotions. 
(29)  Spectacular sign. An advertised display sign advertising copy that is usually animated, constructed or metal or other materials, wired for lights or luminous tubing, or both, with copy action controlled by flashed circuit breakers, matographs, computers or other electrical, electronic, or mechanical means, and attached to or a part of a structure built especially for the purpose. 
(30)  Stanchion sign. A freestanding sign mounted on one (1) or more poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. Such freestanding signs must be in conformance with size and height restrictions imposed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(31)  Wall or fascia sign. A sign conveying a commercial message and/or advertising fastened, placed, or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear, or side of the structure and which shall not exceed dimension and lighting restrictions imposed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-3-5. - Prohibited signs. 
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Roof signs are prohibited, except where no other space is available for mounting of wall or fascia signs on a property. Roof signs may be permitted on the mansard facing of manard style roofs. 
(2)  Portable display signs, including corner notices and corner real estate signs except as otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  Billboard signs. 
(4)  Banner signs. 
(5)  Spectacular signs. 
(6)  Rotating or moving signs. 
(7)  Mobile signs. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-6. - General requirements for all signs. 
All signs shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited except as hereinafter qualified: 
a.  A roof sign consists of any sign (other than a fascia sign as defined in subsection (6) hereof) which extends higher than the highest interior flat ceiling of the building upon which said sign is attached. 
b.  No roof sign shall be permitted to extend higher than the roof line of the building to which it is attached. 
c.  No roof sign shall be permitted to extend laterally beyond the limit of the roof to which it is attached. 
d.  Any roof sign must be firmly attached to the roof s surface, and cannot be constructed in such a way as to require braces or other visible supporting material. A roof sign may be boxed so long as all boxing is firmly attached to the roof. 
e.  No roof sign shall exceed ninety (90) square feet in overall area. Maximum sign letter height is three (3) feet. 
Upon application for a permit for a roof sign meeting all of the qualifications hereinabove set forth, the director is authorized to issue a permit for a roof sign as hereinabove defined. 
f.  A roof sign that qualifies as a special sign and for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to section 8-3-7(d)(2) is permissible. 
(2)  Wall or fascia signs. Wall or fascia signs shall be securely fastened to the building surface. Such signs may not project above the parapet wall. Such signs shall not exceed ninety (90) square feet in overall area on buildings up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Buildings ten thousand (10,000) square feet and over may have one hundred sixty (160) square feet in over all area, and shall not project beyond the building face by more than two (2) feet. Maximum sign letter height is three (3) feet. Projecting signs shall be mounted a minimum of eight (8) feet from grade level above pedestrian areas, and fifteen (15) feet above vehicular areas. A permit for the direct painting of murals, or any other hand-painting, etching, or drawing, must be obtained by application to, and approval by, the architectural design review board (section 8-8-88, et seq.). No mural sign may display any lettering or graphics. To the extent that the City Code section 8-8-88 requires any amendment to provide for the review of mural signs by the architectural design review board, such ordinance is hereby expressly amended. 
(3)  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs can be either monument type (ground level signs not exceeding six (6) feet in height) or stanchion signs (mounted on steel structural supports). Such signs shall be securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently attached to the ground, and wholly independent of building structure support. In the case of monument signs, the primary structural material shall complement the primary building material so as to achieve similarities and consistency of building materials on the site. 
(4)  Height requirements. 
a.  Stanchion signs erected along major thoroughfares, except those signs classified as interstate signs, shall be erected to a maximum of twenty-two (22) feet. 
b.  Stanchion signs erected along all other interior roads or shopping center districts shall be erected to a maximum of eighteen (18) feet. 
c.  Interstate signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height. 
d.  Ground mount signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
e.  All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the adjacent street to which the business has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way to provide additional sign height. 
(5)  Lighting requirements. No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds, or has any other such adverse effect on traffic. The light from all illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within seventy-five (75) feet of any single-family dwelling. Signs with flashing or animated illumination or effect are prohibited. Transitioning illuminated displays shall maintain a static image for a minimum period of six (6) seconds before changing to another image. No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign or hides from view any traffic or street sign, signal, or public service sign. Neon lights are prohibited, except where expressly permitted under the terms of this or any other ordinance enacted by the governing body. Illumination sources shall not be exposed to view. 
(6)  Special requirements. 
a.  No primary or secondary identification signs may be located within ten feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended or at a location that would cause an obstruction to vision of vehicular traffic, the determination of which would be made by the director of public services. 
b.  Freestanding signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the front street, except that one (1) sign, upon submission and approval of installation, may be used in place of two (2) separate signs on corner lots. No sign shall interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
c.  No sign shall be located on any building, fence, or other property belonging to another person without written consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this section. 
d.  No sign shall contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character such as those that offend public morals. 
e.  No sign shall advertise an activity, service, or product prohibited by the laws or regulations of the United States or the State of Georgia or by the ordinances or resolutions of the city. 
f.  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is structurally safe, clean, and in good repair. 
g.  No sign shall emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any road or highway by a person with normal hearing. 
h.  No sign, sign structure or advertising device shall be located on utility poles or within the right-of-way of any street, public property, or public roadway. 
i.  Marketing signs shall be limited to being part of the secondary identification sign, or as window displays, not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the window area. Window displays must be maintained in good taste with other surroundings and in compliance with the provisions of this code, and be included in the ninety (90) square feet limitations. 
j.  All illuminated signs shall have their electrical functions inspected, either at the sign manufacturer's place of business or at the site on which the sign is to be erected, prior to said sign being erected. In the event that the sign is to be inspected on the job site, it must be disassembled to a point in order that the electrical inspection can be performed in order to insure that the work is in accordance with the National Electrical Code. The person desiring to erect such a sign must provide three (3) days' advance notice to the city prior to the date on which they desire said electrical inspection. 
k.  Except as otherwise provided herein, no pennants, flags, signs, or other attention getting devices are permitted. 
l.  Identification of signs. Every advertising display sign hereafter erected, constructed, or maintained, for which a permit is required shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm, or corporation erecting and maintaining such sign and shall have affixed on the front thereof the permit number issued for said sign by the city. 
m.  Signs utilizing a neon lighting system shall be permitted, provided they are in compliance with the following rules and regulations: 
1.  Neon shall be permitted in the construction of signs to include lettering, borders, and framework. 
2.  No neon signs shall be permitted to flash, blink, or exhibit any type of intermittent or animated illumination or effect except the letters thereon. 
3.  When used outside of a shopping center, the height of the neon letters shall be no larger than three (3) feet, and in the shopping center area the height of the neon letters shall not exceed four (4) feet. 
4.  The size regulations which apply to stanchion signs as set forth in section 8-3-4(12)(b) shall apply to neon signs with the exception of a neon sign placed in a major shopping center. In a major shopping center, a maximum advertising space of five hundred (500) square feet may be used in one (1) freestanding sign. 
5.  All wall and fascia signs shall be limited to an area of ninety (90) square feet, except when used in a major shopping center district, and, in that event, the maximum advertising space shall be four hundred (400) square feet. 
6.  Neon or other types of illuminated signs are permitted in store fronts as window display-type-marketing signs, provided that the same are in compliance with all other provisions of this Code. 
7.  Neon or other types of illuminated signs may be used for instructional purposes such as to designate "open," "closed," or other similar information, provided that these signs shall conform to all other provisions of this Code and shall be included in the calculations concerning total advertising and signs permitted under this Code. 
8.  All signs using neon shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the city building and electrical codes. 
(7)  Size regulations. 
a.  Interstate signs. Highway signs shall not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet of sign area on each face. 
b.  Stanchion signs. 
1.  Stanchion signs for parcels exceeding three (3) acres shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
2.  Stanchion signs for parcels exceeding thirty thousand square feet but less than three (3) acres, shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet of sign area. 
3.  Stanchion signs for parcels less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. 
4.  The size of a parcel shall be determined by the extent of the leaseholder's interest in the property on which the sign is to be constructed. Evidence of said lease or other interest in said property must be presented to the city for purposes of determining the size of the parcel on which the sign is to be erected. 
(8)  Three-sided stanchion signs. Three-side stanchion signs are prohibited. 
(9)  "New car" dealerships; variances. Businesses having as their principle operation the sale of non-previously owned motor vehicles shall be governed by all regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
However, if such businesses are able to demonstrate contractual obligations concerning height, square footage, logo, and other matters which they must meet in order to maintain dealership privileges, the mayor and council may, upon appropriate application for variance, allow variance from these requirements. In making this determination, the mayor and council shall consider the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, the intent of these regulations, and also those criteria outlined in the zoning ordinance for consideration of zoning amendments which may be relevant. 
(10)  Variance. The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to consider any application for a variance from the requirements of this title, in addition to the powers and duties set forth in section 8-8-123 where the following conditions are met: 
a.  Application. Application shall be submitted to the department of planning and zoning setting forth the reasons for a variance. 
b.  Fee. The applicant shall submit at the time of application the same fee as required by section 8-8-125 of this Code. 
c.  Authority. To authorize upon application, in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done, the board of zoning appeal may consider an application for variance. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for a variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of zoning appeals that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
2.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the district in which the property is located. 
3.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located. 
4.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
5.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
6.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the property. 
7.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of property which is not permitted by right in the district involved. 
d.  Appeals from the board of zoning appeals. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals may seek review of such decision in the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, §§ 2, 4, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-7. - Regulations and restrictions applicable to primary and secondary identification signs. 
In addition to general regulations and restrictions applying to all sign classifications, primary and secondary identification signs shall comply as follows: 
(1)  Shopping center identification. 
a.  Areas designated as major shopping centers shall be permitted one (1 ) freestanding sign, being a maximum of forty (40) feet in height and containing a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet of sign area. 
1.  This structure shall be a type of sign that will provide space for all businesses in the shopping center. 
2.  Individual signs qualifying as wall or fascia signs will have their square footage determined by the following formula: five (5) square feet multiplied by the number of feet of frontage the store occupies within the shopping center. This may be used for a maximum of nine hundred (900) square feet. 
3.  On primary and secondary advertisement within a major shopping center, sign letter height may not exceed five (5) feet. 
b.  Areas designated as minor shopping center shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign. 
1.  This structure shall be a type of sign that will provide space for all businesses in the center. 
2.  Individual signs qualifying as wall or fascia signs may be permitted for individual businesses within the center. 
(2)  Commercial lot identification. 
a.  Each business located within one (1) parcel of property shall be allowed one (1) freestanding sign, one (1) building mounted sign, and instructional signs as necessary for proper traffic orientation. 
b.  On parcels located at the intersection of two (2) roadways, a business will be allowed a primary identification sign and a secondary identification sign on each frontage plus instructional signs are required. However, at no time shall any business parcel contain more than a total of four (4) signs. 
c.  On parcels located in such a manner as to have frontage on two (2) non-intersecting roads, such businesses will be permitted one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary identification sign on each road plus instructional signs as required. 
d.  Those parcels qualifying as "Interstate" parcels will be allowed one (1) interstate sign, in addition to the signs allowable under this section. However, no interstate parcel is allowed more than four (4) identification signs. 
e.  No lot or parcel shall be allowed more than two (2) primary identification signs. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-8. - Regulations and restrictions applicable to instructional signs. 
(a)  Such signs shall contain only instructional information and may include business name, logo, or trademark for the premises upon which said signs are located. 
(b)  Signs are limited to traffic direction and services are permitted at each major access drive to the property. The signs shall be limited to a minimum number to provide adequate traffic information. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-9. - Regulations and restrictions applicable to temporary signs. 
(a)  Construction project signs. For construction on or development of a commercial or residential lot, one (1) construction sign shall be allowed which identifies the project, the contractors, architects, engineers, and financial institution. Project signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area or twelve (12) feet in height from ground level. Project signs shall be promptly removed upon occupancy of the building or project or completion of the job. A maximum of one (1) sign for each major street is authorized. 
(b)  Promotional signs. Paper, painted signs, or similar advertising will be permitted only on a temporary basis for special activities, such as grand openings of new businesses. A maximum of twenty-one (21) days will be permitted under this provision. For this purpose the area utilized may be greater than fifty (50) percent of the window area. 
(c)  Special signs. 
(1)  The mayor and council may designate certain holiday and special events as banner days, on which banners celebrating such day may be temporarily erected, including those extending entirely across a public roadway, all of which must receive prior approval of the city manager. 
(2)  Permit required. 
a.  Special permits may be issued to any applicant who meets the requirements of a special event. A special event shall be defined a follows: 
1.  The grand opening of a business or sendee or line of products; 
2.  Any special promotion or event; 
3.  The introduction of a new product or line of products; 
4.  An annual or semi-annual inventory reduction sale; 
5.  Miscellaneous promotions of like kind and character. 
b.  Application shall be made to the city manager on a form provided by him pursuant to the following terms and conditions: 
1.  In the event the city manager refuses to issue said permit, and the applicant wishes to appeal that denial, he shall be entitled to come before the next regular session of the mayor and council in order to appeal from that adverse decision. 
2.  The mayor and council shall review the application and shall vote on whether or not the permit shall be issued. It shall take a majority of the votes in order to direct the city manager to issue said permit. 
3.  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee which may be determined and set from time to time by the mayor and council, notwithstanding the provisions of section 8-3-16 of this chapter. 
c.  Special types of advertising devices permitted: the following types of special advertising devices may be permitted for use under this Code section: 
1.  Banners; 
2.  Balloons or related inflatable devices; 
3.  Pennants; 
4.  Pinwheels; 
5.  Streamers; 
6.  Flags. 
The above list devices shall be within the bounds of the aesthetic intent of this chapter. 
d.  Duration of the permit period. 
1.  Any permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
2.  No applicant shall be issued more than one (1) permit within any Three-month period; in addition, no applicant shall be issued more than four (4) permits during any calendar year. 
(d)  Special signs; encroachment of public property. 
(1)  Notwithstanding section 11-1-5 and section 11-1-6, certain signs may be erected on public property (or city-owned) right-of-way with the express permission of the governing body or their delegate. 
a.  Such encroachment request shall be in writing and submitted to the director of public service for review. 
b.  Application shall include type, size, desired location, and length of time said sign is to be erected. 
c.  No sign or advertising device may be erected at a location that would cause an obstruction to vision of vehicular traffic, the determination of which would be made by the director of public service. 
(2)  Only those applications submitted by the following may be granted: 
a.  City of Forest Park; all departments; 
b.  County, state, or other government agencies; 
c.  Churches, temples, and religious organization; and 
d.  Nonprofit organizations local to the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-10. - Regulations apply to nonconforming signs. 
Any permanent sign or advertising device which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter shall either be removed or made to conform. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-11. - Prohibited methods of erection. 
No advertisement, advertising sign, or advertising structure shall be constructed, erected, used, operated, or maintained: 
(1)  Within five (5) feet of the outside boundaries of a federal or state highway or municipal streets or structures; 
(2)  Which is attached to or placed against a building in such a manner as to prevent ingress or egress through any door or window of any building, nor shall any sign obstruct or be attached to a fire escape; or 
(3)  Which is painted on, mounted on, or otherwise attached to a vehicle, board, or object when, if left stationary, tends to circumvent the intent of this Code and the limitations of the sign regulations prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-12. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate, or maintain within lie city any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this chapter without first obtaining an erection permit from the director and making payment of the fee as required by section 8-3-16 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, § 2, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-13. - Application for erection permit. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, or convert any sign in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit for such a sign or structure from the director. Application for erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the director of the department of planning, building and zoning and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  A fee as established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council as provided for in section 8-3-16 below; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected; 
(4)  A sketch or drawing of the proposed location of the building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected which also shows the proposed height or installation and the distance and position of said sign or advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings and structures; 
(5)  A sketch or drawing of the proposed sign showing size, dimensions, character height, and other information as required by the city to establish compliance with this chapter; 
(6)  For all general advertising and on-premises advertising larger than fifty (50) square feet, three (3) sets of scaled and/or dimensioned construction drawings of the plans and specifications that illustrate the method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground; 
(7)  For all on-premises advertising larger than fifty (50) square feet, or which stands at a height in excess of twenty-five (25) feet, a copy of working stresses and calculations showing that the structure is designed for deadload and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the city; stress analysis will be certified by a registered professional engineer; 
(8)  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting structure; 
(9)  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected; 
(10)  Any electrical or building permit required and issued for said sign; 
(11)  Insurance policy or bond as required by section 8-3-10; and 
(12)  Such other information as the director of the planning, building and zoning department shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, §§ 3, 5, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-14. - Illuminated signs; approval of electrical inspector. 
The application for a permit for erection of a sign or other advertising structure in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the department of planning, building and zoning. The electrical inspector shall examine the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same complies with the electrical code of the city, and he shall approve said permit if the said plans and specifications comply with said code or disapprove the application if non-compliance with said code is found. This said action of the electrical inspector shall be taken prior to submission of the application by the director for final approval or disapproval of the erection permit. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, §§ 2, 3, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-15. - Permit issued if application in order. 
(a)  Sign permit applications must be delivered to the department of planning, building and zoning. All permit applications must be stamped by said department indicating the submission date. Incomplete applications shall be rejected and a new application shall be submitted with all of the required information and assigned a new submission date. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director or his or her appointed representative, upon the filing of an application for a permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure. The director may also consider said application in light of the variance, conditional use, or rezoning provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  If the director determines that the application for a permit and the structure proposed therein is in compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter and all other pertinent laws and ordinances, then the director shall accordingly issue the permit within thirty (30) days of the submission date of the application. Upon making a final decision, the director must stamp each application with a decision date. The director should notify the applicant of the denial of a sign permit application within seven (7) days of the decision date. Notice shall be made in writing and sent to the applicant's address listed on the sign permit application. 
(1)  A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this Code or Georgia law, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the director or his/her representative from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction or of violations of this Code. 
(2)  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after the time the permit is issued; provided, that, for cause, one (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each, may be allowed at the discretion of the director. 
(d)  If the director determines that the application for a permit and the structure proposed therein is not in compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter and all other pertinent laws and ordinances, then the director shall accordingly deny the application for a permit within thirty (30) days of the submission date of the application. Upon making a final decision, the director must stamp each application with a decision date. The director should notify the applicant of the denial of a sign permit application within seven (7) days of the decision date. Notice shall be made in writing and sent to the applicant's address listed on the sign permit application. 
(e)  Should a decision on the application not be made prior to the expiration of this thirty-day period, the applicant shall be permitted to erect and maintain the sign under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the director of the department of planning, zoning and building notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for the denial. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such signs, and should director subsequently deny the application, the sign must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, §§ 2, 6, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-16. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Every applicant who makes application for a sign to be used for general advertising purposes, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay to the director the following permit and inspection fee for such sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter: 

 
(b)  For purposes of determining permit fees on illuminated facia signs, the total square footage area of illuminated facia shall be used to obtain square footage and determine the permit fee, as set forth in the schedule above. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, § 2, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-17. - Campaign posters. 
Signs announcing a candidacy or portraying a candidate for political office may be allowed only if placed on private properly and then only with the permission of the owner. It shall be the responsibility of that person receiving permission to erect such sign to remove the same within fifteen (15) days following the election thereby advertised and the failure to do so shall constitute a violation upon the part of such person. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-18. - Control number, date, and voltage on sign. 
Every sign or other advertising structure hereafter erected shall have painted in a conspicuous place thereon, in letters not less than one (1) inch in height, the date of erection, the permit number, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus installed thereon. Existing signs shall have six (6) months after notification that a specific sign does not contain the information hereinabove required in order to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-19. - Ground signs. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  Materials required. All ground signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall have a surface or facing of incombustible materials; provided, however, that combustible structural trim may be used thereon. 
(2)  Letters, etc. to be secured. All letters, figures, characters, or representations in cut-out or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with all requirements in section 8-3-11. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-20. - Projecting signs. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  Every projecting sign, including the frames, braces, and supports thereof, shall be designed by a structural engineer or manufacturer, and shall be approved by the director as in compliance with the building code of the city and by the electrical inspector as in compliance with the electrical code of the city, shall be constructed or incombustible materials, and shall be two-faced. 
(2)  For illumination of projecting signs: limitation of glass. The lettering or advertising designs to be illuminated may be composed of glass or other transparent or semi-transparent incombustible material. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate glass at least one-fourth (¼) inch thick and in case any single piece or pane of glass having an area exceeding three (3) square feet, shall be wired glass. One (1) section, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, constructed of wire glass or safety glass shall be permitted on each side of a sign. 
(3)  Movable parts to be secured. Any movable part of a projecting sign such as the cover of a service opening shall be securely fastened by chains of hinges. 
(4)  Area limitations. Except by special permission of planning and zoning board and the mayor and council, projecting signs shall be limited in areas as follows: 
a.  Horizontal projecting signs fifty (50) square feet each side. 
b.  Vertical projecting signs one hundred (100) square feet each side. 
(5)  Thickness limitation. The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  Projection over public property. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least eight (8) feet above the walkway on private property over which it is erected, and a distance not greater than two (2) feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the point of the sign nearest thereto, nor shall any sign or part thereof extend near the curb line more than one (1) foot. Every projecting sign erected over public driveways, alleys, and thoroughfares on private property shall be placed not less than fifteen (15) feet above the level of same. 
(2)  Obstructions and traffic hazards. Every projecting sign shall be erected in full compliance with section 8-3-11 of this chapter. 
(c)  Erection. 
(1)  Bracing, anchorage, and supports. Projecting signs exceeding ten (10) square feet in area or fifty (50) pounds of weight shall not be attached to nor supported by frame buildings nor the wooden framework of a building. 
(2)  Anchorage with wire, etc. prohibited. No projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails, nor shall any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, § 2, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-21. - Marquees. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  Materials required. All marquees, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods and braces thereof shall be constructed of incombustible materials, shall be designed by a registered professional structural engineer and approved by the director as in compliance with the building code of the city and by the electrical inspector as in compliance with the electrical code of the city, and shall be illuminated. 
(2)  Drainage. The roofs of all marquees shall be properly guttered and connected by down spouts to a storm drain so that the water therefrom will not drip or flow onto public property. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  Height above sidewalk. No portion of a marquee shall be less than eight (8) feet above the level of the private property for public use. 
(2)  Set-back from curb line. No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond a point one (1) foot inside the curb line. 
(3)  Wide. No marquee shall be wide than the entrance or entrances of the building, plus five (5) feet on each side thereof, provided, however, that where the entrances to a building are not more than twenty (20) feet apart, a marquee may be made a continuous single structure between said entrances. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, § 2, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-22. - Signature or logo identifier (SLI). 
(a)  Such signs shall be mounted directly upon the ground with internal structural support of sufficient strength to carry the stresses and weight imposed upon such structures by wind or other external forces. All such internal structural supports must be hidden from view. Such signature or logo identifiers shall be landscaped at their base in a manner that presents a pleasing appearance to those passing on adjacent roadways and must be aesthetically commensurate with their surroundings. Such identifier's (SLI's) may be lighted from within or without to accentuate or enhance appearances of a logo or signature, but may not have exposed neon tubing. 
(b)  Such identifiers (SLIs) may be of any innovative or decorative shape such as triangular, curved, ovate, square, round, or rectangular, but must conform to and be in consonance with the surrounding area. 
(c)  Such identifiers (SLIs) shall be at least fifteen (15) feet behind the street right-of-way at the sign's center and may not under any circumstance be closer than five (5) feet to a right-of-way at any point. The size of such identifiers (SLIs) shall not exceed, as previously stated above, twenty-two (22) feet in height nor six (6) feet in width at the widest and/or tallest points above the grade level of the adjacent street; or a grand total per face of one hundred thirty-two (132) square feet. 
(d)  Such identifiers (SLIs) may have two (2) faces for a grand total square footage of two hundred sixty-four (264) square feet but only forty (40) square feet of each facing may be used to present a commercial message or advertisement about the location. 
(e)  Such commercial message or advertisement area shall be considered as that portion containing the message or advertisement plus three (3) inches bordering the top, ends, and bottom of such lettering, printing, marking, carving, engraving, or other means of display whatsoever. 
(f)  When such identifiers (SLIs) are to have two (2) faces for message or advertisement area and such faces are back to back, the identifier shall be erected perpendicular to the main thoroughfare to which it is closest. If triangular in shape or of a shape having a point from which is two (2) faces radiate in different directions, then that point must be placed in such a manner that a line bisecting its center must be perpendicular to the main thoroughfare upon which it rests. Where only one (1) face addresses the main thoroughfare and it is the only face of the identifier presenting a commercial logo or commercial advertisement of the location name, it shall be placed parallel to the street or roadway. 
(g)  All lettering, engraving, carvings, printing, numerals, symbols, or other markings purveying any advertisement shall be no more than three (3) feet in height and shall be constrained by the forty-square-foot requirement mentioned elsewhere in this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-23. - Real estate signs. 
One (1) sign advertising property "for sale," "for rent," or "for lease," will be permitted for each unit available for sale, rent, or lease. 
(1)  It is the legislative intent and expression of the City of Forest Park that the inclusion of the category of off premise real estate directional signs described further below is not an integral part of the City of Forest Park regulatory scheme regarding signs, and that, if found to be an unconstitutional limitation upon freedom of speech, or otherwise found to cause this chapter to be potentially invalid or for any reason to violate any law, it is the intention of the City of Forest Park that these provisions be deemed "non-integral" to the regulatory scheme of the City of Forest Park and be severed and stricken therefrom. 
(2)  No real estate sign shall interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(3)  No real estate sign located on a building, structure, or real estate unit which is for sale, rent, or lease shall be closer than five (5) feet to a right-of-way at any point except for buildings, structures, or real estate units already in existence at the date of the adoption of this chapter, where compliance with this chapter is rendered impossible due to the proximity of the buildings, structures, or real estate unit to the right-of-way. 
(4)  No real estate sign shall be located on utility poles or within the right-of-way of any street or public roadway. 
(5)  Off premise real estate directional signs shall be of a uniform design with standard colors and graphics. No company names or logos shall appear on the face of the sign. The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) inches by eighteen (18) inches in size. 
(6)  No off premise real estate sign shall be allowed at any intersection with a state highway or at the intersection of any two (2) arterial streets. 
(7)  A maximum of two (2) premise directional signs, one (1) per direction, shall be allowed at any other intersection (signs must direct from the major street onto the lesser street only). If any street intersects another street at more than one (1) place, signs may be placed at only one (1) of the intersections. 
(8)  A maximum of four (4) off premise real estate directional signs may be located along any single collector street. 
(9)  No real estate sign shall be erected more than five (5) feet above ground level. 
(10)  No real estate sign shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended or at a location that would cause an obstruction of vision to vehicular traffic. 
(11)  No real estate sign shall be located within thirty (30) feet of another real estate sign unless the size or shape of the properties for sale, rent, or lease would render compliance with this section impossible as determined by the director by application of the parameters of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-24. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs which on the effective date of this chapter were approved and erected under previous sign restrictions which were in existence before the effective date of this chapter or which became nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this chapter, may continue in existence so long as there is no change in the use of the property, the size of any such sign is not increased beyond that existing as of the effective date of this section or any subsequent change in the ordinance, and the sign has sustained no damage requiring repairs costing in excess of fifty (50) percent of the sign's value. The value of the sign shall be determined by director of the department of planning, building and zoning or his/her designee based on the advice of a professional sign company, using accepted industry standards. No such nonconforming sign shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by the sign at the time it became nonconforming. If use of the premises served by the sign ceased for any reason for a period of more than ninety (90) days, then any such sign shall lose it nonconforming status, and any subsequent sign erected for the premises shall conform with the regulations of this chapter. Upon sale, transfer, or exchange of the sign, the nonconforming sign will be discontinued. 
(b)  Any sign erected in violation of this chapter may be removed by duly authorized employees of the city from any public properly or right-of-way, and a responsible party may be cited for such violation. 
(c)  A conforming sign or advertising device shall not be erected for the same establishment on the same lot with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-25. - Appeals. 
The denial of a permit under this section may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals under the procedure set forth in article I of chapter 8 of title 8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, subject to the following time limits: 
(1)  Any appeal of the director's decision concerning a sign permit application must be made within seven (7) days of receipt of notice of the denial. In the event that no appeal is made within the seven-day period, the decision of the director shall become final. 
(2)  The board of zoning appeals shall hold the hearing on any such appeal no more than thirty (30) days following receipt of the appeal; and 
(3)  The board of zoning appeals shall render a final determination on the appeal not more than thirty (30) days following the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, § 7, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-26. - Construction and maintenance. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is structurally safe, clean, and in good repair. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all signs for which a permit are required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the city building and electrical codes. Such signs, together with their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair, and, unless constructed of galvanized or noncorroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
(c)  Every sign may be inspected by the director from time to time, as the director may require, so as to determine continuing compliance with this Code. 
(d)  Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the director or his/her representative, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the same, shall upon written notice from the director, forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and in any case within ten (10) days, secure the same in a manner to be approved by the director or his/her representative, in conformity with the provisions of this Code, or remove such sign. If such notice is not complied with within ten (10) days, a formal citation will be issued for the violation. Notice shall consist of a letter sent regular or certified mail to the owner or the person or firm maintaining the sign. Once a citation is issued violations of this section shall be punishable under section 8-3-30(d). 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 13-23, § 2, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-3-27. - Erection rights-of-way. 
No sign of any kind shall be permitted to extend into or above or to be anchored or placed in any portion of the right-of-way of a state or county highway, street, or road, or city street or road, or public sidewalk (except official city, county, state signs and O.C.G.A. Title 40 authorized traffic control devices). 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-28. - False advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display untrue, false, or misleading statements upon signs, billboards, or other public places, calculated to mislead the public as to anything sold, any services to be performed or information disseminated. The fact that any sign or display shall contain words or language sufficient to mislead an ordinary person in reading it shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by person displaying the signs or permitting them to be displayed upon their property, at their residence, establishment or place of business. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-29. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
The following advertising structures, advertising signs, and advertisements or parts thereof upon which they are posted or displayed are excepted from the permit requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Those that are used on particular sites of real property advertising that it is for sale, lease, or rent may be exempted from the permit requirements; providing that the dimensions of the sign contained in section 8-3-17(b) are adhered to, that the sign is on the property affected, that it is compatible with the aesthetics of the area, and that it is not used by stores, shopping centers, apartments, or condominiums; that the sign is removed promptly upon consummation of the sale, rental, or lease; and that distance between signs as set out in this chapter is maintained. 
(2)  Official notices or advertisements posted or displayed by or under the direction of any public official or court officer in the performance of official or directed duties or by trustees under deeds of trust, deeds of assignment, or other similar instruments. 
(3)  Signs solely to denote the route to any city, town, village, or historical place or shrine. 
(4)  Notice of any railroad, bridge, ferry, or other transportation or transmission company necessary for the direction or safety of the public. 
(5)  Historical markers erected by duly constituted and authorized public authorities. 
(6)  Signs erected upon property warning the public against hunting, fishing, or trespassing thereon. 
(7)  Signs erected by Red Cross authorities relating to Red Cross emergency stations. 
(8)  Highway markers and signs erected or caused to be erected by duly authorized authority. 
(9)  Name plates note exceeding twenty-four (24) inches by six (6) inches and containing only the name of the business or professional office. 
(10)  Two (2) corner signs for garage, rummage, or carport or permit for garage sales located in the city, for the duration of the sale only and in no case to exceed three (3) consecutive days. Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet and shall be mounted in such a manner so as not to interfere in any way with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The sign shall be removed by the responsible party the day after the sale ends. Signs advertising garage and carport sales held outside the city are prohibited. 
(11)  Traffic control devices erected pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 40 and/or local ordinance. 
(12)  Signs announcing a candidacy for elected office, or portraying a candidate for political office may be allowed only if placed on private property, only with permission of the property owner, and only if their presence does not pose a safety hazard. All signs shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours of the closing of polls for the election for which the candidacy was offered, or within seventy-two (72) hours after a run-off is completed, where a run-off is required. Election signs may remain on the property between primary elections and general elections for candidates who proceed to general elections. Removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. Failure to remove the sign shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The provisions of the laws of the State of Georgia concerning campaign posters as set out in O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 shall be enforced within the city, and the municipal court shall act as a committal court for violations thereof. 
(13)  Other signs on property with the permission of the owner of the property of a non-commercial nature. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-3-30. - Penalties. 
Any conviction of a violation of this section shall constitute grounds for the city to refuse to issue or to revoke a sign permit or to remove a sign; and further, or in the alternative, upon conviction of said violation, the owner or operator shall also be punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days; for not more than ninety (90) days at labor on the roads and street or other public works; by a fine or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), either one (1) or more thereof. Each twenty-four-period after a citation is issued, under this chapter, except for signs being in disrepair under section 8-3-12 which requires a ten-day notice before a citation is issued, for a violation committed or allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Continuing violations of section 8-3-12 after citations are issued shall be punished as set out hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
CHAPTER 4. - MOBILE HOMES, PORTABLE STRUCTURES AND TENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Requirements in flood hazard areas, § 8-6-9(3). 

ARTICLE A. - MOBILE HOMES AND PORTABLE STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8-4-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Mobile home. A structure designed to be and used for human habitation that is capable of being moved from place to place on wheels attached to its own chassis, or on its own chassis transported by another vehicle or trailer. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "mobile home" shall also include a "recreational vehicle," self-propelled or otherwise, when such "recreational vehicle" is to be used for residential purposes within the city. 
(2)  Portable structure. A structure that is capable of being moved from place to place on wheels attached to its own chassis, self-propelled or otherwise, or constructed on its own chassis or frame and transported by another vehicle or trailer to its permanent or temporary location and is to be used for, but not limited to, one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
a.  As a temporary office by an individual, partnership or corporation (profit or nonprofit); 
b.  As a "watchman's" station or construction site office, while construction is in progress; 
c.  As a place of assembly or as a classroom; 
d.  For storage and general utility use (residential or commercial); and/or 
e.  For recreational purposes. 
(3)  Tent. A temporary structure, enclosure or shelter, composed wholly or partly of canvas or similar material and supported by any manner except by air or the contents it protects. 
(4)  Air-supported structure. A temporary structure, enclosure or shelter composed wholly or partially of canvas, vinyl, plastic or similar material, and supported by injected or forced air. 
(Code 1959, § 21-1; Ord. No. 93-021, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 8-4-2. - Temporary structures, tents and air-supported structures for public assemblies. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected any temporary structure composed wholly or partly of canvas, vinyl, plastic or similar material, to be used as a place of amusement or for any religious, educational, recreational or entertainment purpose, or for any other assemblages whatsoever, within the city without obtaining a permit from the planning and zoning administration. No such permit shall be granted unless the applicant shall have secured public liability insurance covering any person who may receive personal injury or suffer property damage while in said structure in such amounts to be determined by the governing body from time to time, but in no event shall the limits of liability be less than $10,000 for injuries to one (1) person and $20,000 for injuries to more than one (1) person, which are received in the same accident, and property damage of $5,000. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, the permit holder shall comply with all provisions of the building code and ordinances relating to temporary structures, tents and air-supported structures, as the case may be. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation licensed to engage in the sale, lease or rental of air-supported structures shall be permitted to erect same for the limited purpose of cleaning it for a period not to exceed six (6) hours, provided that said structure is inflated for cleaning purposes within seven (7) days immediately following the expiration date of the permit issued pursuant to section 8-4-2(a) of this code. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation licensed to engage in the sale, lease or rental of air-supported structures shall be permitted to inflate same for the limited purpose of inspection, routine repair and maintenance one (1) day within each calendar month. 
(Code 1959, § 21-2; Ord. No. 93-021, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 8-4-3. - Mobile homes prohibited in certain areas. 
It shall be unlawful, temporarily or permanently, to locate or place a "mobile home" as described herein, in the city, except where permitted by ordinance and zoning for "mobile home parks." 
(Code 1959, § 21-3) 
Sec. 8-4-4. - Portable structures; sizes. 
It shall be unlawful to locate or place in the city any portable structure larger than 196 square feet (exterior measurement), which is used for the purpose as described in subparagraphs d. and e. in the definition of "portable structures" in section 8-4-1. 
(Code 1959, § 21-4; Ord. No. 93-021, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 8-4-5. - Same; permits (utility or storage). 
Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to transport and place on site a portable structure within the city, as described in subparagraphs d. and e. in the definition of "portable structures," in section 8-4-1 of 196 square feet (exterior measurement) shall obtain a permit in accordance with the ordinances for erecting a building. 
(Code 1959, § 21-5) 
Sec. 8-4-6. - Same; permits to be temporarily used for certain purposes. 
(a)  Any person desiring to transport or place a portable structure in the city exceeding 196 square feet (exterior measurement) for one of the purposes described in subparagraphs a., b. and c. in the definition of "portable structures" as contained in section 8-4-1, shall make application for a permit from the planning and zoning administration. The planning and zoning administration may grant or deny the application based upon the information before it, when considered in the light of the public interest and welfare and the effect on the community. Such a permit, when issued, shall specify an expiration date and such date shall not be for a period longer than six (6) months from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring to place a structure defined in section 8-4-1 of this chapter to be used for recreational purposes shall make application for a permit from the planning and zoning administration. The planning and zoning administration may grant or deny the application based upon the information before it, when considered in the light of the public interest and welfare and the effect on the community. Such a permit, when issued, shall specify an expiration date and such date shall not be for a period longer than eight (8) calendar days. After a permit issued pursuant to this section expires, no additional permit may be issued for the same location for a period of 30 days. 
(Code 1959, § 21-6; Ord. No. 93-021, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 8-4-7. - Same; extension of time of permit. 
A person who has been issued a temporary six (6) months portable structure permit under the terms of this chapter may upon compliance with the original requirements for obtaining a temporary permit, be granted a second six (6) months portable structure permit at the discretion of the planning and zoning administration. However, in no event shall any person be allowed temporarily to place a portable structure at any location within the city for a period to exceed the original six (6) month period plus a second temporary six (6) month period. 
(Code 1959, § 21-7; Ord. No. 93-021, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 8-4-8. - Same; located at construction sites. 
It shall be unlawful to place or use a portable structure requiring a permit under section 8-4-6 in the city without such a permit or to continue to place, transport or use such a structure beyond the expiration date of the permit. Any portable structure which is permitted as described in subparagraph (2) b. in section 8-4-1 (construction company in subparagraph (2) b. in section 8-4-1 (construction company office) must be removed within 90 days after certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Code 1959, § 21-8) 
Sec. 8-4-9. - Same; sanitary requirement. 
(a)  Suitable toilet facilities shall be provided for by the permit holder. Such facilities shall consist of at least one (1) water closet or chemical toilet and one (1) urinal for each 30 workmen. 
(b)  Such facilities shall be provided in a well ventilated location protected from the weather, and affording reasonable privacy. 
(Code 1959, § 21-9) 
Sec. 8-4-10. - Same; parking and storing. 
The parking and storage of personal recreational vehicles not used for any purpose other than parking or storage is not prohibited by this chapter. The total number of units to be stored or parked at any single-family residence will not exceed two (2). 
(Code 1959, § 21-10) 
Sec. 8-4-11. - Construction office trailers. 
(a)  The planning and zoning administration is hereby authorized to approve permits for construction office trailers. 
(b)  Construction office trailers defined. For purposes of this section, "construction office trailers" shall be defined as those portable structures placed on a construction site to be used by supervisors, planners and builders in the construction or remodeling of a given structure. Said construction office trailers are placed on the construction site only until such time as the construction work is completed, then they are removed from said construction site. 
(c)  The planning and zoning administration is only authorized to approve permits where a building permit has been issued. 
(d)  Length of permit. When the planning and zoning administration issues a permit pursuant to this code section, said permit shall be valid for a period of six (6) months, commencing upon the date that the permit is issued. Said permit may be extended by the planning and zoning administration for one (1) six (6) month period only. 
(e)  All other permits of every kind and nature for temporary or portable structures shall also require the approval of the planning and zoning administration as set forth in other parts of this title. 
(Ord. No. 88-003, 1-18-88; Ord. No. 93-021, 10-4-93) 
Secs. 8-4-12—8-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - USE OF TRAILERS AND SEMI-TRAILERS IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of this article were originally designated as §§ 8-4-15—8-4-19. Renumbering was performed by the codifier to correspond to the numbering scheme of the Code. 

Sec. 8-4-21. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words shall have the following definitions: 
(1)  Trailer means every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(2)  Semitrailer means every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried, by another vehicle. 
(3)  Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district, when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
(4)  The above definitions are the same as those found in the Official Code of Georgia, section 40-1-1, and for purposes of construction of this Code section, the remaining definitions set forth in O.C.G.A., section 40-1-1 are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 89-001, 1-3-89) 
Sec. 8-4-22. - Use, etc., in residence districts prohibited. 
(a)  The operation, use, parking and storage of any trailer and semitrailer in residential districts located within the city is hereby prohibited, except as set forth in section 8-4-23 of this title. 
(b)  The operation, use, parking and storage in any residential district located within the city of any vehicle, the operation of which requires a commercial driver's license under the laws of the state, is hereby prohibited, except as set forth in section 8-4-23 of this title. 
(c)  The operation, use, parking and storage in residential districts located within the city of any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds, which vehicle includes commercial advertising or identification on the exterior of the said vehicle, is hereby prohibited, except as set forth in section 8-4-23 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 89-001, 1-3-89, as amended by Ord. No. 93-012, 6-7-93) 
Sec. 8-4-23. - Exceptions. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as to prohibit the following: 
(1)  To restrict transportation and flow of goods and services in the ordinary flow of commerce through the city; 
(2)  To prevent the pickup and delivery of goods and services in the ordinary course of business; 
(3)  To prevent any person, firm, or corporation from using small trailers designed for the task of transporting and storing boats, motorcycles, campers, all-terrain vehicles and the like, the use of said trailer being the purpose for which it was originally designed; 
(4)  Nor shall the prohibitions set forth in section 8-4-22 apply to any residential lot with at least one hundred forty (140) feet of frontage on a city street that has been paved in accordance with standards established by the city department of public works for an "industrial road" and has been designated as a "truck route" under City Code Title 10, Chapter 2, Article B, sections 10-2-31 through 10-2-35, if all of the land lying directly across the street from any such residential lot is zoned and used for industrial purposes and also has at least one hundred forty (140) feet of frontage on said street; and if the city block in which such residential lot is located is bordered on at least two (2) sides by more than ten (10) acres of land zoned and used for industrial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 89-001, 1-3-89; Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 8-4-24. - Penalties. 
In the event that some provision of this article is violated, that person found to be in violation shall be notified and given the opportunity to correct the condition, but, in the event said condition remains uncorrected for a period of twenty-four (24) hours, that person shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Once the initial notification has been accomplished, any subsequent or repeat violation will result in the issuance of a citation immediately, without the violator being given any opportunity to correct the condition. 
(Ord. No. 89-001, 1-3-89; Ord. No. 01-14, § 1, 10-1-2001) 
CHAPTER 5. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Dec. 5, 2016, repealed former Ch. 5, §§ 8-5-1—8-5-10, and enacted a new Ch. 5 as set out herein. Former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition List. 
Cross reference— Public works, Title 5. 
State Law reference— Control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-5-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "The City of Forest Park's Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Clayton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7-1, et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 8-5-4(c) of this chapter. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 8-5-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia ("manual") published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Clayton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the city; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections (15) and (16) of section 8-5-4(c) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to code section 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The city may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (15), (16) and (17) of section 8-5-4(c), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (16) and (17) of this subsection (c), there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280, et seq., the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this act and if the requirement to maintain a twenty-five-foot buffer would consume at least eighteen (18) percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than five hundred (500) square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent the city from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The city shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, without first obtaining a permit from the city's department of planning, building and zoning to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city's department of planning, building and zoning and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 8-5-4(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six (6) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to subsection (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections (15), (16) and (17) of section 8-5-4(c) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The city, with plan review authority, shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the city, with plan review authority, to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The city may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the city with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections (b) and (c) of section 8-5-4, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections (15), (16) and (17) of section 8-5-4(c) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the city. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The city may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city department of planning, building and zoning will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city's department of planning, building and zoning shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the city shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 8-5-5(b)(6). The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the construction codes board of adjustments and appeals within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting its administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal such decision by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia as provided in O.C.G.A § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-5-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the date of its adoption. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 16-23, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-5-2016) 
CHAPTER 6. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed former Ch. 6, §§ 8-6-1—8-6-7.3, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. Former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition List. 

ARTICLE A. - INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-6-1. - Findings of fact. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Forest Park are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: (1) protect human life and health; (2) minimize damage to private property; (3) minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Forest Park does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-2. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-4. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The Clayton County Water Authority is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter, and to provide appropriate recommendations for permit approval to the city's department of planning, building and zoning. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-5. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 5, 2007 and May 16, 1977, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Clayton County and the City of Forest Park are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Forest Park; or 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia that has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Forest Park. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Forest Park, Georgia; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia that has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Clayton County Water Authority. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-6. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-7. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Forest Park or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 8-6-9—8-6-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 8-6-11. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined and interpreted as follows; all other words or terms not defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions: 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Administrator means the Clayton County Water Authority or any other agency, department or official to whom the city has designated the administration of this chapter. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by sheet flow or ponding. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land area subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBP) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM)), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 8-6-1.4. All streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building . See Structure . 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction is any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 4, 1987. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 4, 1987. 
Expansion to an existing home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means the official map of a community issued by FEMA delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished and flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after May 4, 1987 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 4, 1987. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Forest Park to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management services, a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is primarily above ground, as well as a manufactured home. For insurance purposes, "structure" means: (1) a building with two (2) or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof that is affixed to a permanent site; (2) a manufactured home; or (3) a travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, which is regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. For the latter purpose, "structure" does not mean a recreational vehicle or a park trailer or similar vehicle, except as described in subsection (3) of this definition. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
ARTICLE C. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8-6-12. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Forest Park a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-13. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(2)  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 8-6-32(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in section 8-6-31(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including, but not limited to, permits required by section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-14. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. 
Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-15. - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions in articles D and E of this chapter; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the administrator or designee shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA-DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city or the administrator and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA-DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 8-6-16—8-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 8-6-21. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Forest Park. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Forest Park, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Forest Park. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-22. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Forest Park. If floodway data is not available from the City of Forest Park, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Forest Park. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-23. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard allowed under section 8-6-23(1) shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 8-6-24; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Forest Park using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-24. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways for which the provisions of section 8-6-34 apply. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the administrator prior to the approval of any permit by the city or the administrator which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the administrator. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-25. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Forest Park until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the City of Forest Park. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-26. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The administrator may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city or the administrator) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 8-6-27—8-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-6-31. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 8-6-23, 8-6-24 and 8-6-25 have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Forest Park to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-32. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
In addition to the requirements in section 8-6-31, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 8-6-23, 8-6-24 and 8-6-25 have been met. If all of the requirements of the aforementioned sections have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-6-31(5)(a). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-6-31(5)(a). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. 
a.  New construction . New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 8-6-23, 8-6-24 and 8-6-25 have been met. If all of the requirements of the aforementioned sections have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-6-31(5)(a). New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 8-6-23, 8-6-24 and 8-6-25 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the administrator using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the Clayton County Water Authority or designee to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the administrator using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities . Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 8-6-23, 8-6-24 and 8-6-25 are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with the standards of section 8-6-31(5)(a) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (section 8-6-32(1)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes . 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 8-6-23, 8-6-24 and 8-6-25 have been met. If all of the requirements of the aforementioned sections have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-6-31(5)(a). 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with the standards of section 8-6-31(7). 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-33. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
Structures and buildings that are adjacent to the future conditions floodplain shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards in section 8-6-31(5)(a). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-6-31(5)(a). Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
For purposes of this chapter, the phrase "adjacent to the future conditions floodplain" includes all structures and buildings on a property that contains (partially or entirely) an area of special flood hazard and all structures and buildings on a property that shares a common property line with another parcel that contains (partially or entirely) an area of special flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-34. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachment, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with section 8-6-31(5)(a). 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-35. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-6-31(5)(a); 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the administrator using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-36. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 8-6-13(2). 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 8-6-37—8-6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 8-6-41. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city or the administrator or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the administrator. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the administrator. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the administrator shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and the council in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision by certiorari to superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the administrator and the city's governing body shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The administrator and the city shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the administrator and the city shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the administrator and the city's governing body may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 8-6-42—8-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE G. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-6-51. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-52. - Notice of violation. 
If the city or the administrator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner of the responsible party in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city environmental court by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 8-6-53. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city or the administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city or the administrator may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city or the administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible party to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city or the administrator may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit . The city or the administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city or the administrator may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city or the administrator shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city or the administrator has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city or the administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-21-2016) 
CHAPTER 7. - SUBDIVISIONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention standards for subdivision proposals, § 8-6-10. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-7-1. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  These regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land within the incorporated area of the city. 
(b)  Any owner of land within such jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the planning commission a plat of the subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth in these regulations. No plat of a subdivision lying within such territory or part thereof, shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County and no subdivider shall proceed with the improvement of lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the planning commission with such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission and then submitted to the mayor and council for review. 
(Code 1959, § 17-1) 
Sec. 8-7-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  The word shall is mandatory and not directory. The word may shall be deemed as permissive. 
(2)  Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are in accord with the rules and regulations contained herein and with the city's zoning ordinance; 
b.  The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved; and 
c.  The division or sale of land by judicial decree. 
(3)  Streets. The term "street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place or however otherwise designated. 
a.  Major streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
b.  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor or neighborhood streets to the major system of major streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
c.  Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
d.  Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to major streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
e.  Service drives are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties abutting on a street. 
(4)  Subdivider. Any person or duly authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
(5)  Master plan. A comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city, or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto recommended by the planning commission, indicating the general location for major roads, parks or other public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities, zoning districts or other similar information. 
(6)  Planning commission. Whenever the term "planning commission" is used in these regulations, it shall be deemed to refer to the City of Forest Park Planning Commission. 
(7)  Health officer. Whenever the term "health officer" is used in these regulations it shall be deemed to refer to the director of the public services department, or, when deemed appropriate by the planning commission, the county health officer. 
(Code 1959, § 17-2) 
Secs. 8-7-3—8-7-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 8-7-11. - Pre-application review. 
(a)  Prior to the preparation of the subdivision plat, the subdivider shall prepare sketch plans and general subdivision proposals as outlined in article C, section 8-7-21. He or his agent shall then confer informally with the city manager (or an appropriate city official designated by the city manager) regarding the suitability of the plans. This step does not require formal application or filing of the plat but does require notice being given, together with a copy of the sketch plan, to the assistant city clerk at least 10 days before the date of the meeting at which the proposals are reviewed. 
(b)  The purpose of this review is to acquaint the subdivider with plans and policies that might be significant to his proposed development. 
(c)  Upon receiving favorable consideration, the subdivider may then proceed to prepare the preliminary plat for submission to the planning commission. 
(Code 1959, § 17-3) 
Sec. 8-7-12. - Conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  On reaching conclusions as described in section 8-7-11 regarding his general program and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with other supplementary material as deemed necessary by the planning commission and specified in article C, section 8-7-22. 
(b)  Eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified, together with two (2) copies of a written application for conditional approval of the preliminary plan (forms obtained from the city clerk) shall be filed with the city clerk at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. The city clerk shall be responsible for their proper distribution and the collection of a filing fee as specified in article G of these regulations. 
(c)  No preliminary plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission without holding a hearing thereon. The secretary of the planning commission shall notify the subdivider, by registered or certified mail, of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days prior to such hearing date. 
(d)  Within 30 days after the submission of an application for preliminary plat approval, the planning commission shall: 
(1)  issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval; 
(2)  issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval subject to any necessary modifications the nature of which shall be indicated on the preliminary plat or attached to it in writing; or 
(3)  disapprove the preliminary plat, in which case the planning commission shall so notify the subdivider in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
(e)  The action of the planning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One (1) copy shall be retained by the planning commission and two (2) copies returned to the city clerk, who will keep one (1) for the mayor and council and return the other to the subdivider. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. 
(f)  Short-cut method. The preceding provisions of this section may be waived and a short-cut procedure initiated in the case of a subdivision of five (5) lots or less, and the subdivider may submit an application for final plat approval, without submitting a preliminary plat, provided: 
(1)  Each lot in the proposed subdivision abuts an existing public street; 
(2)  The proposed subdivision will not effect any major alterations of utility installations, or other existing or proposed public facilities; and 
(3)  The application for final plat approval meets all the applicable procedural, design and other requirements of these regulations. 
A subdivider intending to use this short-cut method shall first consult with the city manager or his agent, supplying sufficient information to assure that the specified conditions will be met. 
(Code 1959, § 17-4) 
Sec. 8-7-13. - Approval of final plat. 
(a)  The final plat to be prepared as specified in section 8-7-23 shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  All performance bonds must be accepted by the appropriate regulating departments and all filing fees according to the schedule in article G shall be paid prior to approval of final plat by the planning commission. 
(c)  The final plat, and other supplementary material required for approval, shall be submitted to the city clerk at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. It shall also be required that the above material be submitted to the planning commission within six (6) months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. 
(d)  Within ten (10) days after the submission of the final plat and supplementary material required for approval, the planning commission shall express its final action. 
(e)  After final action by the planning commission, the final plat and other supplementary material will be transmitted by the secretary of the planning commission to the mayor and council for their final action. 
(f)  Twelve (12) copies of the final plat shall be procured by the building inspector for distribution to the various departments concerned, including one (1) copy for the mayor and council and one (1) copy for the planning commission. 
(g)  The applicant shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County and shall deliver a copy of said recorded final plat to the building inspector. 
(h)  The final plat (original tracing) may be obtained from the city clerk by the subdivider. 
(Code 1959, § 17-5) 
Secs. 8-7-14—8-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - PLATS AND DATA 

Sec. 8-7-21. - Pre-application plats and data. 
The following shall be provided at the time of preliminary review: 
(1)  Sketch plan (two (2) copies) shall show in sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available. The sketch plan shall include the existing topographic data stated in section 8-7-22 or such of these data as is necessary for consideration of the proposed sketch plan. 
(2)  General subdivision information (two (2) copies) shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the sketch plan. This information may include data on existing covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, minimum floor area in structures, business areas, playgrounds, park areas and other public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements. 
(Code 1959, § 17-6) 
Sec. 8-7-22. - Preliminary plats and data for conditional approval. 
The following shall be provided at the time of the application: 
(1)  Preliminary plat. Eight (8) copies of blueline prints shall be at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. It shall show all existing conditions required below and shall show all existing conditions and all proposals, including the following: 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
b.  Name and address of owner of record. 
c.  Name, address and telephone number of subdivider. 
d.  Date of survey, date of plat drawing, north point and graphic scale. 
e.  Location (land district and land lot), and acreage. 
f.  Number of residential lots and typical lot sizes. 
g.  A sketched vicinity map indicating streets and highways, land lot lines, railroads and other significant features, within one (1) mile of the proposed subdivision, drawn at a scale sufficient to show the information required. 
h.  Exact boundary lines of the trace, giving lengths, bearings and present zoning. 
i.  Unit divisions or stage development, if any, proposed by the subdivider. 
j.  Contour lines based on sea level datum and drawn at intervals not greater than ten (10) feet. The source of the topographic contours shown shall be specified. 
k.  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water and other significant features. On all watercourses the direction of flow shall be indicated. 
l.  Cultural features within the proposed subdivision, including street names, rights-of-way and pavement widths; easements; bridges; culverts; utility lines and structures; buildings; city and county lines; land lot lines; and such other information as the subdivider may desire. 
m.  Proposed subdivision layout, including: Street names, central angles of street intersections, approximate street grades, street surface widths; lot lines with dimensions, lot number, block letters; building setback lines with dimensions; sites to be reserved, developed or dedicated for public uses or for nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
n.  Location and results of percolation tests for any lots which will not be served by a public sewage system, as required by the county health department. 
o.  Location and size of all proposed drainage structures, including catch basins, curbs, gutters, grates and headwalls. 
p.  Location of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer lines or improvements and any easements required with sufficient dimensions to location same on the ground. 
q.  Location and description of all proposed monuments and pins. 
(2)  Street profiles. When requested by the city manager or his designee, three (3) line profiles of proposed streets shall be required. These profiles shall show centerline elevations and elevation along right-of-way lines on either side of the street, exposed rock, street layout, width, curvature and drainage improvements. 
(3)  Draft of protective covenants (one (1) copy) whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(Code 1959, § 17-7; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-7-23. - Plats and data for final approval. 
The following shall be provided at the time of the application: 
(1)  Final plat (one (1) original tracing) shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or paper. The scale of the final plat shall be one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Each sheet size shall not exceed twenty-two (22) inches by thirty-four (34) inches. 
(2)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat; it may, however, represent only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to develop and record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these regulations. 
(3)  The final plat shall be labeled "Final Plat" and contain the following information: 
a.  Name of subdivision. 
b.  Graphic scale, north arrow with reference of bearings to magnetic, true or grid north, and date of survey. 
c.  Location of tract (land lot and land district) and acreage. 
d.  All dimensions accurate to the nearest one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest minute. 
e.  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and building line whether curved or straight. This shall include but not be limited to the radium, length of arc, internal angles and tangent distance for the center line of curved streets. 
f.  Exact locations, right-of-way widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat along with street center lines. 
g.  Street intersection angles and street pavement widths. 
h.  Building setback lines with dimensions. 
i.  Blocks lettered alphabetically with lots and sites numbered in numerical order. 
j.  Location, dimensions and purpose of: easements, public service utility rights-of-way lines; areas (other than streets) to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use; and sites to be used for other than single-family residences. 
k.  Location and size of all drainage structures, including catch basins, curbs, gutters, grates and headwalls. 
l.  Location, material and description of all monuments and pins, including street markers. 
m.  Certification that the applicant is the land owner and dedicates streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public use. 
n.  Certification by the appropriate authorities for roads, water, sewers, and health that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives: 
1.  all improvements have been installed in accordance with their requirements; 
2.  a performance bond has been posted in sufficient amount to assure completion of all required improvements; or 
3.  other guarantees of satisfactory completion of required improvements have been accepted with their conditions specified in the certification. 
o.  Space for the approval of the planning commission. 
p.  Space for the acceptance of the mayor and council. 
q.  Protective covenants, if any, shall be shown on the plat. 
r.  Other data may be required by the Forest Park Planning Commission in the enforcement of these regulations. This data may include final engineering design reports on proposed improvements, or other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications necessary to support the intent of these regulations. 
SAMPLE CERTIFICATIONS 
ENGINEER'S OR SURVEYOR'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
By:  ____________  ____________ 
Registered C.E. No. ____________  Registered Ga. Land Surveyor No. _____ 
OWNER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT: 
STATE OF GEORGIA  CLAYTON COUNTY  CITY OF FOREST PARK 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown for the purposes and considerations therein expressed. 
Owner _____ 
APPROVAL OF THE FOREST PARK PLANNING COMMISSION 
This plat has been submitted to and considered by the Forest Park Planning Commission and is approved by such Commission subject to the approval of the city council. 
Dated this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
THE FOREST PARK PLANNING COMMISSION 
By _____ , Chairman 
By _____ , Secretary 
APPROVAL OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF FOREST PARK, GA. 
This plat having been approved by the Planning Commission and subsequent thereto submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, the same is hereby approved subject to the protective covenants shown thereon. By approving this plat the city does not accept for maintenance any street until same has been constructed in accordance with existing rules, regulations and specifications and a warranty deed delivered and accepted by the city nor does the city accept for maintenance purposes any drainage easement not within the right-of-way of a street deeded to the city. 
Dated this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
By _____ , City Manager 
(Code 1959, § 17-8) 
Secs. 8-7-24—8-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 8-7-31. - Streets. 
(a)  The arrangement, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan of the city and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Where such is not shown in the major thoroughfare plan for the city, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(c)  Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged and shall not be dead end streets when possible to avoid. 
(d)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, double frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service drives, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(f)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the city. 
(g)  Street jogs with center line offsets of less than two hundred (200) feet shall be avoided. 
(h)  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practical. 
(i)  At each street intersection the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve of radius "R", varying with the interior angle as specified in the following table, unless sufficient data is presented to show that strict adherence to this requirement is impracticable due to topographical or engineering considerations. 
TABLE OF INTERSECTION RETURNS 

 
(j)  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the major thoroughfare plan for the city and where not shown therein shall be no less than as follows: 

 
(k)  Dedication of half-streets will not be permitted. Where a dedicated or plotted half-street exists adjacent to a tract being subdivided the other half will be dedicated unless declared unnecessary by the city. 
(1)  A permanent dead end street, not to exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length, may be laid out. There shall be provided a turnaround, at the closed end, with a radius of not less than seventy-five (75) feet to center line. Residential streets without landscaped islands may be provided with a radius of not less than thirty-five (35) feet to the center line. Hammerhead turnarounds may be built in lieu of circular turnarounds in residential neighborhoods, in accordance with the designs provided in Figure X. Final approval of hammerhead designs will be determined in accordance with the recommendations of the city manager or his/her designee. 
Figure X: Hammerhead Turnaround Design Specifications 

(m)  Alleys shall not be permitted in single-family residential areas. 
(n)  Service drives may be required in multiple dwelling, commercial and industrial developments and shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. 
(o)  Street names shall not be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in the Standard Metropolitan Area of Atlanta. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning board. 
(p)  Street grades: 
(1)  Maximum street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following maximum grades with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 

 
(2)  Minimum street grade. No grade shall be less than one (1) percent. 
(q)  Sight distance: 
(1)  Horizontal alignment, two hundred (200) lineal feet minimum site distance. 
(2)  Vertical alignment, three (3) to four (4) percent one hundred (100) feet maximum rate of change in grade. 
(Code 1959, § 17-9; Ord. No. 16-02, §§ 3, 4, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 8-7-32. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks may be required on both sides of every street in a subdivision. 
(Code 1959, § 17-10) 
Sec. 8-7-33. - Easements. 
When easements are deemed necessary by the planning commission, they shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width. 
(Code 1959, § 17-11) 
Sec. 8-7-34. - Blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Easements, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(c)  The desirable maximum block length which is one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet and the desirable minimum length which is six hundred (600) feet. 
(Code 1959, § 17-12) 
Sec. 8-7-35. - Lots. 
(a)  Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance if such zoning requirements are more stringent, otherwise minimum lot dimensions shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lots shall have a minimum width of seventy (70) feet, measured at the building line, and a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  In case of unusual soil conditions or other physical factors that may threaten the health and safety of the neighborhood, the mayor and council may vary minimum building setback and lot areas on recommendation of the planning commission. 
(b)  Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit appropriate building orientation. 
(c)  Each lot shall front and provide vehicular access upon a public street. Such street shall be not less than fifty (50) feet in width. 
(d)  Double frontage shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen reservation of at least ten (10) feet and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(e)  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be right angles to straight streets and radial to curved street lines. 
(Code 1959, § 17-13) 
Sec. 8-7-36. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a)  Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in a master plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the city and planning commission shall require the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision in those cases in which the planning commission deems such requirements to be reasonable. 
(b)  Where deemed essential by the planning commission, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision and especially in large scale neighborhood unit development not anticipated in the master plan, the planning commission shall require the dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, extent and location suitable to the needs created by such development for schools, parks and other neighborhood purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 17-14) 
Sec. 8-7-37. - Suitability of the land. 
(a)  The planning commission shall not approve a subdivision if from adequate investigation it has been determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for development purposes of the kind proposed. 
(b)  Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be plotted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(Code 1959, § 17-15) 
Secs. 8-7-38—8-7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED 

Sec. 8-7-51. - Streets and roads. 
Street improvements shall be provided in each subdivision as prescribed below: 
(1)  All residential minor streets shall be improved in accordance with the specifications for street paving of the city. 
(2)  All other streets shall be improved in accordance with the recommendations of the city engineer as approved by the mayor and council. 
(3)  No residential minor street shall be constructed with a pavement width of less than twenty-two (22) feet or twenty-six (26) feet measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
(4)  All other residential streets shall have a pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet or twenty-eight (28) feet measured from back of curb to back of curb. All other roadway widths to be determined by the number of travel lanes and existing conditions. Final approval of roadway widths are to be determined in accordance with the recommendations of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 17-16; Ord. No. 16-02, § 5, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 8-7-52. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalk improvements will be provided in direct accordance with the specifications for sidewalk paving of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 17-17) 
Sec. 8-7-53. - Curbing. 
Curbs shall be provided in direct accordance with the specifications for curbs of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 17-18) 
Sec. 8-7-54. - Sanitary facilities. 
(a)  When it is determined either by law or the appropriate city officials that public sanitary sewers are within reasonable access of the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot therein. 
(b)  When in the opinion of the appropriate city officials a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, proper provision shall be made for the disposal of sanitary waste in accordance with standards prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Easements for future sanitary outfall shall be shown on all final plats, in accordance with the requirements of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 17-19) 
Sec. 8-7-55. - Drainage. 
As determined by the city manager or his designee, or the mayor and council, the developer shall provide for all necessary facilities, including underground pipe, inlets, catch basins or open drainage ditches, for adequate disposal of surface water to maintain any natural drainage course and to establish easements for future sewers and outfalls, if needed. Other improvements, such as widening, deepening, relocating, clearing, protecting or otherwise improving stream beds and other watercourses, for control of mosquitoes and public health nuisances shall be provided by the developer in accordance with standards and requirements of the county health department or any other such improvements required by the city manager or his designee. Storm sewers shall be installed before final plat is approved. 
(Code 1959, § 17-22; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-7-56. - Reference monuments. 
Permanent reference monuments shall be of stone or concrete at least twenty-four (24) inches long by six (6) inches square and shall be set to approved grades where practicable. Such monuments shall be set at block corner, at all points of curvature, all points of tangent, and such other points as may be required by the city manager or his designee with the approval of the mayor and council. Lot corners shall be one-half-inch iron rods thirty (30) inches long with top set flush with the ground. 
(Code 1959, § 17-21; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-7-57. - Plant material. 
All trees shall be a minimum distance from the center line of a street as indicated below: 

 
(Code 1959, § 17-22) 
Sec. 8-7-58. - Water impoundments. 
Any water impounding structure shall be constructed so as to minimize mosquito breeding and other nuisance hazards. The outside toe of any dam to be constructed within the city shall require the approval of the city manager or his designee and health officer. 
(Code 1959, § 17-23; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Secs. 8-7-59—8-7-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 8-7-71. - Conditions under which variances may be permitted. 
In applying the subdivision regulations, the following variances may be granted under the following conditions: 
(1)  Hardship. Where the planning commission and the mayor and council find that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the master plan or these regulations. 
(2)  Large scale development. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a neighborhood which, in the judgment of the planning commission and the mayor and council, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(Code 1959, § 17-24) 
Sec. 8-7-72. - Conditions imposed. 
In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission and the mayor and council may require such conditions as will, in their judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1959, § 17-26) 
Sec. 8-7-73. - Applications. 
An application for variance shall be made in two (2) copies and shall specify the conditions and the extent of the variance sought and shall be accompanied by all material, designs, data and details as required for preliminary and final subdivision plats. The application shall be filed with the city clerk fourteen (14) days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. 
(Code 1959, § 17-27) 
Secs. 8-7-74—8-7-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE G. - FEES 

Sec. 8-7-81. - Fee schedule. 
At the time of application or filing the following fees shall be paid to the city clerk: 
(1)  Preliminary plat—$2.00/lot up to 50 lots 
$1.00/lot thereafter 
(2)  Extension of preliminary plat—$5.00 each 
(3)  Final plat—$10.00 each 
(Code 1959, § 17-28) 
Secs. 8-7-82—8-7-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 8-7-91. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article include the following: 
(1)  To provide one or more residential zoning districts that permit flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(2)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(3)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(4)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 8-7-92. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available as a use by right in all residential zoning districts, including [list of applicable zoning districts]. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two (2) methods, at the discretion of the City of Forest Park: 
(1)  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; and 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 8-7-93. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan includes the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 8-7-94; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 8-7-94, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 8-7-94, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and Title 8, Chapter 7, unless such requirement is in conflict with this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 8-7-94. - Open space. 
(a)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purpose of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Riparian zones of at least seventy-five-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
a.  Important historic sites. 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one (1) acre contiguous area. 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight (8) inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line. 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area. 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the forty (40) percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the open space shall consist of land that is suitable for building. 
(6)  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(7)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. 
(1)  Uses of open space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space. 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
g.  Nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices; 
h.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space and facilities located thereon. If the designated owner is a homeowners association, then membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If the owner is a homeowners' association, then the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner or a designee approved by the city, or if a homeowners' association is designated under this article, the homeowner's association. 
(2)  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan to the city for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan must be approved by the governing body of the city; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, then the City of Forest Park may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, the homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one (1) of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out is functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Forest Park, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Forest Park shall be included in the easement. 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity approved by the city's governing body. 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city's governing body. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(g)  Tax assessment of open space. Once a legal instrument for permanent protection has been placed upon the open space, then the Clayton County Board of Tax Assessors shall be requested by the city to reassess the open space at a lower value to reflect its more limited use. If the open space is used purely for passive recreational purposes and the terms of the instrument for permanent protection effectively prohibit any type of significant economic activity, then the assessment shall be valued by the board of tax assessors accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
ARTICLE I. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

Sec. 8-7-95. - Violations and penalty; remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  In any case in which any land is used in violation of the regulations or amendments thereto adopted by the mayor and council, the legal counsel of the city or any owner of real estate therein may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement, or any appropriate actions, proceeding or proceedings, to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
(Code 1959, § 17-29; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
CHAPTER 8. - ZONING[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to zone, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; zoning procedures act, O.C.G.A., § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-8-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Forest Park, Georgia." 
(Code 1959, § 24-1) 
Sec. 8-8-2. - Interpretations and definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
(1)  The words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
(5)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(6)  The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(7)  The word "map" or "zoning, map" means the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Forest Park, Georgia." 
(8)  Accessory use or building. A use, building, or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily subordinate to the principal use or building. 
(8.1)  Automobile or truck repair shops. Automobile or truck repair services which generally require substantial replacement/repair of major components of an automobile or truck. Examples of substantial automobile services include, but are not limited to, transmission repair or replacement, paint and body work, engine overhaul and radiator repair. This use is to be distinguished from an automobile service center which shall be automobile maintenance service which generally only requires very brief adjustment or replacement of minor components. Automobile or truck repair shops must be located on a multi-lane arterial road. 
(9)  Automobile service center. An establishment where only minor maintenance or repair services are rendered provided that all servicing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building and that there is no storage of automobiles. An automobile service center is not a gasoline station or repair garage, nor a body shop. Examples of minor automobile services include, but are not limited to, tune up, oil change, lubrication, brake repair, tire sales and installation, air-conditioning system servicing, muffler or shock absorber replacement and wheel alignment. Automobile service centers must be located on a multi-lane arterial road. 
(10)  Boarding house or rooming house shall mean any dwelling in which three (3) or more persons, and up to fifteen (15), are housed for hire for periods of one (1) week or more. Provision for meals may also be made, so long as cooking is done in a central kitchen and not in individual rooms or suites. 
(11)  Building . Any structure attached to the ground and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels; as well as any structure, anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location to the ground. Among other things, buildings and structures include mobile homes, wells, fences, billboards, signs, earth receiving stations; satellite receiving apparatus and antennas. 
(12)  Center line of street . The line surveyed and monumented by Clayton County or the Georgia Department of Transportation, or if a center line has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
(13)  Business sign . An attached or free-standing structure on which is announced the business use of the premises and/or the name of the operator of the business. 
(14)  Dwelling unit . A structure or portion of any structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a family with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, motels, boarding houses or like uses. 
(15)  Dwelling, single-family or residence, single-family. A structure containing not more than one (1) dwelling unit designed for residential use which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
a.  Minimum width in excess of sixteen (16) feet; 
b.  Minimum square footage as required by the regulation of the zone in which it is located; 
c.  The roof shall have a pitch equal to or greater than the average pitch on the roofs of all single-family dwellings within a one thousand-foot radius, and in no case shall the roof have a pitch of less than three (3) inches in rise to twelve (12) feet in run. The roof shall have a surface of wood, shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles; slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the building inspector; 
d.  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance; 
e.  The unit must be attached to a permanent foundation as approved by the building inspector; 
f.  The unit must be constructed according to the standards established by the state minimum standard codes, as amended from time to time, the Standard Building Code, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, or the State of Georgia Industrialized Buildings Act; 
g.  The unit must have an overhang for soffit equal to or greater than the average overhang for soffit on the single-family dwellings within a one thousand-foot radius, and in no case shall the overhang for soffit be less than sixteen (16) inches, to insure adequate ventilation; 
h.  Site built homes, manufactured homes and modular homes, in order to qualify as a dwelling, single-family, shall be compared to other housing within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed site. The approval for placement shall be granted by the building inspector by issuance of a building permit upon the finding that the proposed development is substantially similar in size, siding material, roof material, foundation, the inclusion of carports, garages, porches, patios and similar features, and the general aesthetic appearance to existing or proposed development; 
i.  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed; 
j.  At each exit door there must be a landing that is a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches by thirty-six (36) inches; 
k.  The zoning board of appeals may approve variances from one (1) or more of the developmental or architectural standards provided herein on the basis of a finding that materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. 
(16)  The word family shall mean two (2) or more persons residing in a single dwelling unit where all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption up to the second degree of consanguinity, or by foster care. For purposes of this definition, the second degree of consanguinity means only the following: husbands and wives, parents and children, grandparents and grandchildren, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, nephews and nieces, and first cousins. Also for the purposes of this definition, a person shall be considered to reside in a dwelling unit if he or she stays overnight in a dwelling unit for more than thirty (30) days in a ninety-day period. The term "family" does not include an organization or institutional group, such as (but not limited to), boarding houses or rooming houses, shelters for the homeless, day care centers, personal care homes, hotels, motels, hospices, hospitals, and nursing homes. 
(17)  Fence, privacy . A fence or wall, or a strip of evergreen plantings, or any combination thereof, established and permanently maintained of sufficient density and height to completely obscure viewing. Evergreen plantings shall be installed at the full height specified by the provisions of this chapter. The general appearance, materials, form, color, surface and other visual features of the buffer shall be that which would normally be considered to be compatible with the surroundings and shall not be of an unusual or offensive nature. 
(17a)  Fireworks . Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. The definition of fireworks shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and NFPA 1124 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
(17b)  Fireworks, consumer. Any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. The definition of consumer fireworks shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and NFPA 1124 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
(17c)  Consumer fireworks retail sales facility. A permanent or temporary building or structure, consumer fireworks retail sales stand, tent, canopy, or membrane structure that is used primarily for the retail display and sale of consumer fireworks to the public. The definition of consumer fireworks retail sales facility shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and NFPA 1124 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
(17d)  Consumer fireworks retail sales stand. A permanent or temporary building or structure that has a floor area of not greater than eight hundred (800) feet 2 (74m 2 ), other than tents, canopies, or membrane structures, that is used primarily for the retail display and sale of consumer fireworks to the public. The definition of consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and NFPA 1124 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
(17e)  Explosives . Any chemical compound or other substance or mechanical system intended for the purpose of producing an explosion or containing oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions or quantities that ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by detonator may produce an explosion capable of causing injury to persons or damage to property. 
(17f)  NFPA 1124. National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition. 
(18)  Front yard . An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(19)  Front lot line . The lot line coincident with a street line. 
(20)  Home occupation . Any occupation or activity carried on by a member of the family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is no group instruction, assembly or activity; there is no commodity sold upon the premises; and no mechanical equipment is used other than customarily used for domestic purposes. Home occupation may include the use of premises by a clergyman or other professional person, but shall not include a physician, surgeon, or dentist. 
(21)  Hotel . A building containing a minimum of twenty (20) units in which lodging or boarding are provided and offered to the public for compensation. A building shall not be a hotel if more than twenty (20) percent of the total units of the hotel are efficiency hotel units. Ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 
(22)  Hotel, efficiency . A building which otherwise meets the definition of hotel, but in which cooking facilities are included in more than twenty (20) percent of the total units. For the purposes of this section, "cooking facilities" shall mean any room in which equipment is placed or allowed which facilitates the heating and refrigeration of food. 
(23)  Lot . A portion or parcel of land devoted to a single principal use, or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to same. 
(24)  Lot width . The distance between the side boundaries of the lot measured at the front building line. 
(25)  Major street . A street or highway designated as a major street on the zoning map of the city. 
(25a)  Manufactured home . A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq. The definition of the date of adoption of this section is as follows: 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a verification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under this title. 
(25b)  Mobile home . A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein, and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
(25c)  Modular home . A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(26)  Motel . A building containing a minimum of twenty (20) units in which lodging or boarding are provided and offered to the public for compensation. A building shall not be a motel if more than twenty (20) percent of the total units of the motel are efficiency motel units. Ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally to the outside of the building. 
(27)  Motel, efficiency . A building which otherwise meets the definition of motel, but in which cooking facilities are included in more than twenty (20) percent of the total units. For the purposes of this section, "cooking facilities" shall mean any room in which equipment is placed or allowed which facilities the heating and refrigeration of food. 
(28)  New development . A development upon a previously unimproved or undeveloped tract of land, or a tract of land that has had previously existing structures demolished. 
(29)  Nonconforming use or structure . Any building, structure, or use of land lawful at the time of passage of this chapter which does not conform, after the passage or amendment of this chapter, with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(30)  Nursing home . Any dwelling in which aged, chronically ill or incurable persons are housed and furnished with meals and nursing care for compensation. 
(31)  Outdoor advertising sign . An attached or freestanding structure conveying some information, knowledge, or idea to the public. 
(32)  Planted buffer strip . A screen of shrubs, trees, or similar plants at least eight (8) feet high and dense enough to preclude uninterrupted vision from one (1) side to the other. 
(33)  Rear yard . An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building, or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(34)  Side yard . An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building located between the side of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(35)  Street right-of-way line . The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
(36)  Structure . Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: Site-built buildings, industrialized buildings, modular homes, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes and fallout shelters. 
(Ord. No. 14-18, § 1, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 15-11, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-18, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 2014, repealed former § 8-8-2 and enacted a new § 8-8-2 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 8-8-3. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, or require a lower height of buildings or smaller number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Code 1959, § 24-3) 
Secs. 8-8-4—8-8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8-8-11. - Number designated. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into fifteen (15) districts designated as follows: 
(1)  R-80 Residential District; 
(2)  R-95 Residential District; 
(3)  RM-85 Residential District; 
(4)  RM-100 Apartment Dwelling District; 
(5)  RM-125 Condominium-Townhouse District; 
(6)  C-1 General Commercial District; 
(7)  C-2 Central Commercial District; 
(8)  C-3 Institutional-Commercial District; 
(9)  LI Light Industrial District; 
(10)  HI Heavy Industrial District; 
(11)  PI Planned Industrial District; 
(12)  ADO Architectural Design Overlay District; 
(13)  PUD Planned Unit Development District; 
(14)  GZ Gillem Zoning District; and 
(15)  X-1 Railroad District. 
(Ord. No. 14-18, § 2, 8-18-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-18, § 2, adopted Aug. 18, 2014, repealed former § 8-8-11 and enacted a new § 8-8-11 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 8-8-12. - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map City of Forest Park, Clayton County, Georgia," dated September 16, 1991 and certified by the city clerk on that date. Said map is hereby made a part of this chapter; it shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 24-6; Ord. No. 91-016, § 1, 9-16-91) 
Sec. 8-8-13. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the zoning map, such change shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 24-7) 
Sec. 8-8-14. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highway, or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
(4)  Where a district boundary line as appearing on the zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of enactment of this chapter, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such a lot more than thirty-five (35) feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(Code 1959, § 24-8) 
Sec. 8-8-15. - Measurement of distance requirements. 
All distance limitations required by the Forest Park Zoning Ordinance shall be measured in all cases by a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the proposed use being measured to the closest point of the property line of the site occupied by the other use from which the measurement is being taken. In those cases involving a single parcel of property within which more than one use, or various uses, are permitted and in use (such as a strip mall), such distance limitations shall be measured by a straight line from the closest point of the building space rented or in use for the proposed use to the closest point of the building space rented or in use and occupied by the other use from which the measurement is taken. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
Secs. 8-8-16—8-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-8-21. - Use. 
No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1959, § 24-9) 
Sec. 8-8-22. - Height and density. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered to: 
(1)  Exceed the height limits; 
(2)  House a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or 
(3)  Have narrower or smaller front or side yards than are herein required. 
(Code 1959, § 24-10) 
Sec. 8-8-23. - Lot size and occupancy. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one (1) or more adjacent lots in the same ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards or lot area per family or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 24-11) 
Sec. 8-8-24. - Yards and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or other open space or the off-street parking or loading space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of the yard or off-street parking or loading space required for another building. 
(Code 1959, § 24-12) 
Sec. 8-8-25. - Number of buildings per lot. 
Within any district, more than one (1) building (housing a permitted use together with accessory buildings) may be constructed upon any tract provided that yard and other requirements are complied with for each structure as though each structure were on an individual lot. 
(Code 1959, § 24-13) 
Sec. 8-8-26. - Public street frontage. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least twenty-five (25) feet on a public street. 
(Code 1959, § 24-14) 
Sec. 8-8-27. - Mobile homes. 
Mobile homes are prohibited within the city, except as a special use in all residential zoning districts, if approved by the city council based upon the standards contained in section 8-8-2(15), for security purposes, for developments under construction, or for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 92-024, § 6, 11-2-92) 
Secs. 8-8-28—8-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8-8-31. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Intent. Within the districts established by this part or amendments that may have previously been adopted or may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before the ordinance was passed or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of the present or future amendments. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the term "nonconforming use" shall mean a lawful lot, structure, use of land and structure that existed at the time of the adoption of "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Forest Park, Georgia" (Title 8, Chapter 8 of the "Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Park, Georgia") (hereinafter referred to as the "zoning ordinance"), or at the time of the adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance, that no longer conforms to those regulations and restrictions contained in the zoning ordinance because of the adoption of the zoning ordinance or the adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  It is the intent of this chapter to require removal or cessation of certain of these nonconformities, and to permit others to continue until they are otherwise removed or ceased. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district, nor enlarged upon, extended or expanded except as herein provided. 
(3)  Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. Nonconforming use of land, structures, or land and structures in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by addition of other uses, of a nature generally prohibited in the district involved. 
(4)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots of record. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory building may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this section, notwithstanding limitation imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lots fail to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements, including but not limited to square footage, other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lots shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this section, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area less than the requirements stated in this chapter. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only). Where at the time of passage of this chapter or amendment thereto lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this part and where such use involves no permanent individual structure with a fixed foundation and with a replacement cost exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the use may be continued for a period of not more than two (2) years after the effective date, of this chapter or amendment thereto creating nonconforming status so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use of land or land with minor structures shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part into any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(5)  At the end of the above-prescribed two-year period, the nonconforming use of land shall cease and the nonconforming use of any minor structures as defined above shall cease, and the land or land and minor structures in combination shall thereafter be used for purposes permitted in the district in which they are located. 
(d)  Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reasons of restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it is and remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; but any structure or portion thereof may be enlarged or altered if the degree of its nonconformity remains the same or is decreased, provided such structure is used for a permitted use. 
(2)  a.  One- and two-family residential structures: Should such nonconforming one- or two-family residential structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed, by any means, in whole or in part, it may be reconstructed in the same location and upon its previous foundation and to its previously existing height, provided said reconstruction does not increase the previously existing degree of nonconformity and further provided that said reconstructed structure is used for a permitted use. 
b.  All other structures: Should such nonconforming multifamily residential, commercial or industrial structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Accessory structures: When nonconforming, shall be subject to the same provisions as govern the primary structure to which they are an accessory. 
(3)  Moving: A nonconforming structure may be moved on its own lot only if the administrative official determines that such movement reduces the degree of nonconformity to the maximum extent reasonably feasible, or eliminates such nonconformity, but shall in no case be moved on its own lot in such a manner as to increase the degree of nonconformity. 
Where a nonconforming structure is moved off its previous lot, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared unsafe by any public official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(4)  In cases where land is taken for public purposes from legal lots of record at the time of such taking in such manner as to reduce yards previously provided in relation to a portion of a structure below yard requirements generally applicable within the district, the portion of the structure involved shall be construed to be nonconforming. 
(5)  Removal of abandoned antennas. Any antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of one (1) year shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the department of planning, building and zoning about such abandonment. If such antenna is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the city may, in the manner provided in sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17 of the Official Code of Georgia, remove such antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single antenna, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the antenna. 
(e)  Nonconforming uses or major structures or of major structures and premises in combination. 
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, or of structures and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended or moved, except in changing the use of a structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
a.  Intent: Although the general intent not to permit expansion of nonconformities set forth in subsection 8-8-31(a) is reaffirmed, where indefinite continuation of nonconforming uses in major permanent structures with fixed foundations and with replacement costs exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) seems assured, it is hereby found to be adverse to the general public interest to require that such uses remain in mislocated buildings, or to prohibit enclosure of existing outdoor sales, service or storage operations. 
b.  Special exception authorized: The board of zoning appeals may, therefore, by special exception, permit enlargement, extension or moving on the same lot, subject to general requirements and procedures applying to special exceptions and with the following special requirements, limitations and considerations. No such special exception shall be issued on locations and for classes of cases indicated in subsection 8-8-31(c). 
c.  Materials to be submitted with application: Applications shall be accompanied by site and building plans, photographs of the property and of surrounding property, evidence of continued use, extent of present outdoor sales, service or storage operations, and such other material as may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case. During processing of the application, additional information reasonably necessary to the making of required findings may be called for and shall be provided before decisions are made. 
d.  Limitations on extension or expansion: Floor area shall not be increased except to provide for interior sales, service or storage operations replacing existing outdoor sales, storage or service; and outdoor sales, storage or service thus replaced shall not be resumed in the future. In no case shall floor area be increased by more than thirty-five (35) percent of that existing at the time the use became nonconforming. No floor area increase shall be permitted which is likely to have the effect of intensifying the nonconforming use by increasing traffic, number of customers or employees, or other means. At nonconforming service stations, no floor area increase shall be permitted which would allow total floor area to exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
e.  Screening: Where the lot adjoins or abuts a lot in a residential district directly or with an intervening alley (but not with an intervening street), a solid screening fence or wall not less than six (6) nor more than eight (8) feet in height, or approved vegetative screening, shall be provided and maintained in good condition and appearance; except that such screening shall not be located in required yards adjacent to streets or where it could interfere with visibility at intersections or traffic ways. 
f.  Access, parking and service area: Before such special exceptions are granted, the board shall seek the advice of appropriate city agencies or officials concerning adequacy of design, scale, location and improvement of existing access and parking and service areas, and shall require correction of any deficiencies it finds to be of substantial significance as a condition to the granting of the exception. 
g.  Signs, lighting of premises: Where such special exceptions are granted, limitations appropriate to the nature of the surrounding area shall be placed on the number, size, character and location of signs and the nature of lighting of signs and premises. Such limitations may require removal, redesign and/or relocation of existing signs and lighting. 
h.  Hours and conditions of operation: As a condition to the granting of the special exception, the board may establish such limitations on hours and conditions of operations as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the safety, security, comfort and tranquility of the area, and particularly of nearby residential uses. 
i.  Findings required: No such special exception shall be granted except upon findings by the board that the nonconforming use has continued and is likely to continue indefinitely, and that the actions proposed in the application as submitted, and with the conditions and safeguards attached and accepted by the applicant, would result in substantial reduction of existing adverse effects on surrounding property and/or in other substantial public advantage. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  Changes in nonconforming uses of major structures or of major structures and uses in combination shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  To any use conforming to the regulations of the district in which located; or 
b.  To any use permitted in the most restrictive district in which such original nonconforming use is first permitted by this part, subject to the requirements and regulations concerning such use in the district; provided however, that no nonconforming nonresidential use shall be changed to a residential use in any district in which similar residential uses are not permitted. 
(4)  Any major structure, or major structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the districting in which it located; and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(5)  When a nonconforming use of a major structure or major structure and premises in combination is discontinued for a continuous period of one (1) year, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Such restriction shall not apply if such cessation is as a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the premises. 
(6)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a major structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. "Destruction," for the purpose of this subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of more than sixty (60) percent of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
a.  Where damage is to an extent sixty (60) percent or less of replacement cost, such structures may be restored to the same or lesser size in the same location; provided however, that restoration shall begin within twelve (12) months of damage and be diligently carried to completion; and nonconforming use may be resumed and continued as before, or on a lesser scale, but shall not be enlarged or intensified. Unless restoration is so initiated and completed, the use shall terminate and not be resumed. Remodeling shall not be deemed removal or destruction. Destruction made necessary by repairs, maintenance and/or remodeling shall not be construed to be removal or destruction. 
b.  Special exception for replacement or reconstruction of destroyed major structures containing nonconforming uses: Where a major structure containing a nonconforming use is destroyed to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of replacement cost at time of destruction, the board of zoning appeals may, by special exception, permit its replacement or reconstruction in whole or in part upon making all of the following findings: 
(i)  That the cause of destruction was not the deliberate action of the owner or occupant of the structure or their agents; and 
(ii)  That nothing contained in the provisions of subsection 8-8-31(c) required termination of such nonconforming use; and 
(iii)  That the board finds substantial public advantage in continuance of the nonconforming use; and 
(iv)  That the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly; and 
(v)  That replacement or reconstruction in the manner proposed, with related actions imposed in conditions and safeguards by the board, would reduce any previous adverse effects of the use on neighboring properties. 
(f)  Uses permissible by special use permit or special exception not to be construed as nonconforming uses. Except as otherwise provided herein, any use which is permissible by special use permit or special exception in a district shall not be considered a nonconforming use in the district if in lawful existence prior to passage of the requirement for such special permit or special exception, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. So long as such use remains the same, structural alterations within the general limits of the regulations of this chapter shall be permitted on the premises of such use; but any enlargement, extension, movement or replacement of such use, with respect to land or structures, shall require a special exception or special use permit, as appropriate to the case, as though it were a new use. 
(Code 1959, § 24-15; Ord. No. 86-017, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 93-003, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 05-42, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 1-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-8-32. - Off-street automobile parking. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established. The number of automobile parking spaces provided shall be at least as great as the number specified below for various uses. Each space shall be at least one hundred ninety (190) square feet in area and shall have vehicular access to a public street. Turning space shall be provided (except for single-family residences) so that no vehicle will be required to back into the street. The number of parking spaces required under this subsection may be reduced by no more than ten (10) percent for any lot within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public bus stop or other mass transit location. 
(1)  Automobile repair garages . One (1) space for each regular employee plus one (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area used for repair work. 
(2)  Gasoline filling stations . Three (3) spaces for each grease rack or similar facility plus two (2) spaces for each gas pump attendant. 
(3)  Hospitals and nursing homes or similar institutions . One (1) space for each two (2) beds plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one (1) space for each three (3) employees. 
(4)  Lodges and clubs . One (1) space for each ten (10) members. 
(5)  Offices . One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor space. 
(6)  Places of amusement or assembly without fixed seats . One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space devoted to patron use. 
(7)  Places of public assembly . One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the principal assembly room. 
(8)  Residential . At least one (1) space for each dwelling unit. 
(9)  Restaurants . One (1) space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of floor area devoted to patron use, plus one (1) space for each four (4) employees. 
(10)  Retail business . One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of sales space. 
(11)  Rooming and boarding houses . One (1) space for each two (2) bedrooms. 
(12)  Tourist courts, hotels, and motels . One (1) space for each accommodation. 
(13)  Wholesale business . One (1) space for each two (2) employees. 
(b)  The owners of property either previously developed or being developed which would be covered by subsection (a) of this section may petition the mayor and council for the right to expand the existing or proposed development or to develop potential out parcels onto property that would otherwise be required for parking under the requirements of subsection (a) hereof. Such petitions would be considered by the mayor and council applying the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether or not the parking spaces presently existing are underutilized or in the case of a new development, whether or not the parking spaces which would otherwise be required by subsection (a) are likely to be underutilized; 
(2)  Whether or not the parking requirements for the total development are sufficient; and 
(3)  In the case of an existing development, what renovations and/or rehabilitation will be done to the existing development, in order to enhance the viability of the property. 
(c)  A petition filed under subsection (b) hereof shall be in a form as may be developed by the department of planning, building and zoning of the city, shall be accompanied by a landscape plan for the entire development including parking facilities; a written acknowledgment from the applicant that over-flow parking onto city streets or rights-of-way or adjacent properties from the development will not be permitted; and with regard to additions to existing developments or to out-parcels adjacent to existing developments shall include a plan for the renovation or rehabilitation of the existing development. 
(d)  Shared parking arrangements may be made, in which case the number of parking space required under subsection (a) may be reduced by no more than ten (10) percent. Any off-street automobile parking area under a shared parking arrangement shall include one (1) two-sided bicycle rack. Shared parking arrangements may be used for out parcels. Any shared parking arrangement involving two (2) or more lots must be committed to writing in an instrument acceptable to the department of planning, building and zoning and approved by the owners of each of the affected lots or uses. A copy of the instrument shall be filed for record with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(e)  An applicant under this chapter shall be allowed: (1) an additional 0.5 square feet of floor area above the maximum allowed floor area ratio for every one (1) square foot of structured parking provided that is a minimum of three (3) stories in height; or (2) an additional three hundred fifty (350) square feet of building space for each parking space in a parking structure which is a minimum of three (3) stories in height that will be available for public use. The applicant shall meet the other requirements of the development standards for the base zone in which the subject of the application is to be located. 
(Code 1959, § 24-16; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 05-43, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 16-02, § 6, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 8-8-33. - Location of parking space on other property. 
If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property provided such property lies within four hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Code 1959, § 24-17) 
Sec. 8-8-34. - Extension of parking space into a residential district. 
Required parking space may extend up to one hundred twenty (120) feet into a residential zoning district, provided that: 
(1)  the parking space adjoins a commercial or industrial district; 
(2)  has its only access to or fronts upon the same street as the property in the commercial or industrial district for which it provides the required parking space; and 
(3)  is visually separated from abutting properties in the adjoining residential district by suitable screening devices. 
(Code 1959, § 24-18) 
Sec. 8-8-35. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
(a)  Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. 
(b)  Minimum loading and unloading space required: 
(1)  Retail business. One (1) space of three hundred (300) square feet for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and industry. One (1) space of five hundred (500) square feet for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one time. 
(Code 1959, § 24-19) 
Sec. 8-8-36. - Vision clearance. 
(a)  In all use districts except the C-1 General Commercial District, no fence, wall; shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three (3) feet and fifteen (15) feet shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(b)  No fence, wall or other similar obstruction to vision shall be constructed or erected to a height in excess of fifteen (15) feet within any use district, except that such structures may be erected in excess of fifteen (15) feet in height within the ADO district upon approval by the ADR board and may be erected in excess of fifteen (15) feet in height for the purpose of screening junk yards under section 8-2-95 upon approval of the ADR board where such increased height is necessary to effectively screen the use of the property. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section, or any other ordinance of the city, no fence, wall, or other obstruction to vision shall be constructed or erected to a height in excess of eight (8) feet within the following residential use districts: R-80, R-95, RM-85, RM-100 and RM-125. 
(Code 1959, § 24-20; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 93-011, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 6-6-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-004 added subsection (b) to the above section. Ord. No. 93-011 amended subsection (b) of the above section. 
Sec. 8-8-37. - Accessory use or structure restrictions. 
(a)  Any person desiring to install or construct an accessory use or structure shall first submit to the building inspector a plan or sketch of such accessory use or structure as same is to be located on a zoned lot. 
(b)  Prior to construction of said accessory use or structure, a permit must be purchased from the building inspector before installation of any satellite receiving apparatus, earth receiving station, antenna, or any other structure as hereinabove defined. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, accessory uses or structures shall be permitted only in rear yards and shall be set not less than ten (10) feet from any property line. 
(d)  No accessory structure shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory. 
(e)  Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Only one (1) garage for storage of automobiles and one (1) utility building, with the exception of a receiving devices and antennas, shall be permitted on a zoning lot and shall be located in the rear yard of said lot. 
(2)  Said accessory uses or structures shall be set back not less than ten (10) feet from any lot line. 
(3)  An accessory structure or use located on a typical subdivision lot shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet by thirty-two (32) feet without the prior approval of the building inspector. 
(4)  Each lot shall be permitted one (1) receiving device, located in the rear yard only, and one (1) antenna located in the rear yard only or mounted to the rear of the main structure. 
(5)  Accessory structures shall not be used for any type of commercial operation whether permanent, part-time, or as part of a limited home occupation except as otherwise provided for in the code of ordinances. 
(6)  Accessory uses and structures located on property in excess of one (1) acre will not be restricted to size, as long as they meet the building code and the other requirements herein contained. 
(Ord. No. 85-010, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 96-002, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-004 rewrote subsection (c) and deleted subsection (f) concerning existing uses and structures. 
Sec. 8-8-38. - Approval of conditional uses. 
All decisions referred to any decision-making body of the city on "conditional uses" shall be so referred for the exercises of their sound discretion in determining the appropriateness of such conditional uses. In making these determinations, the governing body shall use both those conditions which may be attached to each conditional use and, in addition, those standards of review which are contained in section 8-8-106. 
(Ord. No. 92-014, 5-4-92, § (e)) 
Sec. 8-8-39. - Places of assembly—Minimum distance requirements. 
(a)  As used herein, the term "place of assembly" shall mean and include places for the gathering of members of social, fraternal, and other organizations and clubs, hotels/motels with public conference/meeting rooms, lodges, funeral homes and parlors, churches, temples, synagogues, and other places of worship including attendant educational and recreational buildings; auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums, dance halls, public libraries, clinics, nursing homes, flea markets, railway stations, theaters, including drive-in theaters, and any other place or building wherein a group, assembly, or company of persons gather together (usually, but not always, for a common purpose). 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, no place of assembly shall be permitted to be located in the City of Forest Park within five hundred (500) feet of any other place of assembly. 
(Ord. No. 11-21, § 1, 6-6-2011; Ord. No. 12-19, § 1, 6-18-2012) 
Editor's note— Formerly, Ord. No. 01-06, § 1, adopted June 4, 2001 repealed § 8-8-39 which pertained to special land use permits and derived from Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2000. 
Sec. 8-8-40. - Manufacture of explosives and fireworks prohibited. 
The manufacture of explosives, consumer fireworks, and fireworks is prohibited in all districts. 
(Ord. No. 15-11, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
Secs. 8-8-41—8-8-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - PERMITTED USES BY DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE THEREIN 

Sec. 8-8-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-70, adopted Dec. 20, 2004, deleted § 8-8-50, which pertained to R-60 Cluster Style Single-Family Residential District and derived from Ord. No. 92-0222, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 1992. 
Sec. 8-8-51. - R-80 Residential District. 
(a)  Within any R-80 Residential District of the city, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Accessory uses and customary incidental home occupations. 
(3)  Agriculture, excluding poultry and livestock in violation of portions of this Code. 
(4)  Noncommercial public and semipublic recreation facilities and grounds. 
(5)  Municipal, county, state or federal buildings, or land uses except cemeteries. 
(6)  Signs in accordance with the provisions set forth in the sign ordinance. 
(7)  Railroad lines. 
(8)  Public utility stations such as electrical substations, if such stations are essential to the immediate area and subject to the following conditions: Such uses shall be enclosed within a woven-wire fence not less than eight (8) feet high; such areas shall be suitably landscaped; and the storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Within any R-80 Residential District the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height when used as a residence or forty (40) feet in height when used for nonresidential purposes. 
(2)  Front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard setback from the street centerline on major streets of seventy-five (75) feet and on minor streets of sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Side yard. Side yards at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided on both sides of the main building. 
(4)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of at least thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Lot area per dwelling unit. Every lot shall have an area of not less than eight thousand two hundred (8,200) square feet. However, the requirements of this subparagraph shall not apply to any lot that was platted on a plat recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia, prior to July 16, 1963. In any event, no more than four (4) dwelling units per acre, or four (4) lots per acre is allowed. 
(6)  Floor area. Dwellings shall have at least one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet of floor space exclusive of porches, garages and carports. 
(7)  Lot coverage. Buildings shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the lot. 
(8)  Lot width. The minimum lot width at the building line shall be not less than eighty (80) feet. 
(9)  Structural integrity and design. The structural integrity and design of a new structure shall be comparable to the majority of existing structures within a one thousand-foot radius and exhibit an exterior finishing of like materials. This subparagraph shall not apply to the consideration of a completely new subdivision. The architectural characteristics, design, and exterior finishing materials may differ from existing structures in the area, at the discretion of the developer, and a recommendation by the planning commission and final approval by the governing authority. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Upon applicant to and recommendation by the planning commission that the same be permitted and, after a review and adoption of the findings of the planning commission by the mayor and council, the uses listed below may be permitted as conditional uses in the area zoned R-80: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Nursery schools, kindergartens and day care centers of every nature, kind and description, provided that such uses meet the minimum requirements of all applicable regulatory agencies. 
(3)  Churches, temples and nonprofit public, private and parochial schools; nonprofit fraternal organizations and clubs; hospitals, clinics and nursing homes, including those for the treatment or confinement of those suffering from mental disorder, psychiatric disorder, insanity, epilepsy, drug addiction, or alcoholic addiction. However, for any use described in this subsection, the following must be observed: 
a.  Adequate and paved off-street parking must be provided; 
b.  Adequate ingress and egress to a major street must be assured and even though location on a major street is not required, it must be determined that no substantial traffic problem will be created which will endanger the health, safety, or welfare of residents of the area or those using the facility; 
c.  No building shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line; 
d.  Planted buffer strips at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be maintained along all property lines except those bordering on streets. 
(Ord. No. 04-71, § 1, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 05-40, § 1, 7-5-2005) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-71, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2004, deleted the former § 8-8-51, and enacted a new § 8-8-51 as set out herein. The former § 8-8-51 pertained to R-70 Residential District and derived from Code 1959, § 24-22; Ord. No. 85-005, adopted Aug. 19, 1985; Ord. No. 89-004, adopted Feb. 20, 1989; Ord. No. 96-005, adopted Mar. 18, 1996; Ord. No. 97-010, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1997. 
Sec. 8-8-52. - R-95 Residential District. 
(a)  Within any R-95 Residential District of the city, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Accessory uses and customary incidental home occupations. 
(3)  Agriculture, excluding poultry and livestock in violation of portions of this Code. 
(4)  Noncommercial public and semipublic recreation facilities and grounds. 
(5)  Municipal, county, state or federal buildings, or land uses except cemeteries. 
(6)  Signs in accordance with the provisions set forth in the City of Forest Park sign ordinance. 
(7)  Railroad lines. 
(8)  Public utility stations such as electrical substations, if such stations are essential to the immediate area and subject to the following conditions: Such uses shall be enclosed within a woven-wire fence not less than eight (8) feet high; shall be suitably landscaped; and the storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Within any R-95 Residential District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height when used as a residence or forty (40) feet in height when used for nonresidential purposes. 
(2)  Front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front setback from the street centerline on major streets of seventy-five (75) feet and on minor streets of sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Side yard. Side yards at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided on both sides of the main building. 
(4)  Rear yard. There shall be rear yard with a depth of at least fifty (50) feet. 
(5)  Lot area per dwelling unit. Every lot shall have an area of not less than fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) square feet. (See exceptions and modifications.) 
(6)  Floor area. Dwellings shall have at least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of floor space exclusive of porches, garages, and carports except where there are existing single-family dwellings within a one thousand-foot radius of the proposed premises. If single-family dwelling(s) described herein exist within the radius then the average heated/cooled square footage of the neighboring home or homes shall be taken and the proposed premises shall be built to provide heated/cooled square footage of at least eighty-five (85) percent of the average of the surrounding home(s) within the radius, or a minimum of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of space described herein whichever heated/cooled square footage is greater. 
(7)  Lot coverage. Buildings shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the lot. 
(8)  Lot width. The minimum lot width at the building line shall not be less than ninety-five (95) feet. 
(9)  Structural integrity and design. The structural integrity and design of a new structure shall be comparable to the majority of existing structures within one thousand-foot radius and exhibit an exterior finishing of like materials. This subparagraph shall not apply to the consideration of a completely new subdivision. The architectural characteristics, design, and exterior finishing materials may differ from existing structures in the area, at the discretion of the developer, and a recommendation by the planning commission and final approval by the governing authority. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Upon application to and recommendation by the planning commission that the same be permitted and, after a review and adoption of the findings of the planning commission by the mayor and council, the uses listed below may be permitted in the area zoned R-95: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Nursery schools, kindergartens and day care centers of every nature, kind and description, provided that such uses meet the requirements of all applicable regulatory agencies. 
(3)  Churches, temples and nonprofit public, private and parochial schools; nonprofit fraternal organizations and clubs; hospitals, clinics and nursing homes, including those for the treatment or confinement of those suffering from mental disorder, psychiatric disorder, insanity, epilepsy, drug addiction, or alcoholic addiction. However, for any use described in this subsection, the following must be observed: 
a.  Adequate and paved off-street parking must be provided; 
b.  Adequate ingress and egress to a major street must be assured and even though location on a major street is not required, it must be determined that no substantial traffic problems will be created which will endanger the health, safety, or welfare of residents of the area or those using the facility; 
c.  No building shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line; 
d.  Planted buffer strips at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be maintained along all property lines except those bordering on streets. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2004, deleted the former § 8-8-52, and enacted a new § 8-8-52 as set out herein. The former § 8-8-52 pertained to R-85 Residential District and derived from Code 1959, § 24-21; Ord. No. 85-005, adopted Aug. 19, 1985; Ord. No. 87-001, adopted Mar. 2, 1987; Ord. No. 89-004, adopted Feb. 20, 1989; Ord. No. 96-005, adopted Mar. 18, 1996; Ord. No. 99-022, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 31, 1999. 
Sec. 8-8-53. - RM-85 Residential District. 
(a)  Within any R-85 Residential District of the city, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Accessory uses and customary incidental home occupations. 
(3)  Agriculture, excluding poultry and livestock in violation of portions of this code. 
(4)  Noncommercial public and semipublic recreation facilities and grounds. 
(5)  Municipal, county, state or federal buildings, or land uses except cemeteries. 
(6)  Signs in accordance with the provisions set forth in the City of Forest Park sign ordinance. 
(7)  Railroad lines. 
(8)  Public utility stations such as electrical substations, if such stations are essential to the immediate area and subject to the following conditions: Such use shall be enclosed within a woven-wire fence not less than eight (8) feet high; shall be suitably landscaped; and the storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(9)  Cemeteries. 
(10)  Nursery schools, kindergartens and day care centers of every nature, kind and description, provided that such uses meet the requirements of all applicable regulatory agencies. 
(11)  Churches, temples and nonprofit public, private and parochial schools; nonprofit fraternal organizations and clubs; hospitals, clinics and nursing homes, including those for the treatment or confinement of those suffering from mental disorder, psychiatric disorder, insanity, epilepsy, drug addiction, or alcoholic addiction. However, for any use described in this subsection, the following must be observed: 
a.  Adequate and paved off-street parking must be provided; 
b.  Adequate ingress and egress to a major street must be assured and even though location on a major street is not required, it must be determined that no substantial traffic problems will be created which will endanger the health, safety or welfare of residents of the area or those using the facility; 
c.  No building shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line; 
d.  Planted buffer strips at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be maintained along all property lines except those bordering on streets. 
(12)  Two-family residences. 
(13)  Multifamily residences. 
(14)  Rooming and boarding houses, tourist homes, provided they are located on a major thoroughfare. 
(b)  Within any RM-85 Residential District the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height. For single-family and duplex construction height limitations are identical to such limitations in R-85 Residential Districts; for multifamily construction, no building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(2)  Front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front setback from the street center line on major streets of seventy-five (75) feet and on minor streets of sixty (60) feet. However, when located on a street or highway having an existing or planned right-of-way of one hundred (100) feet or more, a setback from the street center line adequate to insure a minimum front yard of thirty-five (35) feet shall be required. 
(3)  Side yard. The side yard requirements for single-family dwellings shall be identical to such requirements in R-70 Residential Districts. The side yard requirements for duplexes shall be identical to such requirements in R-85 Residential Districts. In multi-family developments each building shall be situated so as to have a side yard of at least fifteen (15) feet parallel to each and from the front yard line to the back yard line. (See group projects.) 
(4)  Rear yard. The rear yard requirements for single-family dwellings shall be identical to such requirements in R-70 Residential Districts. The rear yard requirements for duplexes shall be identical to such requirements in R-85 Residential Districts. In multifamily developments each building shall be situated so as to have a rear yard of at least thirty (30) feet parallel to the rear of the building and extending the entire length of the building plus a minimum of fifteen (15) feet on either side. (See group projects.) 
(5)  Lot area per dwelling unit. For single-family construction, lot area requirements are identical to such requirements in R-70 Residential Districts. For duplex construction each lot shall have an area of at least four thousand four hundred (4,400) square feet per unit and a street frontage of at least eighty (80) linear feet. For multifamily construction, each lot shall have an area of at least four thousand (4,000) square feet per unit and multifamily construction shall not be permitted on any tract that does not contain at least sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet and a road frontage of at least eighty-five (85) linear feet. (See exceptions and modifications.) 
(6)  Floor area. Single-family dwellings shall have at least nine hundred (900) square feet of floor space on the ground floor exclusive of porches, garages and carports. Each unit of multifamily construction shall have at least five hundred (500) square feet of floor space on the same floor, exclusive of porches, garages and carports. Each unit of duplex construction shall have at least seven hundred (700) square feet of floor space on the ground floor, exclusive of porches, garages, and carports. 
(7)  Lot coverage. Buildings shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the lot or tract. 
(8)  Parking space. One and one-half (1½) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. 
(Code 1959, § 24-23; Ord. No. 87-001, 3-2-87; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 8-8-54. - RM-100 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(a)  Within any RM-100 Apartment Dwelling District of the city, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the RM-85 Residential District. In addition, site-built homes, manufactured homes and modular homes which do not conform to the standards of "dwelling, single-family," shall be a permitted use in the RM-85 district; 
(2)  Accessory use or building and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, including the following: 
a.  Single-family and duplex construction. Accessory uses and buildings that are not a part of the main structure shall be located in the rear yard or in the side yard and shall not be less than eight (8) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
b.  Multiple-family construction. All accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard and not nearer to any lot line than the distance prescribed for side and rear yards, respectively. 
c.  Signs. Signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth by the city sign ordinance. 
d.  Recreational facilities. Recreational facilities, including but not limited to tennis courts, badminton courts and other open, unenclosed and uncovered recreational facilities, except swimming pools, may be placed in any required side or rear yard, provided, however, that any such use shall not be permitted nearer to any lot line than thirty (30) feet therefrom. 
e.  Swimming pools. Swimming pools may be located within any rear yard or side yard provided, however, that no swimming pool may be placed within thirty (30) feet of any rear lot line or interior side lot line, nor shall any swimming pool or appurtenance thereto be placed in a side yard which is adjacent to a public street line, nearer than fifty (50) feet to the street line. Provided further that when located on property adjacent to single-family dwelling use zones, such pools shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet thereof, except in cases where located so as to be screened from single-family dwelling use zones by a multiple-family dwelling greater in length by a minimum of twenty (20) lineal feet at each pool, the distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be required. 
f.  Offices. Commercial and professional offices provided a detailed summary of the plans for same is submitted with the application for zoning or if property is already zoned with the application for a building permit and special permission for same is granted by the governing body. 
(b)  Within any RM-100 Apartment Dwelling District the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height. No building may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height without the prior written approval of the fire marshal of the City of Forest Park. 
(2)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard with a depth of at least one hundred (100) feet exclusive of the street right-of-way. The front yard shall be that yard which is parallel to the street upon which the lot has its primary dimension. 
(3)  Side yard. There shall be two (2) side yards, one (1) on each side of the building as follows: 
a.  For single-family and duplex construction each side yard shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in depth with an additional five (5) feet provided when side yards run along side streets. 
b.  For multiple-family construction each side yard shall be at least thirty (30) feet in depth with an additional fifteen (15) feet provided when side yards run along side streets. 
c.  Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) streets the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet or the average distance established for such street where forty (40) percent of the adjacent street frontage is improved with buildings if such average is less than one hundred (100) feet, but in no case shall such yard be less than seventy-five (75) feet. 
(4)  Rear yard. For single-family and duplex construction there shall be a rear yard of at least thirty-five (35) feet. For multiple-family construction of not more than two (2) stories there shall be a rear yard of at least thirty-five (35) feet. For each additional story an additional five (5) feet shall be required in the rear yard. In any instance where the rear yard abuts property being occupied by single family dwellings, the rear yard shall be at least 75 feet in depth. 
(5)  Lot area per dwelling unit. Every building constructed in this district to be used as a dwelling shall be located upon a lot having a public street frontage of at least 100 feet and in addition shall conform to the following: 
a.  For single family and duplex construction the lot shall contain at least 18,000 square feet. 
b.  For multiple-family construction the lot shall contain square footage in accordance with the following scale: 
1.  One and two stories in height: a minimum of 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit; 
2.  Three stories in height: a minimum of 3,000 square feet per dwelling; 
3.  Four stories in height: a minimum of 2,400 square feet per dwelling unit; 
4.  Five stories in height: a minimum of 1,800 square feet per dwelling unit; 
5.  Six stories in height: a minimum of 1,400 square feet per dwelling unit; 
6.  Seven stories in height: a minimum of 1,200 square feet per dwelling unit; 
7.  Eight stories and above in height: a minimum of 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(6)  Lot width at building line. The minimum lot width shall not be less than 100 feet. 
(7)  Floor area. Single family dwellings one (1) story in height shall have at least 1200 square feet of floor space on the ground floor exclusive of porches, garages and carports. Single family dwellings of two (2) stories or more in height shall have at least 900 square feet of floor area on the ground floor exclusive of porches, garages and carports and a total floor area of at least 1300 square feet. For duplex construction each dwelling unit shall have at least 900 square feet of floor space on the ground floor exclusive of porches, garages and carports. For multiple-family construction each dwelling unit shall have at least 900 square feet of floor space exclusive of porches, garages and carports. 
(8)  Lot coverage. Buildings shall not occupy more than 35 percent of the area of any lot or tract; however, open unenclosed and uncovered recreation areas and swimming pools shall not be considered as buildings. 
(9)  Parking space. One and one-half (1 ½) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit in this district. No parking shall be permitted in any front or side yard within 50 feet of the edge of the right-of-way of any public street. Driveways shall not exceed 24 feet in width at the street line and shall not be located nearer than 10 feet to any side or rear lot line. No parking space or driveway shall be located nearer than 10 feet to any lot line. Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be provided by means other than the use of alleys. Parking spaces and driveways shall be constructed of a permanent material as provided by the city engineer. 
(10)  Open spaces. Open space requirements for a multiple dwelling or for more than one multiple dwelling, when placed on the same lot, parcel or tract of land, shall be as follows: 
a.  When a line is projected perpendicularly from any point on a side of a building other than that side having the least dimension and intersects any other side of the same building or any side of another building, the minimum distance between such sides shall not be less than two (2) times the side yard requirements as determined by the height of such building or buildings. 
b.  When a line is projected perpendicularly from any point on a side of a building having the least dimension and intersects a side of the least dimension of the same building or a side of the least dimension of another building, the minimum distance between such sides shall not be less than one and one-half (1 ½) times the side yard requirements as determined by the height of such buildings; provided, however, that any building or buildings are placed on the same lot so as to require a front yard, the minimum distance between such buildings or parts of a building shall not be less than two (2) times the side yard requirements. 
The distance prescribed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall control, except that the minimum distances between such buildings and any projections thereto, when so arranged on the same lot, parcel or tract of land, shall be as follows: 
Front to front ..... 50 feet 
Front to rear ..... 60 feet 
Rear to rear ..... 50 feet 
Front or rear to side ..... 40 feet 
All other arrangements ..... Same as side yard,  but in no case less than 30 feet. 
(Code 1959, § 24-23.1, as amended by Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 92-024, 11-2-92, § 7) 
Sec. 8-8-55. - RM-125 Condominium-Townhouse District. 
(a)  Within any RM-125 Condominium-Townhouse District of the city, the following uses only are permitted: 
(1)  Multi-family dwellings in which each resident enjoys the exclusive fee simple title and ownership in his individual dwelling unit while retaining an undivided interest in the common facilities and areas of the building and grounds which are used by all other residents of the complex. 
(2)  Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to the above use such as storage buildings and recreational facilities. 
(b)  Within any RM-125 Condominium-Townhouse District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height. No building in this district shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
(2)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard with a depth of at least 65 feet exclusive of the street right-of-way. The front yard shall be that yard which is parallel to the street upon which the lot maintains its primary entrance. 
(3)  Side yards. There shall be side yards with each having a depth of at least 30 feet exclusive of street rights-of-way. 
(4)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard at least 35 feet in depth. 
(5)  Floor area. The houses one story in height shall have at least 1500 square feet of floor space on the ground floor, exclusive of porches, garages, and carports. Dwellings of two (2) stories or more in height shall have at least 1000 square foot floor area on the ground floor exclusive of porches, garages and carports, and a total floor area of at least 1,500 square feet. 
(6)  Lot coverage. Buildings shall not occupy more than 35 percent of the area of any lot or tract; however, open, unenclosed, and uncovered recreation areas and swimming pools shall not be considered as buildings. 
(7)  Density and common areas. The formula presented below shall be used to calculate maximum possible densities and required common open areas in RM-125 districts: 
Developments shall contain five (5) acre minimum area. 
FORMULA: 
;frac;Total Development Area (Sq. Ft.) minus 20%;4,320 sq. feet> = Max. Number of Dwelling Units Permitted 
Twenty percent (20%) of the area shall be devoted to common open space. 
(8)  Site planning. 
a.  Off-street parking. All required parking shall be provided within the development. Parking arrangement shall be adequate and sufficient for maneuver and safety of vehicles and pedestrians. Walls and/or buffer zones created by landscaping shall be utilized between parking areas and public or common areas. Off-street parking arrangements shall consist of not less than two (2) parking spaces per unit and shall comply with applicable provisions of off-street parking requirements according to use. 
b.  Circulation. Sidewalks shall be provided from dwelling units to main public streets in developments with two (2) or more dwelling units. Pedestrian circulation shall be separated from vehicle circulation. Car overhang of sidewalks shall not reduce the effective walk clearance to less than four (4) feet. Pedestrian access from auto to dwelling unit shall not exceed 200 feet. 
c.  Access and egress for service and emergency vehicles. Site planning shall provide for access and egress for fire fighting equipment, ambulance, and service vehicles. Fire protection plans shall provide for required access and facilities necessary. Where vehicular access to individual dwelling units becomes unfeasible, a standpipe arrangements may be used. Access arrangements, standpipe arrangements and related features must be reviewed and approved by the chief of the department of fire services. 
d.  Garbage and trash disposal. Outdoor enclosed collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal. The enclosed collection stations shall be located as to not be a nuisance or hazard to occupants. The refuse disposal will be screened and enclosed to prevent pollution of the environment. Screening shall be through use of a permanent screening wall of sufficient height to avoid visual exposure of garbage and trash containers. 
e.  Maintenance facilities. Maintenance facilities and service facilities shall be located to prevent visual nuisance. 
f.  Common areas. Common open areas shall be a minimum of 20 percent of the total development area. Required yard areas, drains, interior streets, and common parking court areas shall not be credited toward the minimum required open space allocation. The maximum ratio of length to width of common open areas shall be two (2) to one. Planning, equipment, and landscaping should be appropriate for the needs of the residents. Adequate recreation facilities for the residents should be provided in common open areas easily accessible to the dwelling units and where they do not impair the view and privacy of dwelling units. 
g.  Convenience and safety. Provisions shall be made for information signs to prevent confusion as to location of specific units. Provisions shall be made for mail and parcel protection. Parking areas, service areas, walks, steps, streets and driveways, and open public spaces within the development shall be illuminated to prevent dark areas and to assure safe and convenient nighttime use. Lighting fixtures shall be properly shaded to screen the windows of habitable rooms from the direct ray of light. Minimum illumination requirements are as follows: 
1.  parks, common open areas, in accordance with current Illuminating Engineering Society Standards; 
2.  parking areas and walks, in accordance with current Illuminating Engineering Society Standards; 
3.  steps, in accordance with current Illuminating Society Standards; and 
4.  recreational areas, in accordance with current Illuminating Engineering Society Standards. 
h.  Orientation of dwelling units. Dwelling units shall be oriented to provide noise buffers between dwelling units themselves and the service activities (communal) and car zone (urban noise). 
i.  Landscaping. New plant material shall be added to the development for privacy, shade, beauty of buildings and grounds, and to screen out objectionable features. 
j.  Screening. Screening walls shall be incorporated into design in such a fashion that they provide dwelling units and private yard areas with a security measure, visual privacy, and an acoustic barrier. 
k.  Street frontage. Lots within a townhouse development shall front only a public street classified as a minor thorough-fare or other street or on a private street having a width of not less than 28 feet, as measured from the back of the curb on one side of the street to the back curb on the other. 
l.  Separate lot required for each townhouse dwelling unit. Each townhouse unit, whether attached or detached shall be located on a separate lot. 
m.  [Conformance to subdivision regulations.] All street right-of-way requirements (public or private) shall conform to the existing subdivision regulations. 
(9)  Dwelling unit planning. 
a.  Dwelling entrances. Private and protected entrances shall be provided for each condominium-townhouse dwelling unit, to include sheltered standing space on the exterior of each unit and an entry hall with a minimum area of 12 square feet in the interior. No entry shall be directly opposite another entry unless shielded from direct view of interior habitable space upon opening entrance door. 
b.  Acoustics. The acceptable standard for acoustics is 50 decibels for interior walls between dwelling units. 
c.  Fire safety. For fire safety, two (2) exits from each dwelling unit shall be provided. All exits shall provide continuous means of egress to the exterior which is accessible to a street or to a common open space leading to a street. The second exit may be a breakout panel in the wall around a yard which is located between the dwelling unit and development property line only when such second exit allows egress to adjacent yards in series terminating at a street or common open space. An alternate means of egress may be provided by a continuous alley with a minimum three (3) foot clear unobstructed width leading to a street or common open space. Fire walls, party walls and/or lot line walls between each unit shall be constructed of non-combustible material with four (4) hour fire rating. No opening shall be permitted in these walls. These walls shall be self-supporting and continuous, extending through all floors, and three (3) feet above roof if roof covering is of combustible material. If roof covering is noncombustible, the wall may be carried up to and tightly against the underside of the noncombustible roof deck or sheathing. Combustible framing members shall not extend through these walls. These walls may be offset at intermediate floors, provided the offset floor constructed has a fire resistance not less than that required for these walls. 
d.  Private yards. Dwelling units in townhouse developments shall provide a minimum of one (1) yard. The minimum area of one (1) yard shall be 150 square feet with a least dimension of 10 feet. Arrangement of yards should afford maximum privacy of occupant. 
(10)  Preservation of common areas. 
a.  Covenants. The developer of a condominium or townhouse development or a homeowners association created by the developer, by recorded covenants and restrictions, shall preserve and maintain for the owners and occupants of the development the lands set aside for open spaces, parks, or recreational use, the common off-street parking spaces established for the development, and garbage and trash disposal. The book and page in which such covenants and restrictions are recorded shall be shown on a final plat of the development and on each deed transferring property within the development. 
(11)  Distances between buildings. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the minimum distance between buildings and any projections thereof in an RM-125 District shall be as follows: 
Front to front ..... 50 ft. 
Front to rear ..... 60 ft. 
Rear to rear ..... 50 ft. 
Front or rear to side ..... 40 ft. 
All other arrangements ..... same as side yard  but in no case less than 30 ft. 
(12)  Administrative procedures. Building permit applications. In addition to the requirements stated elsewhere in the zoning ordinance, all applications for building permits for new construction under the RM-125 Condominium-Townhouse District shall be received and reviewed by the building inspector and city engineer, respectively, and in concert with the planning commission, as both an application for a building permit under provisions of the city zoning ordinance and as a final subdivision plat under the provisions of the city subdivision regulations. Consequently, the "application plat" shall be submitted in triplicate and shall include accurate plats, prepared by a registered land surveyor and drawings showing dimensions of land, location, identification and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, recreation areas, yards, and common open areas, landscaping, buffer areas, walls, walkways and similar features on the property; location, layout, and dimensions of all streets, driveways, maneuver areas, and parking areas, including minimum turning radii, drive widths, dimensioned parking bays, turning and backup maneuver areas, culs-de-sac, and other information necessary to adequately present significant features of the proposed development with information prepared to conform to the requirements of the city subdivision regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 24-23.2; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 8-8-56. - C-1 General Commercial District. 
(a)  Intent of district . The intent of this district shall be to provide a commercial district designed to serve the automobile, its passengers, and highway users and to provide community and neighborhood shopping facilities consisting of a wide variety of sales and service facilities and locations that will be accessible to all shoppers and highway users or both. 
(b)  Required conditions . All business, servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as for example, off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, miniature golf courses, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, or vibration. 
(c)  Permitted uses . Within the C-1 General Commercial District the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses allowed in the C-2 Central Commercial District as set forth in section 8-8-57(c) of this Code. 
(2)  All uses allowed in the C-3 Institutional Commercial District as set forth in section 8-8-58(c) of this Code. 
(3)  Any retail business or service, including manufacturing in connection with a retail store or shop, provided that such manufacturing is incidental to the retail use and all goods manufactured are sold on the premises. 
(4)  Automobile sales (new) and repair establishments. 
(5)  Automobile re-sales (used), provided that each location contains a minimum lot width of two hundred (200) feet, a minimum lot depth of two hundred (200) feet, and a minimum lot size of two (2) acres. 
(6)  Automobile or truck repair shops. There shall be no outside storage or display of merchandise except as specifically allowed herein: 
a.  Tires shall not be stored in a temporary building. Excluding normal day-to-day deliveries, delivery trucks or semi-trailers shall not be used to store merchandise or equipment; 
b.  Inside storage or display of tires shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the gross floor area of the building; 
c.  All merchandise must be brought inside no later than one (1) hour after the business close for the day; 
d.  The display of merchandise shall be within a display area enclosed on three (3) sides by a wall no less than six (6) feet in height, or under a building overhang/canopy located within five (5) feet of the exterior building wall; 
e.  Displays shall not obstruct ingress or egress of the building; 
f.  Wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed building or in an area surrounded by an opaque fence at least eight (8) feet high located within the side or rear yard. 
(7)  Motorcycle stores. 
(8)  Bus terminals and taxicab stands. 
(9)  Funeral parlors. 
(10)  Newspapers and printing plants. 
(11)  Off-street parking lots and parking garages. 
(12)  Radio stations and transmission towers. 
(13)  Railway lines and passenger depots. 
(14)  Self-service laundry facilities. 
(15)  Shopping centers and malls. 
(16)  Flea markets, pawn shops, salvage shops and other establishments which deal primarily in used merchandise. 
(17)  Mobile home sales. 
(18)  Billiard halls and game rooms. 
(19)  Tattoo parlors. 
(20)  Massage parlors. 
(21)  Dwelling units, provided the following standards and specifications are met: 
a.  Any dwelling unit must be an integral part of the commercial structures situated on the premises. It must be completely self-contained and occupy a minimum of seven hundred (700) square feet of interior floor space; 
b.  There must be an interior division to provide for a separate bedroom, a separate kitchen area and a private bathroom; 
c.  Access to the dwelling unit must be from the exterior only, with no common passage to the commercial structure; 
d.  All utilities shall be on separate service meters and construction of the dwelling unit shall be governed by residential building codes; 
e.  The common wall between the dwelling unit and the commercial premises shall be so constructed as to have a firewall rated for two (2) hours; 
f.  A minimum of two (2) smoke detectors shall be installed in the dwelling unit. A fire extinguisher shall be required for the kitchen area; 
g.  The exterior of the area immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of landscaped premises; 
h.  Off-street parking for a minimum of two (2) spaces shall be provided; 
i.  Occupancy of any such dwelling unit shall be limited to two (2) persons at any given time. 
(d)  Conditional uses . Within the C-1 General Commercial District of the city, the following uses shall be a conditional use and subject to the approval of the governing body after a recommendation thereon has been made to the governing body by the planning commission: 
(1)  A wrecker or towing service. 
(2)  Recycling centers, provided any such center should be for collection only and no processing shall be permitted therein. 
(3)  Efficiency hotels and efficiency motels. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Regulations . Within any C-1 General Commercial District the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height . No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height except upon the approval of the board of zoning appeals upon application for a variance with the concurrence of the department of police and fire services. 
(2)  Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured from the street right-of-way line. On minor streets there shall be a front yard setback of sixty-five (65) feet and on major streets a front yard setback of eighty-five (85) feet both being measured from the centerline of the street. The minimum setback from the street right-of-way or the centerline of a street shall always be whichever is the greatest distance. 
(3)  Side yard. No limitation except when abutting a lot zoned residential and in such case a side yard of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be provided in addition to any required buffer. 
(4)  Rear yard . No limitation except when abutting a lot zoned residential and in such case a rear yard of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be provided in addition to any required buffer. 
(5)  Lot coverage . Buildings shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the lot. 
(6)  Lot width at building line . The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(7)  Parking space . Adequate parking space shall be provided with the approval of the planning commission and the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 14-18, § 3, 8-18-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-18, § 3, adopted Aug. 18, 2014, repealed former § 8-8-56 and enacted a new § 8-8-56 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 8-8-57. - C-2 Central Commercial District. 
(a)  Intent of district. The intent of this district is to protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to a central business area, and to encourage the intensive development of a centralized business center for the City of Forest Park. 
(b)  Required conditions. All business, servicing, storage, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as for example, off-street loading and automobile parking for customers while on the premises. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Within the C-2 Central Commercial District the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any retail business or commercial use in which there is not processing or treatment of material goods, or products except as provided for, including: 
(2)  Appliance stores, including radio and television service. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Bakeries (commercial and retail) employing not more than ten (10) persons. 
(5)  Banks and drive-in banks. 
(6)  Bicycle stores. 
(7)  Book, stationery, camera or photographic supply stores. 
(8)  Confectionery stores. 
(9)  Clothing stores, millinery, drygoods, and notions. 
(10)  Ice cream parlors. 
(11)  Convenience stores. 
(12)  Drug stores. 
(13)  Furniture, home furnishings, including office furniture and equipment. 
(14)  Florist, nursery and gift shops. 
(15)  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, meat market, delicatessen, catering, and super markets. 
(16)  Hardware and paint stores. 
(17)  Jewelry stores. 
(18)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(19)  Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants. 
(20)  Dressmaking and tailoring shops. 
(21)  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments including pickup stations, but not including self-service laundry. 
(22)  Shoe repair shops. 
(23)  Offices and office buildings. 
(24)  Fallout shelters. 
(25)  Business signs, in accordance with the city sign ordinance. 
(26)  Automobile service centers (all of which must be located on an arterial road). There shall be no outside storage or display of merchandise except as specifically allowed herein: 
a.  Tires shall not be stored in a temporary building. Excluding normal day-to-day deliveries, delivery trucks or semi-trailers shall not be used to store merchandise or equipment; 
b.  Inside storage or display of tires shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the gross floor area of the building; 
c.  All merchandise must be brought inside no later than one (1) hour after the business close for the day; 
d.  The display of merchandise shall be within a display area enclosed on three (3) sides by a wall no less than six (6) feet in height, or under a building overhang/canopy located within five (5) feet of the exterior building wall; 
e.  Displays shall not obstruct ingress or egress of the building; 
(27)  Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters provided, that such uses are not located within five hundred (500) feet of any other such uses or within five hundred (500) feet of the uses permitted by subsections (29) and (34) hereof. 
(28)  Public utility structures and buildings, including electric and natural gas, substations, telephone exchanges, radio and television stations, and similar structures for the storage of supplies, equipment or service operations when properly screened in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(29)  Churches and other places of worship with attendant education and recreational buildings provided, that such uses are not located within five hundred (500) feet of any other such uses or within five hundred (500) feet of the uses permitted by subsections (27) and (34) hereof. 
(30)  Private clubs, fraternal orders and lodges. 
(31)  Commercial parking garages or lots provided no entrance or exit be on the same side of the street and within the same block as a school and the curb breaks be limited to two (2) for each one hundred (100) feet of store frontage, each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and not located closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection. 
(32)  Public and private schools and libraries. 
(33)  Hotels and motels. 
(34)  Places of assembly including auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums, and dance halls provided, that such uses are not located within five hundred (500) feet of any other such uses or within five hundred (500) feet of the uses permitted by subsections (27) and (29) hereof. 
(35)  Other uses as deemed appropriate by the governing authority. 
(d)  Within any C-2 Central Commercial District the following uses are prohibited: 
(1)  Gasoline sales. 
(2)  Automobile or truck repair shops. 
(3)  Flea markets, pawn shops, salvage shops, thrift shops, junk shops, used furniture or appliance sales or any establishment which deals primarily in used merchandise. For the purposes of this section, an establishment deals primarily in used merchandise if more than ten (10) percent of the regularly maintained inventory consists of items previously owned or previously used. 
(4)  Used car sales. 
(5)  Towing or wrecker services. 
(6)  Any commercial establishment having exterior sales, exterior storage, or exterior display of merchandise or services. 
(7)  Billiard halls and game rooms. 
(8)  Tattoo parlors. 
(9)  Massage parlors. 
(e)  Within any C-2 Central Commercial District the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height . No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height except upon the approval of the board of zoning appeals upon application for a variance with the concurrence of the department of police and fire services. 
(2)  Front yard . There shall be a minimum front setback of twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the right-of-way line. 
(3)  Side yard . No limitation except when abutting a lot zoned residential and in such case a side yard of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be provided in addition to any required buffer. 
(4)  Rear yard . No limitation except when abutting a lot zoned residential and in such case a rear yard of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be provided in addition to any required buffer. 
(5)  Lot coverage . Buildings shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the lot. 
(6)  Lot area per dwelling unit . Dwelling units are not permitted in this district. 
(7)  Floor area . Dwelling units are not permitted in this district. 
(8)  Lot width at building line. The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Parking space . Adequate parking space shall be provided with the approval of the planning commission and the governing authority. 
(f)  Within the C-2 General Commercial District of the city, the following uses shall be a conditional use and subject to the approval of the governing body after a recommendation thereon has been made to the governing body by the planning commission: 
(1)  Efficiency hotels and efficiency motels. 
(Ord. No. 14-18, § 4, 8-18-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-18, § 4, adopted Aug. 18, 2014, repealed former § 8-8-57 and enacted a new § 8-8-57 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 8-8-58. - C-3 Institutional-Commercial District. 
(a)  Intent of district. The intent of the C-3 Institutional-Commercial District is to allow for an appropriate mix of high density residential, commercial, office and public uses. 
(b)  Required conditions. All business, servicing, storage, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as for example, off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Within the C-3 Institutional-Commercial District the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses allowed in the C-2 Central Commercial District as set forth in section 8-8-57(c) of this Code. 
(2)  Any residential use permitted in the RM-125 District, provide that all area, yard and dimensional requirements of that district are observed; and, further, that no dwellings are permitted in commercial buildings. 
(3)  Convenience stores with gasoline sales. 
(4)  Clinics, medical, dental, chiropractic, osteopathic and other similar uses. 
(5)  Retail and commercial bakeries. 
(d)  Within any C-3 Institutional-Commercial District the following uses are prohibited: 
(1)  Mobile home sales. 
(2)  Flea markets, pawn shops, salvage shops, or other establishments which deal primarily in used merchandise. 
(3)  Automobile sales (new and used). 
(4)  Billiard halls and game rooms. 
(5)  Tattoo parlors. 
(6)  Massage parlors. 
(e)  Within any C-3 Institutional-Commercial District the following limitations shall apply: 
(1)  Height. Within this district there are no limitations as to height except where the lot to be built upon abuts a residential district in which event the building shall be set back in addition to the setback required for yards, an additional one (1) foot for each foot of height the building exceeds sixty (60) feet in height. 
(2)  Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured from the street right-of-way line. On minor streets there shall be a front yard setback of sixty-five (65) feet and on major streets a front yard setback of eighty-five (85) feet both being measured from the centerline of the street. The minimum setback from the street right-of-way or the centerline of a street shall always be whichever is the greatest distance. 
(3)  Side yard. A side yard of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be required when the lot to be built upon abuts property zoned residential. 
(4)  Rear yard. The rear yard requirement shall be the same as that requirement which applies to the most restrictive adjoining residential zoning to the tract or lot to be built upon. 
(5)  Lot area per dwelling unit. Dwelling units are not permitted in this district. 
(6)  Floor area. Dwelling units are not permitted in this district. 
(7)  Lot width at building line. The minimum lot width shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(8)  Lot coverage. Buildings shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the lot. 
(9)  The limitations described in (1) through (8) above shall apply to establishments whose principal business is that of a restaurant, drive-in or otherwise, except that the following special limitations shall apply to such an establishment when in conflict with other provisions of this Code. The minimum floor area of interior usable space shall be one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet or eight and one-half (8½) percent of the total square footage of the lot, whichever is greater. The main structure and all accessory buildings shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the lot. 
(f)  Within the C-3 General Commercial District of the city, the following uses shall be a conditional use and subject to the approval of the governing body after a recommendation thereon has been made to the governing body by the planning commission: 
(1)  Efficiency hotels and efficiency motels. 
(Code 1959, § 24-25; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 92-014, §§ (j), (k), 5-4-92; Ord. No. 93-005, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 06-37, § 1, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 07-04, § 6, 2-2-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 3-5-2007) 
Editor's note— Former § 8-8-59 HNC Highway-Neighborhood Commercial District derived from Code 1959, § 24-26, as amended by Ord. No. 87-001, 3-2-87, was repealed by Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89. 
Sec. 8-8-59. - LI Light Industrial District. 
(a)  Within any LI Light Industrial District of the city, a building or premises may be used for any legal, nonresidential purposes except the following: 
(1)  Abattoir and slaughterhouse or stockyards. 
(2)  Acetylene gas manufacture. 
(3)  Acid manufacture. 
(4)  Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture. 
(5)  Asphalt manufacture, refining or preparations. 
(6)  Auto wrecking or salvage, except when such activities are conducted wholly within a building. 
(7)  Blast furnaces. 
(8)  Boiler works. 
(9)  Brick, tile, pottery or terracotta manufacture, excluding small handicrafts operations. 
(10)  Coal tar manufacturing or tar distillation, except as by-products of public utility gas manufacture, or mineral dye manufacture. 
(11)  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture. 
(12)  Creosote manufacture or treatment. 
(13)  Distillation of bones, coal or wood. 
(14)  Reserved. 
(15)  Fat rendering. 
(16)  Fertilizer manufacture. 
(17)  Gas manufacture or storage. 
(18)  Glue or gelatin manufacture. 
(19)  Incineration, reduction or dumping of offal, dead animals, garbage or refuse. 
(20)  Junk, iron or rags storage or baling. 
(21)  Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture. 
(22)  Oiled cloth or oiled clothing manufacture or the impregnation of any fabrics by oxidizing oils, window shades, or patent leather manufacture. 
(23)  Ore reduction. 
(24)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture. 
(25)  Paper and paper pulp manufacture. 
(26)  Petroleum refining. 
(27)  Rolling mill. 
(28)  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron. 
(29)  Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins. 
(30)  Salvage yards. 
(31)  Yeast plant. 
(32)  And, in general, those uses which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration, light, heat, etc. 
(33)  Automobile resales (used), except those which comply with the lot size and other requirements set forth in the C-1 General Commercial District. 
(b)  Within any LI Light Industrial District the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height. In this district there are no limitations as to height except where a building abuts property zoned for residential purposes in which event the building or buildings shall, in addition to all yard requirements, be set back one foot for each foot of height the building has in excess of fifty (50) feet in height. 
(2)  Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured from the street right-of-way line. On minor streets there shall be a front yard setback of sixty-five (65) feet and on major streets eighty-five (85) feet both being measured from the centerline of the street. The minimum setback from the street right-of-way or the center line of a street shall always be whichever is the greater distance. 
(3)  Side yard. When abutting property zoned residential there shall be a side yard of fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  Rear yard. When abutting property zoned residential there shall be a rear yard of fifty (50) feet including any buffer requirements as set forth in this chapter. When abutting nonresidentially zoned properties there shall be a rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(5)  Lot coverage. Buildings shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the lot. 
(6)  Lot area per dwelling unit. Dwelling units are not permitted in this district. 
(7)  Floor area per dwelling unit. Dwelling units are not permitted in this district. 
(8)  Lot width at building line. The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(Code 1959, § 24-27; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 95-001, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 15-11, § 4, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 8-8-60. - HI Heavy Industrial District. 
(a)  Within any HI Heavy Industrial District of the city, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Within any HI Heavy Industrial District of the city, uses shall be permitted only after site plans have been reviewed by the planning director. Only site plans for new developments shall comply with the below-listed special requirements. Site plans shall be submitted in triplicate to the planning director and the planning director shall indicate the reasons for his/her approval or disapproval in writing within thirty (30) days. The failure of the planning director to take action within the prescribed period of time shall be deemed approval. Each site plan for a new development shall be reviewed for possible obnoxious or offensive effects to the community and the following special requirements: 
(2)  Conditions of operation . All uses in the HI Heavy Industrial District shall be so constructed, maintained, and operated as not to be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration, light, heat, etc. All outdoor processing or storage, except for intact passenger car vehicles, shall be effectively screened by a solid fence or planted buffer strip at least eight (8) feet in height. 
(b)  Within any HI Heavy Industrial District the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height . The regulation as to height shall be identical to that regulation which applies to the LI Light Industrial District. 
(2)  Front yard, side yard, lot coverage and lot width at building line . The requirements and regulations shall be identical to those regulations which apply in the LI Light Industrial District. 
(3)  Rear yard . When abutting property zoned residential there shall be a rear yard of fifty (50) feet including any buffer requirements as set forth in this chapter. When abutting non-residentially zoned properties, there shall be a rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(4)  Lot width at building line . The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(Ord. No. 14-18, § 5, 8-18-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-18, § 5, adopted Aug. 18, 2014, repealed former § 8-8-60 and enacted a new § 8-8-60 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 8-8-61. - PI Planned Industrial District. 
(a)  Within any PI Planned Industrial District of the city, uses shall be permitted only after site plans have been reviewed by the planning director. Only site plans for new developments shall comply with the below-listed special requirements. Site plans shall be submitted in triplicate to the planning director and the planning director shall indicate the reasons for his/her approval or disapproval in writing within thirty (30) days. The failure of the planning director to take action within the prescribed period of time shall be deemed approval. Each site plan for a new development shall be reviewed for possible obnoxious or offensive effects to the community and the following special requirements: 
(1)  Satisfactory provisions for storm drainage, sanitary sewerage, domestic water supply, electric power, and telephone services. As much as possible, all power and telephone lines shall be provided for by easements along rear and side lot lines, not along lot frontages. 
(2)  Provisions shall be made for the adequate lighting of all parking areas and service drives. 
(3)  All service drives and access roads shall be paved and all parking areas shall be either paved or dustproofed. 
(4)  Provision shall be made for planted buffer strips of trees, shrubbery, or plants at least fifteen (15) feet in width and eight (8) feet in height alongside boundaries except where such boundaries abut a public street. 
(5)  All open portions of any lot shall be suitably graded and, except when paved or similarly improved, they shall, as a minimum, be seeded and maintained in grass. Preferably, such open spaces may be further landscaped with trees, shrubs, and ground cover, so as to provide a park-like setting for the buildings and to screen parking and loading areas. 
(6)  Site plans shall include an estimate of the maximum number of employees per shift, proposed service and access drives, parking and loading spaces, and sufficient detail to show the relation of proposed buildings to the site. 
(b)  Within the PI Planned Industrial District of the city, the following uses are permitted subject to the conditions contained herein: 
(1)  Offices: Business, professional and governmental. 
(2)  Scientific or research laboratories. 
(3)  Wholesaling. 
(4)  Warehousing. 
(5)  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
(6)  Processing and compounding of materials. 
(7)  Fabrication and assembly of products. 
(8)  Agriculture, excluding poultry and livestock in violation of portions of this code. 
(9)  Facilities for recreation and the furnishing of meals and refreshments solely for the employees of establishments within the PI district, provided that such facilities shall be located completely within a building, with no external evidence thereof, including any sign relating thereto. 
(10)  Business signs. 
(11)  Railroads. 
(c)  Within any PI Planned Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Height . The regulations as to height in this district shall be identical to the regulation which applies to the LI Light Industrial District. 
(2)  Front yard setback . There shall be a front yard setback on minor streets of one hundred (100) feet and on major streets of one hundred twenty (120) feet, both measured from the center line of the street. 
(3)  Side yard . Side yards shall be provided at least twenty (20) feet in width. 
(4)  Rear yard . A rear yard shall be provided of at least twenty (20) feet in width. 
(5)  Lot coverage . The regulation as to lot coverage shall be identical to that regulation which applies to the L1 Light Industrial District. 
(6)  Lot width at building line . The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(Ord. No. 14-18, § 6, 8-18-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-18, § 6, adopted Aug. 18, 2014, repealed former § 8-8-61 and enacted a new § 8-8-61 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 8-8-62. - (ADO)—Architectural design overlay district. 
(a)  There is hereby established an Architectural Design Overlay District. The Architectural Design Overlay District may overlay other districts on the "Official Zoning Map" of the City of Forest Park. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Architectural Design Overlay District are as follows: All districts zoned General Commercial (C-1), Central Commercial (C-2), Institutional Commercial (C-3), Light Industrial (LI), Heavy Industrial (HI), Planned Industrial (PI), and Planned Unit Development (PUD) as designated on the "Official Zoning Map" of the City of Forest Park. 
(Ord. No. 87-021, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 91-001, 2-4-91) 
Sec. 8-8-62.1. - (SOBOD)—Sexually oriented business overlay district. 
(a)  There is hereby established a sexually oriented business overlay district. The sexually oriented business overlay district may overlay other districts on the official zoning map of the City of Forest Park. 
(b)  (1)  The boundaries of the sexually oriented business overlay district shall be confined to those tracts of land having the following Clayton County Tax Identification Numbers as of December 31, 2006: 13-015B-B003; 13-015B-B002; 13-015B-B001; 13-015B-B007; 13-015B-B002A; 13-015B-B008; and 13-015B-B009;" and 
(2)  Those portions of the city located within the following described area: beginning at the intersection of the northernmost right-of-way line of Georgia State Route 331, a/k/a Forest Parkway, with the westernmost right-of-way line of the spur railroad line that coincides with the western boundary of the incorporated limits of the city, proceed in a generally easterly direction along the northernmost right-of-way line of Georgia State Route 331, a/k/a Forest Parkway to its intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of U.S. Route 41, a/k/a Old Dixie Highway; thence proceed in a generally northerly direction along said right-of-way line to its intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate 285; thence proceed in a generally westerly direction along said right-of-way line to its intersection with the easternmost right-of-way line of Interstate 75; thence proceed in a generally southerly direction along said right-of-way line to its intersection with the northernmost right-of-way line of Georgia State Route 331, a/k/a Forest Parkway; thence proceed in a generally westerly direction along said right-of-way line to its intersection with the railroad spur line that coincides with the western boundary of the incorporated limits of the city, which is the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 93-009, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 97-008, 6-2-97; Ord. No. 07-45, §§ 1, 2, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 8-8-63. - PUD Planned Unit Development District. 
(a)  Intent of district. It is the intent of this district to encourage development of compatible land uses on a scale larger than that of individual small parcels in a comprehensively planned setting. Such developments are to be very sensitive to the interrelationships of use, natural environment, architectural styles, scales of structures, intensities of development, and the larger community setting in which it is situated. 
(b)  General restrictions. The types and locations of permitted structures and uses, accessory structure and uses, development intensity restrictions, development dimensional requirements, and other general conditions under which a PUD may be developed or allowed in a PUD district shall be specified in the PUD district plan for the specific PUD as approved by the city council in the rezoning action taken pursuant to Article H. The restrictions and requirements specified in this section shall be construed only as the maximum and minimum parameters within which a PUD may occur or be utilized. It is the burden of the applicant for a PUD approval to demonstrate that the features of the proposed PUD are sufficiently interrelated and reasonable as to be consistent with the purpose of this district, the purpose of this section, and the city's map. 
(c)  Types of PUD districts allowed. Two categories of PUD districts may be allowed as described below. The category and character of the PUD district shall be as specified in the PUD district plan as approved by the mayor and council in the rezoning action taken pursuant to Article H. 
(1)  Single character PUD districts which may be of only one of the following types of development: 
a.  Residential; or 
b.  Institutional; or 
c.  Commercial; or 
d.  Industrial. 
(2)  Comprehensive PUD districts which shall include at least two of the following types of development: 
a.  Residential; 
b.  Institutional-commercial; 
c.  Commercial; 
d.  Industrial. 
(d)  Structures and uses allowed. Only those structure types and uses specified in the PUD district plan are permitted in a PUD district. The following structures and uses may be permitted in a PUD district plan. 
(1)  In an approved single-character residential PUD or in an approved comprehensive PUD containing residential development, any structure or use indicated as a permitted structure or use, accessory structure or use, or conditional structure or use in the R-70, R-85, RM-85, RM-100 and/or RM-125 zoning districts may be permitted. 
(2)  In an approved single-character institutional-commercial PUD or in an approved comprehensive PUD containing institutional-commercial development, any structure or use indicated as a permitted structure or use, accessory structure or use, or conditional structure or use in the institutional commercial zoning districts may be permitted. 
(3)  In an approved single-character commercial PUD or in a comprehensive PUD containing commercial development, any structure or use indicated as a permitted structure or use, accessory structure or use, or conditional structure or use in C-1, C-2 and/or C-3 zoning districts may be permitted. 
(4)  In an approved single-character industrial PUD or in a comprehensive PUD containing industrial development, any structure or use indicated as a permitted structure or use, accessory structure or use, or conditional structure or use in LI, HI and/or PI zoning districts may be permitted. 
(e)  Structures and uses restricted . The following structures and uses are prohibited in a PUD district. 
(1)  Residential structures and uses are prohibited within any PUD district when such districts are located within an area designated for any type of airport noise abatement activity to include noise proofing or actual clearing of structures. 
(2)  Residential structures and uses may be prohibited by any provisions of urban redevelopment plan guidelines as adopted by the city. 
(3)  Maximum height allowances as provided for in subsection (g)(5) shall be subject to further restrictions in accordance with FAA limitations on structures located within airport clear zones. 
(f)  Development intensity restrictions . Only those development intensities specified in the PUD district plan are permitted in a PUD district. The following development intensities may be permitted in a PUD district: 
(1)  In an approved single-character residential PUD or in an approved comprehensive PUD containing residential development, the development intensities specified below may be permitted. 
a.  Minimum zoning district size for a single-character residential PUD or comprehensive PUD containing residential development shall be fifty (50) acres. 
b.  Minimum lot areas shall be as follows: 
i.  Single-family detached dwelling lot areas—six thousand (6,000) square feet provided that areas for lots under eleven thousand two hundred fifty (11,250) shall be specifically approved in the PUD plan. 
ii.  Multiple-family including attached fee simple townhouses at least two thousand nine hundred four (2,904) square feet per dwelling unit subject the restrictions of the approved land and subsection (i) of this section. 
c.  Maximum ground coverage shall be twenty-five (25) percent. 
d.  Maximum gross density shall be as follows: 
i.  Single-family detached dwelling areas shall not exceed five (5) units per acre provided that areas for densities exceeding 3.87 units per net acre shall be specifically identified and approved in the approved PUD plan. 
ii.  Multiple-family developments including attached single-family fee simple townhouses shall not exceed fifteen (15) units per acre provided that areas for densities exceeding eleven (11) units per acre shall be specifically identified and approved in the PUD plan and such intense development shall also be subject to subsection (i) of this section. 
(2)  In an approved single-character commercial/institutional PUD or in an approved comprehensive PUD containing office/institutional development, the development intensities specified below may be permitted. 
a.  Development intensities for single character institutional-commercial PUD or a comprehensive PUD containing institutional-commercial are as follows: 
i.  Minimum contiguous area used for such uses shall be five (5) acres. The minimum zoning district size for a single-character institutional-commercial PUD shall be ten (10) acres. 
ii.  Minimum lot areas shall be forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet except for fee simple attached offices which shall have a minimum lot area of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
iii.  Maximum ground coverage shall be fifty (50) percent. 
iv.  Maximum gross density shall be eighty-five thousand (85,000) square feet of heated floor area per acre. 
(3)  In an approved single-character commercial PUD or in an approved comprehensive PUD containing commercial development, the development intensities specified below may be permitted: 
a.  Minimum zoning district for a single-character commercial PUD shall be twenty (20) acres. The minimum contiguous area used for commercial development (including associated open spaces, parking areas, and driveways) shall be ten (10) acres in a comprehensive PUD containing commercial development. 
b.  Minimum lot areas shall be five (5) acres except or out-parcels developed as part of a shopping center which shall have a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Said out-parcels must be identified or at least stated as to their number and general locations in the approved PUD district plan. 
c.  Maximum ground coverage shall be forty (40) percent. 
d.  Maximum gross density shall be seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square feet of heated floor area per acre (including associated open spaces, parking areas, and driveways). 
(4)  In an approved single-character industrial PUD or in an approved comprehensive PUD containing commercial development, the development intensities specified below may be permitted. 
a.  Minimum zoning district size for a single-character industrial PUD shall be twenty (20) acres. The minimum contiguous area used for industrial development (including associated open spaces, parking areas, and driveways) shall be ten (10) acres. 
b.  Minimum lot areas shall be five (5) acres. 
c.  Maximum ground coverage shall be sixty (60) percent. 
d.  Maximum gross density shall be twenty-six thousand two hundred (26,200) square feet of heated floor area per acre. 
(g)  Development dimensional requirements. Only those development dimensions specified in the PUD district plan are permitted in a PUD district. The following development dimensions may be permitted in a PUD district: 
(1)  Minimum lot width at the building line shall be as follows: 
a.  Sixty (60) feet for lots for single-family detached dwelling units; 
b.  Twenty (20) feet for lots for single-family attached fee simple townhouses; 
c.  Two hundred (200) feet for multiple-family office/institutional development. 
d.  One hundred fifty (150) feet for commercial and industrial lots; 
e.  Two hundred (200) feet for lots with a mixture of residential, office/institutional, commercial and industrial development. 
(2)  Minimum front yard depth as measured from the right-of-way line shall be as follows: 
a.  Twenty (20) feet for single-family dwellings; 
b.  Forty (40) feet for multiple-family dwellings; 
c.  Forty (40) feet for office/institutional buildings; 
d.  Forty (40) feet for commercial buildings; 
e.  Fifty (50) feet for industrial buildings; 
f.  Fifty (50) feet for buildings with a mixture of residential, institutional/commercial, and/or industrial development. 
(3)  Minimum side distances shall be as follows: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings may have a zero side yard but must maintain at least ten (10) feet between buildings. 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings must be spaced at least twenty (20) feet apart and a distance of at least fifty (50) feet from any lot developed for or occupied by a single-family dwelling. Said distance from the single-family dwelling lot shall be based upon the requirement of fifty (50) feet of horizontal spacing for each twelve (12) feet of height of the multiple-family structure. 
c.  Institutional and commercial structures must have a horizontal distance side yard of at least seventy-five (75) feet for each twelve (12) feet in height from each property with a residential structure or approved by an act of zoning or subdivision plat approval. Otherwise, a zero side yard may be allowed. 
d.  Industrial structures must have a side yard of at least fifty (50) feet unless adjacent to industrial property. If the property joins residential property, the distance of the side yard shall be determined based upon fifty (50) feet of horizontal distance from the residential property line for each twelve (12) feet of industrial structure height with a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
e.  Buildings with a mixture of residential, institutional, commercial, and/or industrial uses shall have a horizontal side yard distance based upon the same guidance as specified in subsection (g)(3)d of this section. 
(4)  Rear yard dimensions shall be determined in the same manner as side yard dimensions as specified in subsection (g)(3) of this section, except as follows: 
a.  All residential buildings shall maintain a rear yard of at least thirty (30) feet. 
b.  All nonresidential structures shall have a rear yard setback of at least twenty (20) feet. 
(5)  Maximum height allowed shall be as follows: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings: Thirty-five (35) feet; 
b.  Multiple-family structures and fee simple single-family townhouses: Seventy-five (75) feet; 
c.  Institutional-commercial structures: One hundred twenty-five (125) feet; 
d.  Commercial structures: Fifty (50) feet; 
e.  Industrial structures: Seventy-five (75) feet; 
f.  Structures with a mixture of residential, institutional, commercial, and/or industrial uses: One hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(6)  Minimum floor area required shall be as follows: 
a.  Single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and modular housing: Nine hundred (900) square feet; 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings shall vary based upon the following: 
1.  Minimum size is eight hundred (800) square feet; 
2.  Two-bedroom dwellings shall have at least nine hundred fifty (950) square feet; 
3.  Each dwelling unit with over two (2) bedrooms shall have at least two hundred (200) square feet of additional floor area for each bedroom over two (2). 
(h)  Preapplication procedures. 
(1)  At least thirty (30) calendar days prior to submittal of a rezoning application, any developer and property owner intending to apply for a PUD zoning district shall submit formal notice of intent to apply for such zoning. This notice shall be made in writing to the department of public services and shall include the following items: 
a.  Name of proposed PUD; 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer, and consultants working on, or involved in the proposed PUD; 
c.  A conceptual site plan showing the general layout of the development including proposed principal internal through streets and various use areas; 
d.  Proposed number of dwelling units and lots for individual dwellings by type of structure for each use area shown on the conceptual site plan; 
e.  Total acreage in the total tract; 
f.  Vicinity map; 
g.  Description of proposed uses to be allowed in each use area identified on the conceptual site plan; 
h.  A tract boundary map showing the specific boundaries of the property to include topographic data based on USGS (United States Geodetic Survey) and adjoining public rights-of-way; 
i.  Anticipated date for submitting the rezoning application; 
j.  Rights-of-way, easements in and adjacent to the property, and floodplain boundary. 
(2)  The department of public services shall review the material submitted and arrange a preapplication meeting with representatives of impacted governmental and utility entities. 
(3)  Upon reviewing comments received from the impacted governmental and utility entities the department of public services zoning board shall provide the owner and developer of the proposed PUD with a preliminary staff review at least ten (10) days prior to the anticipated date for submission of the rezoning application. 
(i)  Basic requirements. A PUD district must have at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on a principal arterial highway as designated in the city's land use plan. Property in a PUD district must have immediate access to major streets and highways as designated by the city. 
(1)  Minimum acreage requirements for a PUD district are as follows: 
a.  For a single character PUD district the size shall be defined in subsection (f) of this section. 
b.  For a comprehensive PUD district including some residential areas, the size shall be at least seventy-five (75) acres. 
c.  For a comprehensive PUD district without any residential areas, the size shall be at least fifty (50) acres. 
(2)  Any person intending to apply for a rezoning for more than one (1) acre and owning more than two hundred (200) acres contiguous to said property must apply for a PUD district for the entire contiguous acreage and comply with all procedures accordingly. 
(3)  Any request for a PUD district will be considered, and processed in the same manner as a rezoning application except that the additional requirements of this section 8-8-63 will be adhered to. 
(4)  Any application for rezoning for a PUD district must be accompanied by ten (10) copies of the following materials: 
a.  A site plan showing proposed improvements, internal circulation, parking, landscaping, grading/buffers, drainage plan and amenities; 
b.  A written report stating (for each use area shown on the site plan) the following: 
i.  Proposed structural types and uses; 
ii.  Development intensity development dimensional standards to be utilized in developing the property; 
iii.  Number of dwelling units by structural type (single-family detached, single-family attached, duplex, etc.) to be built; 
c.  A general description of the proposal; 
d.  Detailed legal description; 
e.  Ownership of adjacent properties; 
f.  Proposed dedication of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks, and school sites; 
g.  Plan for the provisions of utilities, including water, sewer, and drainage facilities; 
h.  Plans for buffering from adjacent properties; 
i.  Plans for open space, courts, walks and common areas; 
j.  Approximate locations of proposed points of access into existing streets; 
k.  Plans for acoustical treatments when PUD district is located within airport noise abatement areas. 
(j)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  No residential development shall have a density of greater than eleven (11) dwelling units per acre unless all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  The structures exceed three (3) stories in height; 
b.  The maximum ground coverage is twenty (20) percent; 
c.  No dwelling units located in structures in such areas have over two (2) bedrooms; 
d.  Not over 75 percent of the dwelling units in such areas have two (2) bedrooms. 
(2)  Individual building lots shall not have separate access to any public street in existence prior to the date of approval of the PUD district by the city council. However, this provision may be waived by the city council when taking action to approve the PUD zoning. 
(3)  For purposes of zoning compliance, a PUD district property shall be treated as one (1) lot or parcel. 
(4)  The building inspector shall be authorized to approve minor changes in the details of the approved PUD district plan; provided: 
a.  The developer can show a hardship requiring such modifications; and 
b.  The building inspector determines that the changes so requested do not materially affect the basic design nor negate any special features which were designed to facilitate traffic or preserve neighborhood character. 
(Ord. No. 91-001, 2-4-91) 
Sec. 8-8-64. - RMH mobile home park resident district. 
(a)  Intent of district. This district is intended to provide areas for use as mobile home parks at a medium density urban residential character with spaces in such parks to be offered for rent to mobile home owners. Such parks are to be located where public water and sewer systems are available. 
(b)  Definitions . For the purposes of this Code, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Manufactured home . A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section is as follows: 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under this title. 
(2)  Mobile home . A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
(3)  Modular home . A factory-fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(4)  Mobile home park . A tract of land developed and offered for the purpose of parking mobilehomes and manufactured homes for use as permanent or semipermanent dwelling units. No tract shall be a mobile home park if more than ten (10) percent of the available spaces are routinely made available to the traveling public for temporary use of less than thirty (30) days. 
(c)  Permitted structures and uses. 
(1)  Mobile home parks having a minimum of fifty (50) mobile home spaces; 
(2)  Travel/motor coach/RV camper park; 
(3)  Accessory structures and uses; 
(4)  Signs subject to restrictions as specified by provisions set forth in the city sign ordinances. 
(d)  Accessory structures and uses. 
(1)  One office/maintenance building incidental to use by residents of the mobile home park only; 
(2)  Recreation areas and structures owned, operated and maintained exclusively for the use of residents and guests of residents of the mobile home park and further provided that such areas and structures are controlled by the mobile home park's owners; 
(3)  Private streets to provide access only to the spaces and facilities within the mobile home park. 
(e)  Conditional structures and uses. Upon application to, and favorable decision thereon by, the city planning and zoning board as provided in the conditional structures and uses, specified herein, are permitted in this district, provided that their establishment promotes the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. Specific conditional structures and uses which may be permitted as so specified are as follows: 
(1)  Those conditional structures and uses common to all residential districts. 
(f)  Development intensity restrictions. The maximum intensity of development in this district is as follows: 
(1)  Minimum zoning district size: fifteen (15) acres; 
(2)  Minimum lot area: six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
(3)  Maximum ground cover: forty (40) percent; 
(4)  Maximum gross density: five (5) per acre. 
(g)  Development dimensional requirements. The minimum development dimensional requirements in this district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot width: sixty (60) feet at building line; 
(2)  Minimum front yard: thirty (30) feet; 
(3)  Side yard: zero (0) to twenty (20) feet; 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: thirty (30) feet; 
(5)  Maximum height: thirty-five (35) feet; 
(6)  Minimum floor area: six hundred (600) square feet. 
(h)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  All mobile homes locating in a mobile home park subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall provide documentation of compliance with the National Home Construction and Safety Act or compliance with specifications presented by the American National Standards Institute. Existing mobile homes within city mobile home parks not in compliance with either of these standards are nonconforming. 
(2)  No mobile or manufactured home or accessory structure shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way line of any federal or state highway or within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way line of any street right-of-way. 
(3)  No mobile or manufactured home or accessory structure shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any exterior boundary of a mobile home park. 
(4)  No mobile or manufactured home sales or repair facilities of any type (including automobile repair) shall be permitted; provided, however, that this shall not be construed as to prohibit the owner of a mobile or manufactured home from selling the mobile or manufactured home in which they are residing or to prohibit a person from performing minor repairs on an automobile which they own. 
(5)  Each mobile or manufactured home space within the approved park shall be clearly delineated by means of an iron pin at each corner. 
(6)  Each mobile or manufactured home space within the approved park shall abut, have access to and have sixty (60) feet of frontage on an approved private street of the park. Such street shall meet city requirements for pavement width and construction materials and methods as if it were a public street. 
(7)  The business of renting or otherwise allowing recreational vehicles, or of operating a trailer park or campground is not a permitted use in this district. 
(8)  The building and zoning administrator shall review and approve preliminary and final site plans. 
(9)  All mobile home parks shall have an opaque buffer fifty (50) feet in width. 
(10)  No mobile or manufactured home space within the district shall front on or have immediate access to a public street. 
(11)  The side yard between mobile or manufactured home spaces shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet and shall be maintained between all buildings, and no building may be closer than fifty (50) feet of any boundary of an RMH zoning district. 
(12)  Within all developments in an RMH zoning district, at least fifteen (15) percent of the total gross land area shall be devoted to recreation or improved open space suitable for recreation purposes. Approval of such areas shall be as provided in an attached single-family development in an R-60 district. This area must be developed prior to any mobile or manufactured homes being placed upon any space. All spaces approved for occupancy must have access to recreation areas. 
a.  Areas not to be included in computation of recreation and open space requirements in this paragraph include streets, utility easements of over ten (10) feet in width and drainage easements. 
(13)  No mobile or manufactured home shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the rear line of the space on which it is located or within thirty (30) feet of the private street on which it is located. 
(14)  No mobile home park shall be constructed or maintained on a lot or tract which has an average width of less than four hundred (400) feet or a total area of less than ten (10) acres. 
(15)  At least two (2) paved parking spaces shall be provided on each mobile or manufactured home space. 
(16)  Except for those in place upon the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, no mobile or manufactured home shall be allowed which has dimensions of less than twelve (12) feet by fifty (50) feet or a heated floor area of less than six hundred (600) square feet. 
(17)  One refuse collection station shall be provided for each twenty (20) mobile or manufactured home spaces or fraction thereof, conveniently located to serve residents, not more than two hundred (200) feet from any mobile or manufactured space as measured along the adjoining streets or concrete sidewalk. 
(18)  Each mobile or manufactured home shall be connected with water and sanitary sewer facilities in a manner approved by the city public service department to their specification (where applicable), and in compliance with the plumbing code of the city. 
(19)  The mobile home park and all mobile or manufactured homes located therein shall be in compliance with all regulations of the county and state health departments. 
(20)  At requirements of the city and state fire marshal's office shall be adhered to. 
(i)  Mobile home park criteria. 
(1)  A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building and zoning administration prior to development or expansion. No mobile or manufactured homes shall be placed in the new area of an existing park or a new park until the final site plan is approved by the building and zoning administrator. 
(2)  The minimum space limits and setback requirements shall be as set forth in this section. 
(3)  No additions shall be made to a mobile home park or mobile or manufactured home that will violate setback requirements. All additions shall be approved by the building and zoning administrator. 
(4)  Each mobile or manufactured home unit shall be installed on a concrete block foundation, of which the base block shall be solid and equal in size to the pier block size (a minimum of eight (8) inches by eight (8) inches by sixteen (16) inches). Top course of the parts of foundation shall be a solid cap block with a minimum dimension of four (4) inches by eight (8) inches by sixteen (16) inches. The mobile home unit shall be installed true and plumb. The tongue and wheels shall be removed and an approved permanent skirting shall be installed. 
(5)  All streets and driveways within the mobile home park shall be lighted between sunset and sunrise with electric lights emitting light at an intensity of at least five thousand (5,000) lumens, and the light poles shall be no more than two hundred fifty (250) feet apart. 
(6)  All streets and driveways shall be properly designed and shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet as approved by the city. 
(7)  An adequate supply of pure, potable water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile or manufactured home spaces within the park. Each mobile or manufactured home stand shall be provided with an approved cold water connection and a tap (hydrant) constructed in accordance with the plumbing standards adopted by the city. 
(8)  The following conditions regarding sanitation shall be complied with: 
a.  The area around and underneath each mobile or manufactured home unit shall be kept clean and free from collection of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles or other unsightly material. 
b.  Refuse control shall be provided by either of the following methods: 
i.  Centrally located trash dumpsters. One (1) such refuse collection station shall be provided for each twenty (20) mobile home spaces or fraction thereof conveniently located to serve tenants, not more than two hundred (200) feet from any space served, and be conveniently located for collection. Such station shall be constructed with a concrete floor and appropriate and enclosure methods; 
ii.  A centrally located trash compactor. 
c.  Regardless of the method to be utilized, plans for trash disposal are subject to approval by the building and zoning administration before approval is granted for development. 
(9)  No mobile home park shall be served by a privy. 
(10)  Every mobile home park shall be equipped at all times with fire equipment in good working order and of such type, size, number and location as to satisfy applicable fire regulations of the city; provided further that no open fires or burning of leaves or other refuse shall be permitted within the boundaries of any mobile home park. 
(11)  Each mobile or manufactured home in a mobile home park shall be provided with safety tiedowns in conformance with city building code requirements. 
(12)  A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross acreage of the mobile home park shall be set aside for the recreational use by residents of the mobile home park. Such recreation park shall be one (1) continuous tract or several tracts each no smaller than one-half (½) acre and located within the mobile home park in such a manner as to be convenient to all its residents. The recreational park shall be located on land suitable for park development and shall contain a sufficient amount of play equipment designed for elementary school age children. 
(13)  Planted buffers shall be required. Buffers shall be installed as follows: 
a.  Mobile home parks shall be surrounded by planted buffers at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth on the sides and rear, provided however, that no side and rear buffer is required between adjacent mobile home park developments. 
b.  Coin-operated laundries for the use of the residents of the mobile home park shall be permitted within enclosed buildings inside the park. Building structures containing such laundries may also contain vending machines and recreational rooms and activities. More intensive commercial uses than those specified herein are strictly prohibited. 
c.  Each mobile home space shall have the following: 
i.  A concrete patio at least four (4) inches thick with minimum dimensions of forty (40) feet by eight (8) feet; or 
ii.  A wooden deck built to city specifications and having a surface area of at least three hundred twenty (320) square feet; or 
iii.  A combination of a concrete patio at least four (4) inches thick and a wooden deck built to city specifications provided the combined surface area (excluding steps) is at least three hundred twenty (320) square feet. 
(j)  Travel trailer/motor coach (RV) campers within RMH district . No travel trailer/motor coach (RV) camper park may hereafter be developed or expanded until the site plan thereof has the approval of the building and zoning administrator which approval shall be given provided the plans as submitted meet the following requirements: 
(1)  No such park shall be located except with direct access to a county, state or federal highway and having a minimum of three hundred (300) feet of frontage thereon to permit adequate design of entrances and exits. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
(2)  The minimum area for such park shall be ten (10) acres, and maximum density of such park shall be eight (8) units per gross acre. 
(3)  Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
(4)  Spaces in such parks may be used by motor coaches, travel trailers, equivalent facilities constructed in or on automotive vehicles, tents or other short-term housing or shelter arrangements or devices. 
(5)  Management headquarters, recreational facilities, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a recreational vehicle park are permitted as an accessory use in any district in which recreational vehicle parks are allowed provided: 
a.  Such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the area of the park. 
b.  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
c.  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
(Ord. No. 92-023, 11-2-92) 
Sec. 8-8-65. - GZ Gillem Zoning District. 
(a)  Intent of district. The intent of the Gillem Zoning District is as follows: 
(1)  Allow an appropriate mix of industrial, commercial, office, residential and public uses; 
(2)  Establish uses that complement the city's main street development efforts, investments and goals; 
(3)  Improve the aesthetics of the built environment; 
(4)  Encourage a grid of connected streets to improve access and reduce congestion; 
(5)  Allow for the repurpose of the former Ft. Gillem area of the city. 
It is further intended to encourage development of compatible land uses on a scale larger than that of individual small parcels in a comprehensively planned setting and to promote the purposes set forth in the Gillem Logistics Center Master Declaration of Covenants Plan and other plans approved by the City of Forest Park Urban Redevelopment Authority. 
(b)  Required conditions. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration to neighboring residential properties. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Within the GZ Gillem Zoning District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Agriculture, excluding poultry and livestock in violation of portions of this Code; 
(2)  Any retail business or service, including manufacturing in connection with a retail store or shop, provided that such manufacturing is incidental to the retail use and all goods manufactured are sold on the premises; 
(3)  Appliance stores, including radio and television service; 
(4)  Banks and drive-in banks; 
(5)  Book, stationery, camera or photographic supply stores; 
(6)  Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants; 
(7)  Churches and other places of worship with attendant education and recreational buildings; 
(8)  Clinics, medical, dental, chiropractic, osteopathic and other similar uses; 
(9)  Clothing stores, millinery, dry goods and notions; 
(10)  Confectionery stores; 
(10a)  Consumer fireworks retail sales facility; 
(10b)  Consumer fireworks retail sales stand; 
(11)  Convenience stores; 
(12)  Convenience stores with gasoline sales; 
(13)  Distribution of products and merchandise; 
(14)  Day care centers of every nature, kind and description, provided that such uses are secondary uses to the primary permitted uses; 
(15)  Drug stores; 
(16)  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments including pickup stations but not including self-service laundry; 
(17)  Fabrication and assembly of products; 
(18)  Florist, nursery and gift shops; 
(19)  Furniture, home furnishings, including office furniture and equipment; 
(20)  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, meat market, delicatessen, catering, and super markets; 
(21)  Hotels and motels; 
(22)  Newspapers and printing plants; 
(23)  Noncommercial public and semipublic recreation facilities and grounds; 
(24)  Offices and office buildings; 
(25)  Off-street parking lots and parking garages; 
(26)  Places of assembly including auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums, and dance halls; 
(27)  Waste to energy facilities; 
(28)  Processing and compounding of materials; 
(29)  Public and private schools and libraries; 
(30)  Public utility structures and buildings, including electric and natural gas, substations, telephone exchanges, radio and television stations, and similar structures for the storage of supplies, equipment or service operations when properly screened in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(31)  Radio stations and transmission towers; 
(32)  Railway lines, passenger depots, intermodal facilities and rail yards; 
(33)  Recreational facilities, including but not limited to tennis courts, badminton courts and other open, unenclosed and uncovered recreational facilities; 
(34)  Recycling centers, provided any such center should be for collection only and no processing shall be permitted therein; 
(35)  Retail and commercial bakeries; 
(36)  Scientific or research laboratories; 
(37)  Shopping centers and malls; 
(38)  Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters provided, that such uses are not located within five hundred (500) feet of any other such uses; 
(39)  Warehousing; 
(40)  Wholesaling. 
(d)  The following regulations shall apply within the GZ Gillem Zoning District: 
(1)  Height . There are no limitations as to height in this district. Buildings in excess of one hundred ten (110) feet must be approved by the director of fire services. 
(2)  Front yard setback. On minor streets there shall be a front yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet and on major streets fifty-five (55) feet both being measured from the centerline of the street. The minimum setback from the street right-of-way or the center line of a street shall always be whichever is the greater distance. 
(e)  Within the GZ Gillem Zoning District, the following uses are prohibited: 
(1)  Automobile or truck repair shops; 
(2)  Flea markets, pawn shops, salvage shops, thrift shops, junk shops, used furniture or appliance sales or any establishment which deals primarily in used merchandise. For the purposes of this section, an establishment deals primarily in used merchandise if more than ten (10) percent of the regularly maintained inventory consists of items previously owned or previously used; 
(3)  Used car sales; 
(4)  Towing or wrecker services; 
(5)  Billiard halls and game rooms; 
(6)  Tattoo parlors; 
(7)  Massage parlors; 
(8)  Adult entertainment establishments. 
(f)  Conditional uses. Upon applicant to and recommendation by the planning commission that the same be permitted and, after a review and adoption of the findings of the planning commission by the mayor and council, the uses listed below may be permitted as conditional uses in the GZ Gillem Zoning District: 
(1)  Multi-family dwelling units. Provided the following specifications are met: 
a.  Must be completely self-contained and occupy a minimum of seven hundred (700) square feet of interior floor space. 
b.  There must be an interior division to provide for a separate bedroom, a separate kitchen area and a private bathroom. 
d.  All utilities shall be on separate service meters and construction of the dwelling unit shall be governed by residential building codes. 
e.  Walls constructed between dwelling units and commercial premises shall be so constructed as to have a firewall rated for two (2) hours. 
(Ord. No. 14-09, § 3, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 15-11, § 5, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 8-8-66. - X-1 Railroad District. 
(a)  Scope . The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in the ordinance from which this section was derived, when referred to in this section, are the regulations applicable in the X-1 Railroad District. 
(b)  Use regulations . A building or premises shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Railroad purposes. 
(2)  Off-street parking. 
(c)  Signs in excess of ten (10) square feet are prohibited in the X-1 Railroad District. 
(Ord. No. 14-18, § 7, 8-18-2014) 
Secs. 8-8-67—8-8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 8-8-71. - Existing lots. 
Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one (1) or more adjacent lots at the time of the enactment of this chapter did not at that time own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the maximum lot size requirements of this chapter, such plot of land may nevertheless be used as a building site. The yard and other space requirements of the district in which the piece of land is located may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit a house of minimum acceptable size to be built upon the lot. 
(Code 1959, § 24-30) 
Sec. 8-8-72. - Front yard setback for dwellings. 
The front yard setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the setbacks of the aforementioned existing buildings. 
(Code 1959, § 24-31) 
Sec. 8-8-73. - Buffer zone required. 
In any district which is zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, LI, HI, PI or PUD, which abuts a district zoned R-85, R-70, RM-85, RM-100 and RM-125, the owner of the property with a commercial zoning shall be required to maintain a buffer zone between the commercial property line at all points where it intersects with a property line of property zoned residential. 
(1)  The buffer zone shall be an area of space fifteen (15) feet in width, and shall be planted with sufficient vegetation so as to provide a visual screen between the commercial and residential property at least eight (8) feet in height. 
(2)  The buffer zone shall be free of any form of commercial activity whatsoever. 
(3)  In those instances where there is not sufficient space to enable the maintenance of a fifteen-foot buffer zone, a screen or fence at least eight (8) feet in height, and made of sufficient material to provide a visual screen between that property zoned commercial and that property zoned residential, shall be constructed by the owner of the property zoned commercial and maintained at all times. 
(Ord. No. 86-018, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-8-74. - Group projects. 
A group project (housing, commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religious, civic) of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of land of at least two (2) acres not subdivided into customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, may be constructed provided: 
(1)  Uses are limited to those permitted within the district in which the project is located. 
(2)  The overall intensity of land use is no higher and the standard of open space is no lower than that permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(3)  Building heights do not exceed the height limits permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(4)  Every building in the project is so situated: 
a.  As to have a minimum front yard measuring thirty-five (35) feet out from the front face of the building and extending parallel to the front of the building to include side yard lines on either side and a minimum of fifteen (15) feet on each side; 
b.  As to have a rear yard thirty (30) feet parallel to the rear of the building extending the entire length of the building plus a minimum of fifteen (15) feet on either side; 
c.  As to have a side yard distance a minimum of fifteen (15) feet parallel to each end from the front yard line to the back yard line; 
d.  As to have all yard requirements exclusive of any parking area, driveways, or utility buildings with the exception of walkways which may be located in yard area. 
(5)  If the project lies within or abuts upon a residential district, provisions shall be made for an adequate planted buffer strip along the rear or side lot lines abutting the residential properties. 
(Code 1959, § 24-32; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-8-75. - Height limits. 
(a)  The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; nor to monuments, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio or television towers or aerials. 
(b)  Public, semipublic service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet upon approval by the department of fire services. Any portion of said buildings or structures exceeding the height regulations of the district in which it is located shall be set back from side and rear lot lines by an additional one (1) foot for additional foot in height. 
(Code 1959, § 24-33) 
Sec. 8-8-76. - Storage yards. 
Exterior storage yards (but not including the parking of vehicles for sale or lease) shall not be permitted in any district except the LI, HI, and PI districts. In the LI, HI, and PI districts these storage yards shall be enclosed by a privacy fence not less than eight (8) feet in height to provide visual screening. 
(Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 8-8-77. - Site plan required. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit in any C-1 General Commercial, C-2 Central Commercial, C-3 Institutional Commercial, LI Light Industrial, or HI Heavy Industrial district, a site plan drawn to scale shall accompany a building permit request which shows the following: 
(1)  The northpoint, scale, and date. 
(2)  The boundaries of the property involved, the location of all existing easements, section lines, and property lines, existing streets, buildings, and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project. 
(3)  The location and size of existing and proposed streets, sidewalks, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, loading areas (including number of parking and loading spaces), and outdoor lighting systems. 
(4)  The location and height of all proposed main and accessory buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, height, and material of all fences, walls, screens, plants, and landscaping presently existing and to be constructed. 
(6)  Location, character, size, and height and orientation of proposed signs. 
(b)  Six (6) copies of the site plan prepared by and bearing the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional engineer shall be submitted to the building inspector for review and approval by the architectural design review board prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(c)  In addition to the site plan and other district requirements set forth in this chapter, the following improvements are required in any C-1 General Commercial, C-2 Central Commercial, C-3 Institutional Commercial, LI Light Industrial, or HI Heavy Industrial. 
(1)  Paved parking areas. 
(2)  Interior curbing utilizing standard twenty-four-inch concrete curb and gutter. 
(3)  Provisions for stormwater retention as required by other applicable city ordinances. 
(4)  Sidewalks when development abuts a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-8-78. - Fences. 
(a)  Within any C-1, C-2 or C-3 commercial district no fence shall be allowed to be placed forward of the front building wall of the primary structure, except that decorative fencing may be allowed within the front yard setback upon prior approval of the ADR board. Such fencing shall be set back as provided for in section 8-8-36 of this Code. 
(b)  Within any LI, HI, PI or PUD districts fencing may be allowed. All fencing constructed within these districts shall be set back as provided for in section 8-8-36 of this Code. 
(c)  Within R-80, R-95, RM-85, RM-100 and RM-125 residential districts fencing may be allowed except that such fences shall be set back as provided for in section 8-8-36 of this Code. However, barbed wire, razor wire, and electrical wire fencing is strictly prohibited in these residential districts. 
(d)  All fence installations provided for herein shall be subject to approval and permitting prior to construction. 
(e)  Fencing of junk yards as provided by section 8-2-95 may be permitted to be placed forward of the front building wall of the primary structure upon approval of the city, where such placement is necessary to effectively screen the use of the property. 
(f)  Within any commercial district, the fence may be placed forward of the front building wall of the primary structure in order to secure the inventory on parcels used for the sale or rental of new or previously owned automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 93-011, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 05-41, § 1, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 8-8-79. - Exemptions from chapter. 
The following are exempt from complying with the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all federal, state, county and municipal government agencies and boards of authority owned, operated and leased facilities as well as facilities owned, operated or leased by others that have received the city's permission to be located on land owned or leased by the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; however, the city shall be required to meet all of its other development codes, regulations and ordinances. 
(2)  Developments located within the Gillem Zoning District and approved by a resolution of the city and the City of Forest Park Urban Redevelopment Authority or its successor in title or function, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter provided that all other applicable development codes, regulations and ordinances are adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 14-09, § 4, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE G. - ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES; REMEDIES 

Sec. 8-8-81. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector and the code enforcement officer, and they are hereby given the authority, to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 24-34; Ord. No. 89-004, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 8-8-82. - Building permit required. 
The regulations contained in section 105 of the International Building Code and in section R105 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted by, and as may be amended or revised from time to time by, the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20(9) and 8-2-23(b), shall determine the circumstances under which a building permit is required in this chapter. Any exemption for a building permit provided under this section does not remove the requirements to adhere to other sections of this chapter that relate to building height, setbacks, lot width, lot coverage or other applicable zoning and building regulations. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-21, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 8-8-83. - Application for building permit. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and the locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use, and the location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 24-36) 
Sec. 8-8-84. - Construction progress. 
If no substantial construction progress has been made within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid. 
(Code 1959, § 24-37) 
Sec. 8-8-85. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
(1)  Any lot or a change in the use thereof. 
(2)  A building hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing building. 
(3)  Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or an amendment thereto or that is changed, extended, altered or rebuilt thereafter. The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Code 1959, § 24-38) 
Sec. 8-8-86. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 24-39, as amended by Ord. No. 87-001, 3-2-87) 
Sec. 8-8-87. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building inspector or other appropriate authority or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure, or land. 
(Code 1959, § 24-40) 
Sec. 8-8-88. - Architectural design review. 
(a)  Creation of architectural design review board. 
(1)  An architectural design review board is hereby created. Said board shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed by the governing body for terms of three (3) years each. The city manager shall provide advice and recommendations to the governing body concerning the qualifications of individuals considered for appointment to the board. On and after the effective date of this section, each person appointed to the board shall meet either one (1) of the two (2) following minimum requirements: (1) he or she shall be educated and experienced in the field of urban planning or urban development; or (2) he or she shall be a design professional registered and licensed by the State of Georgia in one (1) of the following professional fields: architecture, engineering, or landscape architecture. 
(2)  Any vacancy in the membership of the architectural design review board will be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall serve with pay as established by the governing body and may be reimbursed for any authorized travel expenses incurred while representing the board. 
(3)  Members of the architectural design review board shall be appointed by the governing body of the city for overlapping terms of three (3) years each. In order to ensure that the members' terms overlap, the initial appointments made after the effective date of this amendment may be, but are not required to be, for terms of three (3) years, two (2) years, or one (1) year, as needed to ensure overlapping terms as provided for in the original section 8-8-88; and thereafter all subsequent appointments shall be the terms of three (3) years each. All members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and assume office. 
(b)  Duties of the architectural design review board. The architectural design review board shall elect officers consisting of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary and shall adopt rules and guidelines for review of applications. Meetings of the board shall be held at such times as the board may determine on an as-needed basis. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall review and approve or disapprove development proposals as set forth in subsection 8-8-88(c)(3) below. 
(c)  Regulation of development in the architectural design overlay district. An architectural design overlay district presently overlays other districts on the official zoning district map. In the architectural design overlay district, as the same may be amended from time to time, the board shall review all proposed residential and/or commercial new construction, development, exterior remodeling (other than maintenance), reoccupancy and/or demolition within the architectural design overlay district, and shall approve or disapprove all such construction, development, exterior remodeling, reoccupancy and/or demolition in accordance with the requirements set forth in the following subsections. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide procedures and standards for review and approval of site, landscaping, and exterior architectural design plans for development within the architectural design overlay district in order to insure that such development complies with the provisions of this chapter and meets design and development policies established by the city. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the design plan review process is to regulate site plan, landscaping, and the exterior architectural design for all uses in the designated architectural design overlay district in order to: 
a.  Enhance and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the City of Forest Park as an attractive and progressive suburban community; 
b.  Protect and maintain the value of existing buildings and property; 
c.  Insure architectural harmony between buildings and landscaping in order to promote and protect the aesthetic qualities of Forest Park; 
d.  Lessen traffic congestion and minimize traffic safety problems; 
e.  Preserve and enhance the natural resources of Forest Park in order to provide aesthetic and other public benefits, such as pollution abatement, erosion and runoff control, energy conservation, and enhancement of property values; 
f.  Minimize any adverse impacts of new development on existing uses through provisions of screening, buffering, landscaping and other techniques; 
g.  Protect public investment by mitigating impacts generated by new development on existing public facilities and utilities; 
h.  Enhance economic opportunities by maintaining Forest Park as an attractive community for prospective developers, businesses, and residents. 
(3)  Applicability. A design plan approved by the architectural design review board shall be required before a building permit is issued on any improvement, grading, alteration of land or alteration of the exterior of any building commences, for all structures and uses in the architectural design overlay district. 
(4)  Approval procedures. Pre-application meeting. Prior to submittal of an application for approval or design plan, the applicant may meet with the building inspector and/or the architectural design review board. The purpose of this informal meeting is to insure the developer's understanding of this section and design plan application requirements; to inform the applicant of community design policies and standards; and to provide an opportunity for review of any preliminary drawings and site plans. 
(5)  Application review. A design plan application shall be submitted in triplicate to the building inspector for review to insure compliance with provisions of this section and for transmission of two (2) copies to the architectural design review board for review and final action. After the design plan application is submitted and accepted, the chairman of the board shall call a formal meeting within fifteen (15) days of the application's acceptance. Within seventy-two (72) hours after the date of formal review meeting, the board shall take final action on the design plan application. If the board shall fail to take final action upon the application, the application shall be deemed to be approved. The board may extend this deadline by a majority vote of those members present. When circumstances necessitate, the board may defer action on an application until its next meeting. 
(6)  Decisions of the board. The architectural design review board shall take final action by rendering one (1) of the following decisions on the design plan: 
a.  Approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building permits in accordance with the approved design plan. 
b.  Conditional approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building permits with approved conditions or modifications to the design plan. Conditions imposed by the board shall be to achieve public purposes and shall still permit development as accorded high-quality similar developments within the City of Forest Park. 
c.  Denial. The applicant shall not be granted a building permit. The board shall specify in writing to the applicant and governing body the reasons for denial. The reasons for denial shall include: negative impacts on the environment, property values, surrounding properties, or public health, safety, or welfare. 
(7)  Approval. Upon approval of the design plan, the chairman of the board shall notify the building inspector of the approval and transmit a copy of the approved design plan, with any conditions noted, to the building inspector. 
(8)  Enforcement. All exterior architectural design and landscaping and other on-site improvements shall be completed in accordance with the approved design plan. The building inspector shall make periodic field inspections as required. If a violation is found to exist, the building inspector shall take immediate appropriate action to insure compliance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all on-site improvements, landscaping, and exterior building facades are completed (or guaranteed through the posting of an acceptable performance bond) in accordance with the approved design plan. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued not to exceed thirty (30) days wherein the on-site improvements can be completed within that time frame and such conditions present no safety hazard. 
(9)  Approval duration and extension. Approval for a design plan submitted under provisions of this section shall expire or be extended subject to provisions in section 8-8-84 for building permits. 
(10)  Application requirements. The specific administrative requirements for any pre-application and final application for design plan approval shall be established by the City of Forest Park; however, the application shall contain at least the following three (3) elements, as applicable: 
a.  Site analysis. A site analysis, with appropriate topographic data, shall include information on significant manmade and natural features and features to be retained, moved or altered. 
b.  Site plan. A site plan at an appropriate scale with accompanying supporting information shall include information on proposed improvements including internal circulation and parking, landscaping, grading, lighting, drainage, and amenities. 
c.  Architectural design. The architectural design element shall include scaled elevation drawings of proposed structures and information on building materials, colors, and items affecting exterior appearance, such as signs, air conditioning, grills, compressors and similar features. 
(11)  Waiver. The architectural design review board may waive administrative requirements of this section as needed to facilitate the review process, where such requirements are inappropriate or unnecessary. 
(12)  General architectural requirements. The general architectural requirements listed in this section are minimum aesthetic standards for structures within the architectural design overlay district, regulated by the provisions of this section. These requirements shall be used by the architectural design review board in reviewing exterior architectural design plans and drawings, and may be supplemented by specific architectural design policies and standards, as established by the architectural design review board and approved by the governing body. 
a.  It shall not be the intent of the architectural requirements of this section to prescribe a narrow range of exterior architectural design choices, but rather to encourage well designed structures compatible with existing high-quality development in the immediate vicinity and in the surrounding area, and to prohibit poor-quality, garish, and/or incompatible design, which would have adverse effects on public and private investment. 
b.  Each architectural design plan shall be reviewed by the architectural design review board, based upon, but not limited to, the following policies and standards: 
1.  Design shall be in harmony with the general character of developments of high-quality in the immediate vicinity and the surrounding area, considering factors such as mass, building materials, placement, height, changing land use patterns, and consistency of exterior architectural treatment. 
2.  Design components shall be planned in such a fashion that they are physically and aesthetically related and coordinated with other elements of the project and surrounding environment to insure visual continuity of design. 
3.  Design shall protect scenic views, particularly those of open space, and utilize natural features of the site. 
4.  Design shall protect adjacent properties from negative visual and functional impacts. 
5.  All exterior forms, attached to buildings or detached, shall be in conformity to and secondary to the building. 
(13)  General landscaping requirements. The landscaping requirements listed in this section are the minimum design standards for all development regulated under the provisions of the architectural design overlay district. These requirements shall be used by the board and the building inspector in reviewing site plans, and may be supplemented by specific landscaping standards and specifications established by the architectural design review board and approved by the governing body. 
a.  Landscape design and planning shall be integrated with the overall design concept for the project; therefore, the board shall evaluate landscaping schemes as to their relationship to buildings and structures, as well as to existing natural and developed landscapes, and to other adjacent landscaping on private property and public rights-of-way. 
b.  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or at the applicant's option, replaced with suitable vegetation. 
c.  Landscaping or privacy fences shall be used whenever possible to screen objectionable views or nuisances which are visible from the roadway, such as service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units, transformers, and similar features. 
d.  Grass areas shall be sodded or seeded with a variety suitable to the area that produces complete, permanent coverage. 
e.  No artificial plants, trees, or other vegetation shall be installed. 
f.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with a sprinkler system or readily available water supply. 
(14)  Tree requirements. The following tree and planting and maintenance requirements shall be met within the architectural design overlay district: 
a.  Except as otherwise required by this section and to meet specific community design policies established by the architectural design review board, trees shall be planted and/or retained in areas of the site to enhance the overall project design and to provide such amenities as visual attractiveness, natural resources preservation and energy conservation. 
b.  All retained or planted trees shall be protected or situated so as to prevent damage from environmental changes resulting from any building or other improvement. 
c.  The architectural design review board may vary the minimum landscaping and tree requirements of this section, if specific circumstances and/or site conditions warrant such action. 
(15)  Agreement and bonding. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer or owner may be required to post a performance bond or cash escrow deposit guaranteeing all landscaping materials and work for a period of one (1) year after approval or acceptance thereof by the city in a sum established by the architectural design review board, if specific circumstances and/or conditions warrant such action (such as intentional failure on the part of the owner or developer to comply with these provisions on a prior occasion or occasions), such bond shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of replacing all landscaping required in the approved design plan. At the end of one (1) year, the building inspector shall make an inspection and notify the owner or developer and the bond company of any replacements/corrections required to be made. If there are no replacements or corrections to be made, then the building inspector may authorize release of the bond or cash deposit. 
(16)  Maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping and other features of the design plan approved by the architectural design review board. 
(17)  Appeals. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the architectural design review board shall be entitled to file an appeal with the governing body. 
a.  Said appeal must be submitted in writing and addressed to the mayor and council of the City of Forest Park. 
b.  Said appeal shall set forth each and every basis upon which the application was denied, and shall set forth each and every reason that the said denial should be overruled. 
c.  The governing body shall then set a time and date at the next regular meeting of the governing body whereby the aggrieved party may come before it and submit proof to said governing body that the denial is improper. 
d.  The governing body shall afford the applicant sufficient time in which the applicant may address each reason that said party contends the board was in error. The governing body shall then hear from a representative of the architectural design review board as to why said application was originally denied, and what negative impact said structure would have on the city. 
e.  The governing body may question either the applicant, the board representative, or both, in order to clarify or expand upon the position taken by either the applicant or the board. 
f.  Thereafter, the mayor and council shall vote and decide whether to overrule initial decision of the architectural design review board or whether to permit the decision of same to stand. 
(Ord. No. 87-017, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 97-003, § 1, 2-17-97; Ord. No. 09-32, § 1, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Secs. 8-8-89—8-8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 8-8-101. - Amendments. 
(a)  This zoning ordinance may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council, but no amendment shall become effective without a public hearing having been held prior to its passage as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The zoning map may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to, the planning commission for review and recommendation. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30 day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(Code 1959, § 24-41; Ord. No. 87-017, 11-2-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-017 divided the prior requirements pertaining to text and map amendments. 
Sec. 8-8-102. - Public hearings and public notices. 
The following provisions shall apply and no request for an amendment to the zoning ordinance which will affect a single parcel or a limited number of parcels of property shall become effective unless: 
(1)  The city has a notice containing a general description of the amendment under consideration and stating the date, time, and location at which the governing body will hold a public hearing on said amendment published in the official organ of Clayton County, Georgia. The newspaper notice shall also contain an accurate legal description of the potentially affected property, along with the street and number of the property, if such a number has been assigned. This notice must be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, with the first notice appearing no more than thirty (30) days and no less than fifteen (15) days from the date upon which the governing body is to hold its public hearing. 
(2)  The city has a sign informing the public of the property's present zoning category; the proposed zoning amendment; and the time, date, and location of the public hearing placed in a conspicuous location on the property for which an amendment to the ordinance is sought. Where possible, said sign shall be placed where the same can be seen from a public road. The sign must be posted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing, and the city shall have the sign location inspected at least each forty-eight (48) hours after the sign is posted. In the event that the city finds that the sign has been defaced or destroyed, the city shall have the sign re-erected within a reasonable length of time; provided, however, that the fact that the sign has been defaced or destroyed shall not prevent the public hearing from occurring as scheduled. It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to deface, damage, or remove any sign posted pursuant to this section. 
(3)  The governing body holds a public hearing in accordance with public notice given as described in subsections (1) and (2) above when acting pursuant to the provisions of section 8-8-101(a). 
(4)  The planning commission and the governing body hold a public hearing in accordance with the public notice provided for in subsections (1) and (2) above when acting pursuant to the provisions of section 8-8-101(b). 
(5)  Zoning hearings shall be held at city hall unless otherwise posted to be at another location, and shall be conducted according to the following guidelines: 
a.  Written comments regarding the subject of the zoning hearing may be submitted by any citizen or property owner at any time prior to the adjournment of the hearing. 
b.  Persons desiring to be heard orally may present their views at the hearing. The length of time of oral presentations permitted to each speaker will be determined by the mayor and council and will depend upon the number of persons present and desiring to speak. However, proponents and opponents of each zoning request shall have at least ten (10) minutes total per side to present data, evidence, and opinion. Insulting remarks of a personal nature will not be tolerated. 
c.  Any person desiring an exact transcript of the hearing must arrange for a court report at his or her own expense. 
d.  The mayor and council may ask questions of those parties presenting data, evidence, and opinion; and 
e.  All questions from the public or presenters will be addressed to the presiding officer. 
(6)  For those zoning decisions which are initiated by the governing body itself, and which are of general application or generally affect property within the city, the governing body shall comply with all provisions set forth hereinabove; provided, however that subsection (2) regarding the posting of signs shall not apply. 
For purposes of this subsection (6), a zoning decision of general application refers to a decision regarding land use which would not simply affect the use of a single parcel or a limited number of parcels of property, but rather would affect all parcels in one (1) or more zoning classifications, or would affect parcels located in particular geographic areas or on particular streets or roadways within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 24-42; Ord. No. 87-017, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 99-020, § 1, 11-15-99; Ord. No. 04-50, § 1, 9-20-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-017 deleted a prior requirement for hearing of text amendments by the planning commission. 
Sec. 8-8-103. - Re-application for amendment. 
Should the planning commission determine that a petition for an amendment (rezoning) presented to it is so similar in nature to any other petition presented to said commission in the six (6) months immediately past as to constitute substantially the same petition, the commission shall take no action on the new petition. The petitioner shall be directed by the commission to resubmit his request upon the expiration of six (6) months from the date the first or prior petition was acted upon by the governing body. 
(Code 1959, § 24-42.1) 
Sec. 8-8-104. - Fee for amendment. 
Each application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, including conditional use permits, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee that is set by resolution of the governing body. 
(Code 1959, § 24-42.2, as amended by Ord. No. 87-017, 11-2-87) 
Sec. 8-8-105. - Conditional amendments. 
(a)  An applicant may, if he desires, apply for a "conditional amendment" to this zoning ordinance. A conditional amendment is not to be confused with a conditional use permit. A "conditional amendment" should be an application for re-zoning or for a conditional use permit which, if it is granted, shall have attached to it the following condition: The applicant shall present detailed plans, specifications, design and layout for a particular development or use to the planning board and the governing body. These plans, specifications, design and layout shall be presented in triplicate. If the board and the governing body approve same, each set shall be marked "approved" and signed by the chairman of the board and the mayor. Either the board or the governing body may require the applicant to provide any information, document, correspondence, guarantee, bond, sketch, map, photograph, survey, topographical survey or any other item to insure a full and complete understanding of the proposal. The same procedure as to advertising and public hearings shall be followed as is required for ordinary amendments and conditional use permits and the same fees shall be paid. The board shall make its recommendations to the governing body as usual. 
(b)  If the governing body approves the plans, specifications, design and layout, and otherwise approves the application, it shall then grant the conditional zoning to the category requested or the conditional use permit. Thereafter, the building inspector may issue a building permit provided the proposed construction meets existing building codes. 
(c)  No alteration, change or variation in plans, specifications, design or layout shall be allowed after the granting of conditional zoning or a conditional use permit unless the same is submitted to the board and approved by the governing body and public notice is given and public hearings held. 
(d)  The approved copies of plans, specifications, design and layout shall be distributed as follows: one (1) copy returned to the applicant; one (1) copy to the building inspector to insure strict compliance; and one (1) copy retained by the city, the same to become by reference a part of this chapter. 
(e)  Within one (1) year from the date the governing body grants conditional zoning or a conditional use permit under this section, the applicant must make substantial progress toward putting the approved plans, specifications, design and layout into effect. Failure to make such progress shall cause the property to revert back to its original status prior to the application being filed. 
(Code 1959, § 24-42.3) 
Sec. 8-8-106. - Standards of review. 
(a)  In ruling upon any application for a zoning map amendment or upon any application for a conditional use or upon any other application for which the discretion of the mayor and council or other decision-making bodies are otherwise invoked, they shall, at all times, act in the best interest of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. In doing so, they will consider one or more of the following factors as they may be relevant to each application: 
(1)  Would the proposed amendment be consistent and compatible with the city's land use and development, plans, goals and objectives: 
(2)  Would the proposed amendment tend to increase, to decrease, or to have no impact on traffic safety and congestion in the streets? 
(3)  Would the proposed amendment tend to increase, to decrease, or to have no relationship to safety from fire and other dangers? 
(4)  Would the proposed amendment tend to promote, to diminish, or to have no influence on the public health and general welfare of the city? 
(5)  Would the proposed amendment tend to increase, to decrease or to have no influence on the adequacy of light and air? 
(6)  Would the proposed amendment tend to cause, to prevent, or to have no influence on the overcrowding of land? 
(7)  Would the proposed amendment tend to cause, to prevent, or to have no relationship on the population distribution within the city, thus creating any area so dense in population as to adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the city? 
(8)  Would the proposed amendment tend to impede, to facilitate, or to have no impact on the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, other public services, utilities or facilities? 
(9)  Would the proposed amendment tend to be compatible with environmental conditions in light of surrounding developments? If compatible, what factors, if any, would diminish the value, use and enjoyment of surrounding properties? 
(10)  Would the proposed amendment tend to promote, to diminish, or to have no influence upon the aesthetic affect of existing and future uses of the property and the surrounding area? 
(11)  Would the proposed amendment tend to promote, to diminish, or to have no influence upon the aesthetic affect of existing and future uses of the property and the surrounding area? 
(12)  Would the proposed amendment have measurable adverse economic effect on the value of surrounding or adjacent property? 
(13)  Would the proposed amendment create an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts? 
(b)  After the mayor and council has heard evidence at the zoning hearing, they shall apply the evidence to the standards of review hereinabove set forth in arriving at their decision. They shall consider every relevant criteria contained in the standards. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show that the proposed zoning amendment promotes the public health, safety, or general welfare of the city. In the event the planning board and the mayor and council determine that the applicant has shown that the proposed zoning amendment promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare under the standards of review, then they shall grant the application, subject to any reasonable conditions that they may otherwise impose. Otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(c)  The mayor and council and the planning board shall follow the lines of inquiry as hereinafter set out: 
(1)  existing uses and zoning of the subject and nearby property; 
(2)  the extent to which property values are diminished by the existing zoning restrictions; 
(3)  the adverse economic effect of existing zoning in relation to the promotion of the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(4)  the relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship, if any, imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(5)  the suitability of the subject property for zoned purposes; 
(6)  the length of time the property, if vacant, has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area and vicinity of the subject property; 
(d)  The existing zoning classification shall be considered presumptively valid and it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to present evidence in rebuttal of this presumption. The planning board and the mayor and council may determine from the evidence presented that the existing zoning classification is unduly burdensome to the petitioner and is not offset by the considerations of the public's health, safety and general welfare, and may impose upon the property any appropriate zoning classification, including conditions which might be consistent with the considerations hereinabove set forth in this code section. 
(Ord. No. 86-006, 4-21-86; Ord. No. 92-014, 5-4-92, § (1)) 
Sec. 8-8-107. - Appeal. 
Any applicant dissatisfied with the decision of the governing body on a proposed amendment to this zoning ordinance (including a request for a conditional use permit or conditional zoning) shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of the Clayton County Judicial Circuit as provided by law. 
(Code 1959, § 24-42.4) 
Secs. 8-8-108—8-8-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 8-8-121. - Establishment of board of appeals. 
A board of zoning appeals is hereby established. Said board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor and council for overlapping terms of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members will be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Members shall be paid an amount that will be fixed from time to time by the governing body by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 24-43, as amended by Ord. No. 87-017, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-8-122. - Proceedings of the board of appeals. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall select a chairman and a vicechairman from its members who shall serve for one year or until reelected or until their successors are elected. The board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a municipal officer, an employee of the city, or a member of the planning commission. The board shall adopt rules and by-laws in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The chairman shall call meetings of the board, decide upon points of order and procedure, administer oaths, and command the appearances of witnesses. The vice-chairman shall, in the absence of the chairman, administer the offices of the chairman. The board shall keep minutes of is proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1959, § 24-44) 
Sec. 8-8-123. - Powers and duties of the board of appeals. 
The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of the chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for a variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of appeals that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
b.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the district in which the property is located. 
c.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located. 
d.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
e.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
f.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure. 
g.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
(Code 1959, § 24-45) 
Sec. 8-8-124. - Appeals; hearings; notice. 
(a)  Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the building inspector and with the board of appeals a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to it, and give at least 15 days' public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, or may be represented by agent or by attorney. 
(c)  Upon the receipt of a written notice of appeal, as set forth in subsection (a) above, the city shall cause to be posted on the property a sign stating that an appeal has been taken and that a hearing on said appeal will be held stating the time, date, and location of said hearing. The sign must be placed in a conspicuous spot on the property, and, where possible, located where same can be seen from a public road. The sign must be posted at least 15 days prior to the date of said public hearing. The city shall cause the sign location to be inspected no less often than each 48 hours after the same is posted. Should the city find that the sign has been defaced or destroyed, the city shall cause the sign to be re-erected in a reasonable length of time, but the fact that the sign has been defaced or destroyed shall not prevent the public hearing from taking place as scheduled. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this code for any person to deface, damage, or remove any sign posted pursuant to this code section. 
(Code 1959, § 24-46, as amended by Ord. No. 87-017, 11-2-87) 
Sec. 8-8-125. - Fees. 
A fee in an amount that may be set from time to time by the governing body shall be paid to the secretary of the board of zoning appeals at the time the notice of appeal is filed. The secretary shall forthwith pay the same over to the city clerk, who shall credit the fee to the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 24-47, as amended by Ord. No. 87-017, 11-2-87) 
Sec. 8-8-126. - Decisions of the board of appeals. 
(a)  In exercising its powers, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector and may issue or direct the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant or any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon request, the board of appeals shall inform, in writing, petitioners involved of its decisions and reasoning concerning all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the board. 
(Code 1959, § 24-48) 
Sec. 8-8-127. - Appeals from the board of appeals. 
Any person, firm or corporation jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals may seek review of such decision in the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia. 
(Code 1959, § 24-49; Ord. No. 96-005, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 8-8-128. - Stay or proceedings. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from. However, if the building inspector deems that peril to life and property is imminent in the case of an appeal, proceedings shall not be stayed. 
(Code 1959, § 24-50) 
Sec. 8-8-129. - Moving structures into the city or from place to place within the city. 
(a)  The provisions of this zoning ordinance shall apply to the movement of previously constructed buildings, including residences, into the city, and the movement of such structures from one location in the city to another location. Specifically, before such a building may be moved into the city or moved from one location in the city to another, the zoning requirements of the district in which the building is proposed to be situated must be met, including, without limitation, yard requirements, floor area requirements, height limits and lot coverage. Additionally, the orientation of the building on the lot shall correspond to the orientation of the building as originally constructed, i.e., the "front" of the building shall face the street upon which the lot fronts. 
(b)  Any person desiring to locate or relocate a building or any part thereof shall comply with each and every requirement of all applicable city construction and building codes. Failure to so comply shall constitute an unlawful act and a violation of this Code. 
(c)  Any person desiring to locate or relocate such a structure shall do so after making application to the governing body. Upon the filing of such an application, the city manager [shall] obtain in writing the opinions of all department heads whose departments are affected. Failure to obtain a permit constitutes an unlawful act and a violation of this Code. 
(d)  No structure or part thereof as described in this section shall be moved on the streets of the city without the approval of the department of police and fire services as to time of movement, date of movement, and method of movement. 
(Code 1959, § 24-51; Ord. No. 87-001, 3-2-87, Ord. No. 91-007, § 1, 5-20-91) 
Secs. 8-8-130—8-8-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE J. - FOREST PARK TREE AND VEGETATION PROTECTION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2000, pertained to forest p[ark tree and vegetation protection and was designated as §§ 8-8-124—8-8-140. For purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 8-8-124—8-8-140 as §§ 8-8-154—8-8-170. 

Sec. 8-8-154. - Definitions. 
The following definition of terms shall apply to the Forest Park Tree Protection Ordinance: 
City: The City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Buffer: That portion of a lot set aside with adequate natural or planted vegetation to accomplish visual and sound screening to separate residential zoning districts as required in the City of Forest Park Zoning Ordinance. (Reference sections 8-8-73 buffer zone required) 
Clearing: An activity which removes or disturbs the vegetative cover, including trees. 
Crown dripline: A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree branch tip to the ground. 
Deciduous tree: Any tree which drops its leaves at the end of a growing season. 
Dripline area: The total area underneath a tree which would encompass all crown driplines. 
DBH or "diameter-at-breast height:" A standard measure of tree size, and is the trunk diameter measured in inches to a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, each trunk is measured separately, and the total trunk diameters are added together. A tree which splits into multiple trunks above 4.5 feet is measured as a single tree at 4.5 feet. 
Evergreen: Any tree which retains its foliage throughout the year. 
Landscaping: Any additions to the natural features of a plot of ground to restore construction disturbance and to make it more attractive, by adding lawns, trees, and shrubs, etc., to the natural environment. 
Landscape area: An area set aside for the installation and maintenance of planting materials. 
Landscaping ordinance: A document which establishes requirements as to the number, size, and type of vegetation for landscaping improvements (ADRB landscaping requirements). 
Land and vegetation disturbance permit: A permit to authorize the cutting, transporting, and clearing of vegetation. 
Natural vegetation: A generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprising indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses and trees. 
Natural vegetation area: The area within the boundaries of a given lot which is devoted to natural vegetation. 
Protection area: All land which falls outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of the parcel required to remain in open space, the dripline areas beneath a tree or clusters of trees to be retained, and/or areas required to remain landscape strips or buffers according to the City of Forest Park Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning approval. 
Shrub: A woody plant or bush of relatively low height (two (2) to six (6) feet), distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
Specimen tree or specimen stand: Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined to be of high value because of its species, size, age, or location. General criteria for the determination of specimen trees or stands are as follows: 
(1)  Any deciduous tree whose DBH equals or exceeds twenty-four (24) inches. 
(2)  Any evergreen tree whose DBH equals or exceeds twenty-four (24) inches. 
(3)  Any understory tree whose DBH equals of exceeds ten (10) inches. 
(4)  Any tree which has a significant historical value and can be documented through historical records or otherwise, and any tree which has exceptional aesthetic value. 
Tree harvesting: The cutting of more than fifteen (15) trees per year for purposes not related to immediate land development or in conjunction with an ongoing development project. 
Understory tree: Any tree or woody plant which is of lesser height and spread than the surrounding evergreens or deciduous trees but which still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-155. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to any activity which involves the removal of trees in the city. 
Exemptions from the Forest Park Tree Protection Ordinance are: 
(1)  Dead, diseased, or infested trees as determined by the Georgia Forestry Commission and/or its local representative(s). 
(2)  Orchards and tree nurseries in active commercial operation. 
(3)  In the case of a tree contractor removing a tree or trees in a residential area, the contractor will not be required to submit a site plan but shall obtain a permit and pay a fee. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-156. - Land vegetation disturbance permit required. 
Unless specifically exempted from this article, all owners, developers of land, or contractors, must secure a land and vegetation disturbance permit prior to the removal, relocation, or transportation of any trees in the incorporated City Limits of Forest Park. 
(1)  Procedure. 
Four (4) copies of a tree protection plan (TPP) must be submitted to the City of Forest Park Planning, Building, and Zoning Director, or his designee, for review to ascertain conformance to the City of Forest Park Tree Protection Ordinance prior to application for a land and vegetation disturbance permit and/or application for development plan and preliminary plat approval. It is advised that a qualified landscape architect, Georgia Forestry Commission (GVC) certified urban forester, or arborist prepare the TPP. 
The TPP must include: 
1.  The exact location of all existing trees and specimen trees more than ten (10) inches in diameter clearly indicating those which will be retained to meet the tree protection requirements, their size, dripline area and species. 
2.  The location, size, and species of all replacement trees. 
3.  The boundaries of all required buffer areas. 
4.  The boundaries of all existing and proposed landscaped areas. 
5.  The boundaries of all existing and proposed buildings. 
6.  The boundaries of all vehicle and pedestrian use areas. 
7.  All existing and proposed utilities (i.e., water, sewer, stormwater drainage and retention facilities, etc.), and all existing and proposed utility poles and/or light poles. 
Upon submission of the TPP, the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee, shall: 
1.  Conduct a preliminary review of the TPP. 
2.  Conduct an on-site inspection to determine if there are any trees of exceptional aesthetic or historical value. 
3.  Return the TPP either approved or with changes which must be made prior to the issuance of a land and vegetation disturbance permit. 
After final approval of the TPP by the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee, development plan and plats can be forwarded for review, of the land and vegetation disturbance permit can be issued. Plans will be considered approved if no decision is made by the city within thirty (30) days of the submission of the TPP. 
(2)  Compliance: 
It is the responsibility of the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee, to review the TPP to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the tree protection ordinance before a land and vegetation disturbance permit will be issued. It is also the responsibility of the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee, to conduct a final inspection for compliance with the tree protection ordinance before a certificate of occupancy or acceptance of streets will be granted. 
(3)  Appeal procedure: 
Any applicant for a land and vegetation disturbance permit who is aggrieved by any decision of the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee, relating to the application of this article shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. Such appeal shall be requested in writing no less than ten (10) days after the decision has been made. The appeal shall be heard by the city manager within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the appeals request. The city manager shall have the right to overturn, modify, or affirm the decision made by the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-157. - Tree protection requirements. 
Property subject to the Forest Park Tree Protection Ordinance shall retain a minimum of twenty (20) percent of all trees more than ten (10) inches in diameter. Trees which fulfill this preservation requirement shall be exclusive of the required buffer areas. Every five (5) caliper inches of trees preserved shall count one (1) caliper inch toward the density requirements. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-158. - Guidelines for tree protection. 
Listed below are guidelines for tree protection to be followed during the grading and construction process, and for the continued maintenance of trees. 
(1)  All individual stand alone trees to be retained on a site must be marked with orange engineering tape, tied around the trunk of the tree at a height of five (5) feet above the ground. 
(2)  The tree protection area (dripline area) of stand alone trees and stands of trees will be marked with standard construction fencing (orange) or four (4) foot silt fence with stakes placed every ten (10) feet. 
(3)  If initial development is limited to streets, drainage easements and utilities, a TPP indicating only trees equal to or in excess of ten (10) inches DBH which are to be removed must be submitted. During street and utility construction, the grading permit shall be limited to the area needed for street right-of-way. 
(4)  If it is determined that irreparable damage has been done to a tree in a tree protection area, the developer, the builder, and/or owner shall be responsible for the replacement of that tree as provided for in this article under "guidelines for replacement." 
(5)  All areas not devoted to structures, access ways, dumpsters, storage, roads, parking lots and natural vegetation shall be landscaped. 
(6)  The planning, building, and zoning department may require landscaping in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit not requiring plat or site approval. 
(7)  All trees planted in accordance with this article shall be of a species approved by the city. 
(8)  The planting of trees to meet the requirements of this article shall be on the front or side of the developed areas and plantings behind a building shall not be counted in determining the minimum requirements of this section unless specifically authorized by the city. 
(9)  The care and maintenance of trees shall be the responsibility of the current owner. Trees which become diseased or dysfunctional shall be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-159. - Guidelines for tree replacement. 
(a)  If the tree preservation requirements of this article make reasonable use of a property impossible or if a tree in a tree protection area is irreparably damaged, the following replacement requirements shall be followed after the construction process is complete. 
(1)  The trees shall be replaced diameter inch for diameter inch with a minimum of three (3) inch DBH trees of the same species. If the species of the existing tree is unsuitable for replacement [refer to section 8-8-159(b)] or is unavailable, an inch for inch replacement of minimum three (3) inch DBH trees of a suitable species [refer to section 8-8-159(b)] shall be planted. 
(2)  All trees selected for replacement must be quality specimens free of disease, injury, or infestation, and must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing area [refer to section 8-8-159(b)]. 
(3)  All replacement trees must be planted before a certificate of occupancy is issued or streets and easements will be accepted. 
(4)  Replacement trees planted shall fall under the maintenance provisions of the City of Forest Park (ADRB Requirements). 
(5)  Specimen trees shall be replaced with specimen trees and understory trees shall be replaced with understory trees [refer to section 8-8-159(b)]. 
(6)  Where the minimum tree diameter cannot be met due to natural site constraints, the developer or builder shall provide the remaining balance of the required trees for planting on public property. 
(b)  Trees suitable for replacement trees and unsuitable as replacement trees: 
(1)  Trees suitable as replacement trees for specimen trees: 

 
(2)  Trees suitable for the replacement of understory trees: 

 
Other understory trees may be allowed with the approval of the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee. 
(3)  Trees unsuitable for replacement: 

 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-160. - Tree harvesting prohibited. 
Tree harvesting is not allowed in a residentially zoned area or within one hundred (100) yards of residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-161. - Fees. 
(a)  All permits and licenses shall be obtained through the business licensing and permits department at city hall and planning, building, and zoning and shall be in accordance with the business license ordinance prior to commencement of any type of operation. A permit of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid annually by any tree contractor removing a tree or trees. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 14-09, § 5, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-8-162. - Variances. 
The city council may authorize in specific cases such variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest when, due to special conditions: 
(1)  Granting a variance is determined to be a greater public benefit than the literal enforcement of the ordinance; and 
(2)  The tree replacement requirements of the ordinance could be met on site but, due to the location of the replacement trees they would not be in keeping with the intent and goals of the tree protection and/or landscaping ordinances of the city. 
The affected property owner must make application for the variance request to the city manager no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the next scheduled city council meeting. The variance request shall not be placed on the council agenda if the city manager determines that the request does not meet the variance criteria listed above. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-163. - Penalties. 
Citation(s) for violation(s) of this article will be issued by the city. The citation shall be returnable to and tried before the environmental court of the city. Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating this article shall upon conviction be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as described in section 1-1-8, general penalty. Each day such violation remains unresolved to the satisfaction of the city shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to any imposed fines, the responsible person may be required to replace a removed tree with a number of smaller trees of the same species, provided the combined caliper measurements of the smaller trees are at least equal to the measurement of the tree which was removed. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-164. - Industrial, commercial, office, and institutional, business park, and multi-family residential landscaping plan required. 
Industrial, commercial, office, and institutional, business park, and multi-family developments shall be required to provide a landscaping plan and submit the landscaping plan for review and approval by the planning, building, and zoning director, or his designee, with the submission of the site plan for development approval. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-165. - Minimum requirements for trees. 
The landscaping plan shall provide a minimum of one (1) specimen tree with a minimum diameter of two (2) inches and an understory tree with a diameter of two (2) inches for every two thousand (2,000) square feet of impervious surface for which a development permit is sought. All trees must be planted in areas large enough to accommodate a full-grown tree of the species planted. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-166. - Minimum requirements for shrubbery. 
The landscaping plan shall provide for one (1) bush per five hundred (500) square feet of impervious surface of an industrial, commercial, office, and institutional, business park, and multi-family site. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-167. - Minimum requirements for ground cover. 
Areas on the site which are not covered by trees and/or shrubbery shall be planted with grass or other ground cover. 
Where appropriate, other permeable ground cover, such as mulch and stones, may be used as an alternative to the ground cover listed in this section. However, alternative forms of ground cover must be specifically approved by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-168. - General regulations for landscaped areas. 
There are no prescribed criteria for design or formation of the landscaped area. However, it should be consistent with the architectural scheme of the building and surrounding area and should complement the plan for sediment and erosion control of the site. 
The requirements of the previous paragraphs shall be in addition to buffer zones and tree protection areas; however, some relief of the above described requirements may be granted, by the mayor and council, for saving existing trees, shrubbery, and ground cover on the site. 
Industrial, commercial, office, and institutional, business park, and multi-family sites one (1) acre or more must be landscaped entirely. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 14-09, § 6, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-8-169. - Specifically approved trees, shrubbery, and ground covers. 
The following trees, shrubbery, and ground covers are specifically approved; however, developers may, at the discretion of the planning, building, and zoning director and the city manager, substitute other varieties as deemed appropriate. 
TREES 

 
SHRUBBERY 

 
GROUND COVER 

 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 8-8-170. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The foregoing requirements shall be mandatory for all industrial, business park, and multi-family developments constructed in the city. 
Failure to provide and adhere to the industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park, and multi-family landscaping requirements shall be grounds for denial of a building permit for such developments, the issuance of a stop-work order for such developments, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or the revocation of the business licenses of the builder and/or tenants of the development. 
Furthermore, the maintenance of the landscaping, including the replacement of trees, shrubs, and ground cover, is the sole responsibility of the property owner(s). Upon finding a violation, the code enforcement officer of the city shall notify the property owner(s), in writing, and the owner shall be given thirty (30) calendar days from the date of notification to bring the site into compliance. If the property is in violation after that time, the code enforcement officer shall issue a citation against the property owner(s) of a site in violation with a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) maximum fine. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 8-7-2000) 
Cross reference— Section 1-1-8, general penalty. 
Sec. 8-8-171. - Exemptions from this article. 
The following are exempt from complying with the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all federal, state, county and municipal government agencies and boards of authority owned, operated and leased facilities as well as facilities owned, operated or leased by others that have received the city's permission to be located on land owned or leased by the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; however, the city shall be required to meet all of its other development codes, regulations and ordinances. 
(2)  Developments located within the Gillem Zoning District and approved by a resolution of the city and the City of Forest Park Urban Redevelopment Authority or its successor in title or function, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter provided that all other applicable development codes, regulations and ordinances are adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 14-09, § 7, 4-7-2014) 
Secs. 8-8-172—8-8-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE K. - MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS; EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 8-8-180. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article and for the purposes of the zoning ordinance of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, the following definitions shall apply: 
Boarding house or rooming house shall mean any dwelling in which three (3) or more persons, and up to fifteen (15), are housed for hire for periods of one (1) week or more. Provision for meals may also be made, so long as cooking is done in a central kitchen and not in individual rooms or suites. 
Child or children shall mean any person under the age of nineteen (19) years living with a parent or grandparent or other legal guardian or in foster care. 
Family shall mean two (2) or more persons residing in a single dwelling unit where all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption up to the second degree of consanguinity, or by foster care. For purposes of this definition, "the second degree of consanguinity" means only the following: husbands and wives, parents and children, grandparents and grandchildren, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, nephews and nieces, and first cousins. Also for the purposes of this definition, a person shall be considered to reside in a dwelling unit if he or she stays overnight in a dwelling unit for more than thirty (30) days in a ninety-day period. The term "family" does not include an organization or institutional group, such as (but not limited to), boarding houses or rooming houses, shelters for the homeless, day care centers, personal care homes, hotels, motels, hospices, hospitals, and nursing homes. 
(Ord. No. 07-29, § 1, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 8-8-181. - Maximum occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful for the occupants residing in or for the owner of any single dwelling unit to have more than four (4) unrelated persons residing therein, nor shall any family as defined herein have, in addition to members of the family, more than two (2) additional unrelated persons residing therein. 
(Ord. No. 07-29, § 1, 7-2-2007) 
Sec. 8-8-182. - Maximum occupancy for all residential dwellings; exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, not more than eight (8) persons, related by blood or marriage or unrelated, shall occupy any dwelling unit unless a variance has been granted pursuant to Title 8, Chapter 8, Article I of this Code, entitled "Board of Zoning Appeals". 
(Ord. No. 07-34, § 1, 9-4-2007) 
Secs. 8-8-183—8-8-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE L. - FOREST PARK MAIN STREET OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 8-8-201. - Purpose of Main Street Overlay District. 
The design guidelines are created to help attract and direct new growth as the city anticipates development in the Main Street and Fort Gillem areas. The city has created the Main Street and Ft. Gillem Tax Allocation District to incentivize the type of targeted growth that will revitalize these strategic areas of the city. These design guidelines will inform the redevelopment of the Main Street District to ensure that new construction and renovation contributes to a sense of place, a lively pedestrian environment, and a high quality, small-town destination, consistent with the city's redevelopment plan adopted in 2008. The regulations will provide strong direction for property owners and property developers seeking to be a part of the Main Street revitalization while reassuring residents that new development is guided by a vision for a walkable, friendly, and inviting Main Street that is accessible to all. 
The guidelines establish a framework upon which the various aspects of development can evolve as part of a cohesive fabric. They provide criteria for project review, and an objective basis for the decisions and recommendations of the Forest Park Architectural Design Review Board. This review process governs all proposed development in the Main Street District. The guidelines also include design requirements that promote effective use of the built environment, which can lead to a reduction in the incidence and fear of crime, and an improvement in the quality of life. The guidelines and their enforcement serve to protect property values and personal investment by ensuring a quality and consistency of design, continuity, a sense of order, and the reinforcement of community. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-202. - Main Street Overlay District. 
The Main Street Overlay District overlays other districts on the official zoning district map and in the zoning ordinance. The boundaries of the Main Street Overlay District are shown on map Attachment A which by this reference is incorporated into and made a part of this article L. The area includes Main Street and Forest Parkway between West Street and Jonesboro Road, Jonesboro Road between Marie Street and Forest Parkway, and nearby side streets within the area, more specifically described as follows: 
Beginning at a point located on the centerline of the track, said point being more particularly described as being at the intersection of the Central of Georgia Railway (100' R/W) and centerline of West Street (50' R/W), thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of West Street 400 feet to a point; located at the intersection of the centerline of West Street and the south R/W of Hill Street (40' R/W), thence in an easterly direction along the south R/W of Hill Street 2,590 feet to a point; located at the intersection of the south R/W of Hill Street and the centerline of College Street; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of College Street, 315 feet to a point; located at the intersection of the centerline of College Street and the south R/W of Finley Drive (30' R/W), thence in an easterly direction along the south R/W of Finley Drive, 1,540 feet to a point; located at the intersection of the south R/W of Finley Drive and the centerline of Courtney Drive (35' R/W), thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Courtney Drive, 480 feet to a point, located at the intersection of the centerline of Courtney Drive and the south R/W of Marie Street (30' R/W), thence in an easterly direction along the south R/W of Marie Street 600 feet to a point, located at the intersection of the south R/W of Marie Street and the west R/W of Jonesboro Road aka Georgia State Route No. 54 (100' R/W). thence in a southeasterly direction, diagonally across Jonesboro Road 150 feet to a point, located at the intersection of the east R/W of Jonesboro Road and the south R/W of Bartlett Road (50' R/W), thence along the south R/W of Bartlett Road 350 feet to a point, located on the south R/W of Bartlett Road, thence in a southerly direction 320 feet to a point, thence in an easterly direction 400 feet to a point; located on the 12 th and 13 th District boundary line and also being a property corner of the Atlanta Army Depot, thence in a southerly direction along the 12 th and 13 th District boundary line of the Atlanta Army Depot, 980 feet to a point, located on the east R/W of Jonesboro Road aka Georgia State Road No. 54 (100 R/W). Thence, in a southwesterly direction diagonally across Jonesboro Road 230 feet to a point, located on the west R/W of Jonesboro Road, thence in a southerly direction along the west R/W of Jonesboro Road 850 feet to a point, located at the intersection of the west R/W of Jonesboro Road and the north R/W of the Central of Georgia Railway, thence northwest along the north R/W of the Central of Georgia Railway, approximately 980 feet more or less to a point on the north R/W of the Central of Georgia Railway; thence in a southerly direction 50 feet to a point on the centerline of the track of the Central of Georgia Railway, thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of the track, 5,340 feet to the intersection of the centerline of West Street and being the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-203. - Applicability of regulations. 
(a)  The scope of regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this Code when referred to in this article, are the regulations of the Main Street Overlay District. The existing zoning map and all underlying zoning regulations governing all properties within the Main Street Overlay District shall remain in full force and effect. The regulations contained within this article shall be overlaid upon, and shall be imposed in addition to, said existing zoning regulations. Except where it is otherwise explicitly provided, whenever the following overlay regulations are at variance with said existing underlying zoning regulations, the regulations of this article shall apply. The design guidelines shall apply to new construction and any reconstruction, relocation, alteration, remodeling or renovation of structures within the Main Street Overlay District. Any property where sixty (60) percent or greater of the principal building is removed or destroyed by any means shall be redeveloped in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Amendments. These district regulations may be amended as provided by Code section 8-8-101, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-204. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Architectural design review board or ADRB or board means that administrative review body as provided by section 8-8-88, of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Development means new construction and any reconstruction, relocation, alteration, remodeling or renovation of structures within the Main Street District. 
(c)  Guidelines means the regulations codified within this article of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(d)  Main Street Overlay District or district means all that portion of the city within or along the area bounded by Forest Parkway, Jonesboro Road, Marie Street, Courtney Drive, Finley Drive, College Street, Hill Street and West Street within the city, as more particularly defined in section 8-8-202, to which these regulations apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-205. - Application to architectural design review board. 
In the Main Street Overlay District as it may be amended from time to time, the ADRB shall review all proposed residential and/or commercial construction, development, exterior remodeling (other than maintenance), alteration renovation, re-occupancy and/or demolition, and shall approve or disapprove all such actions in accordance with the requirements set forth in the following subsections. 
(a)  Process. 
1.  Intent. The following shall provide procedures and standards for review and approval of site, landscaping, and exterior architectural design documents for development within the Main Street Overlay District in order to ensure that such development complies with the design and development policies established by the City. 
2.  Purpose. The purpose of the design plan review process is to regulate site plan, landscaping, and the exterior architectural design for all uses in the designated Main Street Overlay District in order to: 
(A)  Enhance and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the city as an attractive and progressive community; 
(B)  Protect and maintain the value of existing buildings and property; 
(C)  Ensure architectural harmony between buildings and landscaping in order to promote and protect the aesthetic qualities of the city; 
(D)  Improve the pedestrian environment and minimize safety problems; 
(E)  Preserve and enhance the natural resources of the city in order to provide aesthetic and other public benefits, such as pollution abatement, erosion and runoff control, energy conservation, and enhancement of property values; 
(F)  Minimize any adverse impacts of new development on existing uses through provisions of screening, buffering, landscaping and other techniques; 
(G)  Protect public investment by mitigating impacts generated by new development on existing public facilities and utilities; 
(H)  Enhance economic opportunities by maintaining the city as an attractive community for prospective owners, developers, business, and residents. 
(I)  Employ principles of crime prevention through environmental design where efficient and compatible. 
3.  Applicability. A design plan approved by the ADRB, including site, building and elevation drawings, shall be required before a building permit is issued on any improvement, grading, alteration of land or alteration of the exterior of any building or structure, for all structures and uses in the Main Street Overlay District. 
4.  Requirements. The specific administrative requirements for any pre-application and final application for design plan approval shall be established by the city; however, the application shall contain at least the following three (3) elements, as applicable: 
(A)  Site analysis. A site analysis, with appropriate topographic data, including information on significant manmade and natural features and features to be retained, moved or altered. 
(B)  Site plan. A site plan at an appropriate engineering scale with adequate resolution for verification of measurements shall be used and shall include information on proposed improvements including internal circulation and parking, building footprint, landscaping, grading, lighting, fencing, stormwater management, and amenities. 
(C)  Architectural design. The architectural design element shall include scaled elevation drawings of proposed structures and information on building materials, fenestration, colors, and items affecting exterior appearance, such as signs, air conditioning, grills, compressors and similar equipment and features. Elevation drawings of each exterior façade must be provided at the time of application. Information regarding sustainable design should be submitted at this time also. 
5.  Pre-application meeting. Prior to submittal of an application for approval of the design plan, the applicant shall meet with the city's building inspector and/or the ADRB. The purpose of this informal meeting is to ensure the applicant's understanding of this article and design plan application requirements; to inform the applicant of design standards; and to provide an opportunity for review of any preliminary drawings and site plans. 
6.  Application review. A design plan application shall be submitted in triplicate for review by the city's building inspector to ensure compliance with provisions of this article. Once a complete design plan application is submitted, the building inspector shall transmit two (2) copies to the ADRB for review and final action. After the design plan application is submitted and accepted by the ADRB, the chairman of the board shall call a formal meeting within fifteen (15) days of the application's acceptance (which may be the next regularly scheduled meeting of the ADRB), at which the applicant may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. Within seventy-two (72) hours after the date of formal review meeting, the ADRB shall take final action on the design plan application. If the ADRB shall fail to take final action upon the application within said time period, the application shall be deemed to be approved. The ADRB may extend this deadline by a majority vote of those members present. When circumstances necessitate, the ADRB may defer action on an application until its next meeting. 
7.  Decisions. The ADRB shall take final action by rendering one (1) of the following decisions on the design plan: 
(A)  Approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building permits in accordance with the approved design plan. 
(B)  Conditional approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building permits with approved conditions or modifications to the design plan. Conditions imposed by the board shall be to achieve public purposes and shall still permit development as accorded high quality similar developments within the city. 
(C)  Denial. The applicant shall not be granted a building permit. The board shall specify in writing to the applicant and the city's governing body the reasons for denial. The reasons for denial shall include: negative impacts on the environment, property values, surrounding properties, or public health, safety, or welfare. 
8.  Approval. Upon approval of the design plan, the ADRB shall notify the building inspector of the approval and transmit a copy of the approved design plan, with any conditions noted, to the building inspector. 
9.  Enforcement. All exterior architectural design and landscaping and other on-site improvements shall be completed in accordance with the approved design plan. The building inspector shall make periodic field inspections as required. If a violation is found to exist, the building inspector shall take immediate appropriate action to ensure compliance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all on-site improvements, landscaping, and exterior building facades are completed (or guaranteed through the posting of an acceptable performance bond) in accordance with the approved design plan. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued not to exceed thirty (30) days wherein the on-site improvements can be completed within that time frame, provided that such conditions present no safety hazard. 
10.  Agreement and bonding. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant may be required to post a performance bond or cash escrow deposit guaranteeing all landscaping materials and work for a period of one (1) year after approval or acceptance thereof by the city in a sum established by the city's governing body. If specific circumstances and/or conditions warrant such action (such as intentional failure on the part of the owner or applicant to comply with these provisions on a prior occasion or occasions), such bond shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of replacing all landscaping required in the approved design plan. At the end of one (1) year, the building inspector shall make an inspection and notify the owner or developer and the bond company of any replacements/corrections required to be made. If there are no replacements or corrections to be made, then the building inspector may authorize release of the bond or cash deposit. 
11.  Maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping and other features of the design plan approved by the ADRB. 
12.  Appeals. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the ADRB shall, within thirty (30) calendar days of that decision, be entitled to file an appeal with the governing body, in accordance with Code section 8-8-88. 
13.  Waiver. The ADRB may waive administrative requirements of this section as needed to facilitate the review process, where such requirements are inappropriate or unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-206. - Design requirements. 
(a)  Architecture. The general architectural requirements listed in this article are minimum aesthetic standards for structures within the Main Street Overlay District, regulated by the provisions of this article. These requirements shall be used by the ADRB in reviewing exterior architectural design plans and drawings, and may be supplemented by specific architectural design policies and standards, as established by the ADRB and approved by the city's governing body. 
(1)  It shall not be the intent of the architectural requirements of this section to prescribe a narrow range of exterior architectural design choices, but rather to encourage well designed structures compatible with existing high-quality development in the immediate vicinity and in the surrounding area, and to prohibit poor-quality, garish, and/or incompatible design, which would have adverse effects on public and private investment. 
(2)  Each architectural design plan shall be reviewed by the ADRB, based upon, but not limited to, the following policies and standards: 
(A)  Design shall be in harmony with the general character of developments of high-quality in the immediate vicinity and the surrounding area, considering factors such as massing, building materials, placement, height, and consistency of exterior architectural treatment. 
(B)  Design components shall be planned in such a fashion that they are physically and aesthetically related and coordinated with other elements of the project and surrounding environment to ensure visual continuity of design. 
(C)  Design shall protect scenic views, particularly those of open space, and utilize natural features of the site. 
(D)  Design shall protect adjacent properties from negative visual and functional impacts. 
(E)  All exterior forms, attached to buildings or detached, shall be in conformity to and secondary to the building. 
(b)  Landscape. The landscaping requirements listed in this section are the minimum design standards for all development regulated under the provisions of the Main Street Overlay District. These requirements shall be used by the ADRB and the building inspector in reviewing site plans, and may be supplemented by specific landscaping standards and specifications established by the ADRB and approved by the governing body. These regulations shall be in addition to those required by the Forest Park Tree and Vegetation Protection Ordinance. 
(1)  Landscape design and planning shall be integrated with the overall design concept for the project; therefore, the ADRB shall evaluate landscaping schemes as to their relationship to buildings and structures, as well as to existing natural and developed landscapes, and to other adjacent landscaping on private property and public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or at the applicant's option, replaced with suitable trees and/or vegetation. 
(3)  Landscaping or privacy fences shall be used whenever possible to screen objectionable views or nuisances which are visible from the public way, such as service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units, transformers, and similar features. 
(4)  Grass areas shall be sodded or seeded with a variety suitable to the area that produces complete, permanent coverage. 
(5)  No artificial plants, trees, or other vegetation shall be installed. 
(6)  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an irrigation system or readily available water supply. 
(c)  Trees and vegetation. The requirements of the Forest Park Tree and Vegetation Protection Ordinance shall be applied within the Main Street Overlay District. In addition, street trees shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Street trees shall have minimum caliper of three (3) inches DBH (diameter at breast height) and twelve (12) feet in height at installation. 
(2)  They shall have a minimum mature height of forty (40) feet. 
(3)  As they grow to maturity, street trees shall be limbed to a minimum of eight (8) feet above the sidewalk to maintain appropriate clearance at the sidewalk. 
(4)  They shall be centered in the furniture or landscape zone and located a minimum of fifty (50) feet on-center. 
(5)  Street trees species shall vary by street throughout the Main Street Overlay District. Every street shall use the same species along its length but other streets will use different species. This will encourage biodiversity and individual street character while reducing susceptibility to insects and disease. Tree species will be determined by the city as part of the ADRB review process. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-207. - Streetscape guidelines. 
The Main Street Overlay District Streetscapes are the common elements that visually unite the area and lend it a distinct identity and boundaries. It is important to express the pedestrian-friendly, lively, safe environment that the city desires for this area through its design. The many elements that make up a complete streetscape work together to create an atmosphere that people will enjoy visiting and lingering. The following guidelines are general principles that apply to any streetscape in the Main Street Overlay District. 
(a)  Pedestrian and bicycle access. 
(1)  All new sidewalks shall connect to existing sidewalks to extend the network of pedestrian movement. 
(2)  Crosswalks shall be visually emphasized through the use of one (1) of the following methods, appropriate to the street type: 
(i)  Contrasting specialty paving; 
(ii)  Raised crosswalks; 
(iii)  Striping; 
(iv)  Curb bulb-outs and extensions. 
(3)  Special treatment shall be given to crosswalks at key intersections to calm traffic and give pedestrians priority. 
(4)  Bike lanes, where appropriate, shall be designed to reduce conflicts between motorists and cyclists. 
(5)  On-street parallel parking shall be provided where possible on residential streets to slow traffic, buffer pedestrians, and provide additional parking. 
(b)  Vehicular access and surface parking. 
(1)  The number of curb cuts shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible by utilizing shared drives. Access shall be located off of secondary streets where possible. The width of curb cuts shall be kept to a maximum width of twelve (12) feet for one-way access and twenty-four (24) feet for two-way access. 
(2)  Parking shall not be permitted between the back of sidewalk and the building façade. Parking shall be located behind buildings and shared among multiple tenants. 
(3)  Surface parking lots shall be vegetated to help shade the paving and to soften their impact on the streetscape. Vegetated swales shall be utilized along the edges and in islands or medians within the lot to help treat and detain stormwater runoff. 
(4)  Where parking areas are adjacent to buildings and front the sidewalk, they shall be screened with continuous vegetation or a low wall, a maximum of forty-two (42) inches tall with limited access. 
(5)  On Main Street, on-street parallel parking shall be used to buffer pedestrians from traffic and to allow easy access to street-level retail. 
(6)  Parking lots that abut streets with residential frontages shall be buffered to soften their appearance. Use of low walls, ample plantings, and at least a four (4) foot setback from the edge of sidewalk shall be required. 
(c)  Sidewalk—Generally in Main Street Overlay District. 
(1)  All sidewalks shall consist at a minimum of two (2) distinct zones: 
(A)  a furniture or landscape zone along the back of the curb; and 
(B)  a clear walking zone. 
(2)  The furniture or landscape zone shall be determined by street type and shall be a minimum of four (4) foot wide. The clear walking zone shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide. 
(3)  Additional zones and added widths may be required depending on the street type. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be continuous across driveways to prioritize pedestrians. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall have a minimum clear vertical clearance of eight (8) feet. 
(6)  A supplemental zone shall exist on residential sidewalks adjacent to the clear walking zone. It shall be four (4) foot - eight (8) foot wide to accommodate stoops, stairs, low walls or fences, and landscaping. 
(d)  Street trees shall comply with the requirements in section 8-8-206(c). 
(e)  Streetscapes—Authorized materials. 
(1)  Sidewalk clear walking zones shall be concrete, plain or stained, with a broom finish, or brick/concrete pavers set in sand without mortar. 
(2)  The furniture zone shall be brick or concrete permeable pavers to permit infiltration of stormwater. 
(3)  A change in material color and/or texture shall be used at the back of curb and at crosswalks to assist visually impaired pedestrians in navigating safely. 
(4)  Parking lots may be pervious pavement, brick and concrete pervious pavers, or standard asphalt. Overflow or lesser used parking lots may be light colored aggregate. 
(5)  Walls shall be brick, natural stone, or cast stone; and fences shall be wrought iron painted black. Chain link, vinyl fencing, and barbed or razor wire are not allowed. 
(f)  Street furniture adds amenities to the environment by providing places to sit and rest, receptacles for trash and recyclables, and secure places to lock bicycles. 
(1)  Street furniture shall be of high quality durable construction. 
(2)  Street furniture shall be placed in the furniture zone and shall not encroach on the clear walking zone. 
(3)  Street furniture shall be acquired from the city or a city-approved vendor in a design and style as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(g)  Pedestrian lighting. 
(1)  Pedestrian lighting standards shall be centered between street trees a maximum of fifty (50) feet O.C. 
(2)  Pedestrian lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of sixteen (16) feet tall and shall illuminate the sidewalk with full cut-off fixtures that meet dark sky initiative guidelines. 
(3)  Banners may be mounted to lighting standards and must provide a minimum of eight-foot clearance above the sidewalk. 
(4)  Seasonal lighting, or festival lighting for special events, may be strung from buildings or poles to overhang the street and add excitement and interest. 
(h)  Walls and fences. 
(1)  Walls and fences used along sidewalks to delineate private property from pedestrian areas shall be a maximum of forty-two (42) inches tall and shall have openings for safety and security reasons. 
(2)  Walls and fences used to screen dumpsters from view, shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet tall to provide proper screening. 
(3)  Walls and fences along the cemetery boundaries shall have openings to create a minimum forty (40) percent transparency to allow glimpses inside and add interest to the perimeter of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-208. - Main Street Overlay District Signage. 
Signage shall comply with the requirements of Title 8, Chapter 3 of this Code, with the exception of the following: 
(a)  Streetscape signage. 
(1)  Streetscape Signage design shall be compatible in scale, style, and composition with the building and storefront as a whole. 
(2)  Durable materials and quality construction shall be evident in all streetscape signage. 
(3)  Corner buildings may place projecting signage on their corner. 
(4)  Blade signs shall be mounted to provide an eight-foot clearance under the lowest part of the sign and shall not extend more than five (5) feet into the right-of-way; all right-of-way encroachments shall require an encroachment permit. 
(5)  Channel letters, silhouette signage, and individualized letter signs may be located in a signage band above the storefront windows. 
(6)  Awnings may include signage. 
(7)  Freestanding signage is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-209. - Specialized streetscape regulations for Main Street. 
In addition to the other streetscape requirements of this article, on Main Street, the following shall also apply. To the extent there is any conflict with this section, these provisions will control. 
(a)  Drive through facilities prohibited. Drive through facilities are prohibited on Main Street. 
(b)  On-street parallel parking shall be used to buffer pedestrians from traffic and to allow easy access to street-level retail. 
(c)  Sidewalks along Main Street shall consist of three (3) distinct zones. 
(1)  A furniture zone along the back of curb. 
(2)  A clear walking zone. 
(3)  A supplemental zone adjacent to storefront façades. 
(d)  The furniture zone shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide to accommodate street furniture and trees. The clear walking zone shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide. The supplemental zone, where required adjacent to restaurants and shops, shall be five (5) feet - ten (10) feet wide to allow for cafe dining and store displays. 
(e)  Street trees shall be planted in five (5) feet x five (5) feet wells with a metal grate covering, flush to the surrounding pavers. Metal grate coverings around street trees shall be acquired from the city or a city-approved vendor in a design and style as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-210. - Specialized streetscape regulations for Forest Parkway. 
In addition to the other streetscape requirements of this article, on that section of Forest Parkway within the Main Street Overlay District, the following shall also apply. To the extent there is any conflict with this section, these provisions will control. 
(a)  Pedestrian and bicycle access. 
(1)  Crosswalks shall be visually emphasized through the use of contrasting specialty paving or striping. 
(2)  Pedestrian refuges in existing medians shall be added to allow people a safe place to wait while crossing the street. 
(3)  Mid-block crosswalks shall be added to shorten the distance between street crossings. These crossings shall utilize pedestrian activated signals to allow safe crossing while not slowing traffic when not in use. 
(b)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks along Forest Parkway shall be designed to buffer pedestrians from traffic. They shall consist of a landscape zone, at the back of the curb, and a clear walking zone. The landscape zone shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide and the clear walking zone shall be at least eight (8) feet wide. 
(c)  Vegetated swales. 
(1)  Vegetated swales shall be used to treat and infiltrate stormwater runoff. Swales shall be located in existing medians and in the landscape zone adjacent to the street to help capture and detain runoff. 
(2)  The swales shall be planted with native grasses and groundcover suitable for retention and cleansing of stormwater. 
(3)  Street trees shall not be planted in the vegetated swales and instead planted behind the back edge of the sidewalk. 
(d)  Street furniture. Street furniture shall not be allowed to encroach in the clear walking zone. A three (3) feet x eight (8) feet concrete or paved pad shall be provided at the back edge of the sidewalk to accommodate street furniture. This will allow benches and waste receptacles to be placed along the edge of the sidewalk without impeding easy pedestrian movement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-211. - Specialized streetscape regulations for Jonesboro Road. 
In addition to the other streetscape requirements of this article, on that portion of Jonesboro Road within the Main Street Overlay District, the following shall also apply. To the extent there is any conflict with this section, these provisions will control. 
(a)  Pedestrian and bicycle access. Crosswalks shall be visually emphasized through the use of contrasting specialty paving or striping. 
(b)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks along Jonesboro Road shall be designed to buffer pedestrians from traffic. They shall consist of a landscape zone, a furniture zone, and a clear walking zone. The landscape zone shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide. The furniture zone shall be at least four (4) feet wide and the clear walking zone shall be at least eight (8) feet wide. 
(c)  Street trees. Street trees shall be located in the furniture zone. Trees shall be placed in four (4) feet x ten (10) feet planting beds with groundcover filling the rest of the bed. 
(d)  Vegetated swales. 
(1)  Vegetated swales shall be used to treat and infiltrate stormwater runoff. Swales shall be located in existing medians and in the landscape zone adjacent to the street to help capture and detain runoff. 
(2)  The swales shall be planted with native grasses and groundcover suitable for retention and cleansing of stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-212. - Setbacks and orientation of buildings. 
(a)  Mixed-use and commercial buildings shall have zero setback from the back of sidewalk. Projecting façade elements such as columns or pilasters shall be set at the back of the sidewalk with the mass of the building within three (3) feet of the setback line. 
(b)  Buildings located at prominent intersections may address the corner with special treatments such as chamfers with entrances or tower elements. 
(c)  Upper balconies, bay windows, or other projections from the main facade shall require an encroachment permit. 
(d)  All buildings shall be oriented to a public street with pedestrian entrances located along the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-213. - Nonresidential building height, materials and color. 
(a)  Minimum height is one (1) floor or twenty-four (24) feet. The first floor shall have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of eighteen (18) feet. 
(b)  Allowable materials include brick masonry as the primary facade material, wood and aluminum for storefronts, stone or cast stone for details, transparent glass, fabric awnings, and metal canopies. 
(c)  Prohibited materials include stucco or plaster, tinted or reflective glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), and vinyl or wood siding. 
(d)  Allowable brick colors shall include natural tones such as browns, oranges, reds, creams, and yellows, to be approved by the board. 
(e)  Paint and fabric colors shall be complementary subtle tones such as dark greens, blues, or neutral tones, to be approved by the board. 
(f)  Height limitations: 
(A)  Maximum building height is five (5) floors, or seventy (70) feet. 
(B)  Minimum building height is one (1) floor, or twenty-four (24) feet. 
(C)  The first floor shall have a minimum clear interior floor-to-ceiling height of eighteen (18) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-214. - Building entrances. 
(a)  Primary building entrances for all uses shall be oriented to, architecturally articulated, face, be visible from, and be directly accessible to a public street. Secondary entrances for upper level uses may be located at the rear of the building, or may be located to face the parking areas located to the rear of buildings. The use of fire-escape, entrance-only and exit-only doors as primary entrances is explicitly prohibited. 
(b)  Primary building entrances shall be at grade for universal accessibility. 
(c)  Entrances on the sidewalk for upper level uses shall be distinguished from retail entrances. 
(d)  Entrances shall be emphasized with architectural features, such as varied massing, materials, architectural details, a canopy or awning, or a change in the roofline above. 
(e)  Recessed entries are required to prevent doors from opening into the sidewalk clear zone. They shall be a maximum of four (4) feet deep, shall be illuminated at night, and shall continue the storefront glass along the walls of the recess. 
(f)  Primary entry doors shall be at least fifty (50) percent transparent. 
(g)  To facilitate easy movement from the parking areas to the sidewalk, pedestrian alleys shall be included between buildings and shall be well-lit and marked. 
(h)  A street address number shall be located directly above or beside the primary building and business establishment entrances, shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk, and shall have a minimum height of six (6) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-215. - Building façade transparency. 
These requirements shall not apply to single-family residential buildings, but shall apply to other buildings in the district. 
(a)  Ground floor facades shall be at minimum sixty-five (65) percent transparent. 
(b)  Storefront windows shall begin no higher than thirty-six (36) inches above grade and the head height shall be at least ten (10) feet above grade. 
(c)  Doors shall be at least fifty (50) percent transparent which shall count towards the overall transparency of the ground floor facade. 
(d)  Upper façades shall be at least thirty-five (35) percent transparent but not more than fifty (50) percent transparent. 
(e)  Windowless expanses shall be less than ten (10) feet long at street level to maintain visual interest and pedestrian safety. 
(f)  Upper level windows shall be vertically proportioned in either 1:2, 1:3, or 1:4 ratios. Grouped windows may have an overall horizontal proportion but shall be internally divided into vertical components. Street level windows may be horizontal to allow the greatest amount of transparency. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-216. - Ground floor standards. 
These requirements shall not apply to single-family residential buildings, but shall apply to other buildings in the district. 
(a)  Ground floor space shall have a floor to ceiling height of eighteen (18) feet to accommodate a range of retail, commercial, and office uses. 
(b)  Storefront bulkheads shall be between eighteen (18) inches and thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  Transom windows are encouraged over doors and storefronts to maximize penetration of light and provide greater transparency to the façade. 
(d)  Storefront windows may display merchandise, temporary signs and other displays only in a manner which still allows customer and pedestrian views into shops and restaurants. 
(e)  A continuous horizontal band shall be located between sixteen (16) feet and twenty (20) feet above grade for placement of signage and separation of the base and middle or top of the building. 
(f)  Architectural detailing shall be highly articulated at the ground floor to generate pedestrian interest and create variety at street level. 
(g)  Building floors shall be delineated up to, and including, the fifth story above the sidewalk-level, executed by windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural detailing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-217. - Awnings and canopies. 
These requirements shall not apply to single-family residential buildings, but shall apply to other buildings in the district. 
(a)  Fabric awnings in shed form are encouraged over retail storefronts as well as other nonresidential buildings. Awnings shall be no wider than the storefront and shall provide clearance of at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 
(b)  Metal canopies may be used to mark building entrances. They shall be limited to twice the width of the doorway. 
(c)  All canopies or awnings shall be supported from the building and shall not be supported with columns in the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-218. - Green roof and rooflines. 
These requirements shall not apply to single-family residential buildings, but shall apply to other buildings in the district. 
(a)  Roofs shall typically be low-slope ("flat"). Only noncommercial buildings that are 1-2 stories tall may have a pitched hip roof form. 
(b)  Low-slope roofs shall incorporate decorative parapets, cornices, or corbelling of the masonry. 
(c)  Pitched roofs shall have a minimum eighteen (18) inch overhang and be supported by decorative brackets. 
(d)  At a minimum, low-slope roofs shall have a white reflective membrane to help lessen the heat island effect. 
(e)  Terraces, or amenities for users of the building, are encouraged for low-slope roofs. 
(f)  Green roofs that incorporate native, drought-tolerant plants or xeriscaping are encouraged to reduce the heat island effect and manage stormwater. They may be cross-utilized as attractive amenities for building inhabitants. 
(g)  Low-slope roofs shall have internal roof drains or be sloped to drain toward the rear of the building. Downspouts and gutters shall not be incorporated into the front façade of any building. 
(h)  Sloped roofs shall be asphalt shingles, clay tile or metal roof systems as approved by the ADRB. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-219. - Exterior nighttime illumination of nonresidential buildings. 
(a)  Building lighting design shall follow dark sky initiatives and minimize light trespass across property lines. 
(b)  Building mounted lights must not extend lower than eight (8) feet above grade and project no more than twenty-four (24) inches from the façade. 
(c)  Moving, blinking, or strobe lights are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-220. - Security measures for nonresidential buildings. 
These requirements shall not apply to single-family residential buildings, but shall apply to other buildings in the district. 
(a)  Security measures shall be concealed when not in use and must be equipped with key boxes, such as the KNOX-BOX&reg; Rapid Entry System or other system approved by the city fire chief or fire marshal, to allow public safety personnel to enter buildings quickly in case of emergency. The key boxes shall be marked, conspicuous and accessible. The fire chief or fire marshal shall approve the key box location. 
(b)  External roll down gates are prohibited. 
(c)  Internal roll down gates may be used but shall be designed to allow visual monitoring of the interior from the sidewalk. 
(d)  Window bars are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-221. - Service and utilities. 
(a)  Service and utilities shall be located behind buildings whenever possible. If it is not possible, a location on the side of the building is acceptable, with adequate screening. 
(b)  Dumpsters shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with three (3) walls eight (8) feet tall, and one (1) side providing a gated opening for access. 
(c)  Utilities shall be screened with vegetation or walls less than forty-two (42) inches tall. 
(d)  Rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view with parapet walls that match the primary façade materials. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-222. - Sustainable design. 
Innovation green building strategies shall be encouraged to further the implementation of sustainable design. Applicants are encouraged to submit such information with the application submitted to the ADRB. 
(Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, adopted July 6, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009. 
Sec. 8-8-223. - Regulation of large buildings occupied by a single retailer. 
(a)  Other than on Jonesboro Road, no single commercial retail establishment within the Main Street Overlay District shall occupy more than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of floor area. All structures, including structures housing such large retail establishments, must comply with the design standards of this article. 
(b)  In that portion of Jonesboro Road located within the Main Street Overlay District, no single commercial retail establishment shall occupy more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area. All structures, including structures housing such large retail establishments, must comply with the design standards of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-224. - Additional regulation for residential buildings. 
(a)  Townhome buildings shall be set at the back of a four (4) feet to eight (8) feet wide supplemental zone adjacent to the sidewalk. 
(b)  The supplemental zone will allow for stoops, stairs, low walls and fences, and small gardens to buffer the ground floor from the sidewalk. 
(c)  Single-family residences shall be set back from the back of the sidewalk at least fifteen (15) feet. 
(d)  Single-family residences shall locate their primary entrance oriented to the street and shall open directly onto the adjacent sidewalk, supplemental zone, terrace, porch, plaza, or park adjacent to the sidewalk. 
(e)  Except where it is otherwise explicitly provided, whenever these overlay regulations are at variance with existing underlying zoning regulations, the regulations of this article shall apply. 
(f)  Multifamily residential, residential other than owner-occupied, and assisted living residential facilities shall not be permitted in the Main Street Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-225. - Residential building height, material and color regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height of townhomes or condominium buildings is three (3) floors, or forty-six (46) feet. The minimum height for such buildings is two (2) floors, or twenty-two (22) feet. 
(b)  Townhomes or condominium buildings shall be constructed of brick masonry as the primary façade material, stone or cast stone for details, transparent glass, and cement-board siding. 
(c)  The maximum height for single-family homes is two and one-half (2½) floors, or forty-two (42) feet. The minimum height for such dwellings is one (1) floor, or eighteen (18) feet. 
(d)  Single-family homes shall be constructed of brick masonry or wood/cement-board siding as the primary façade material. 
(e)  Prohibited materials for townhomes, condominiums and single-family homes include stucco or plaster, tinted or reflective glass, and vinyl siding. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-226. - Residential building entrances. 
(a)  Primary entrances shall be oriented to the street. Secondary entrances may be located in the rear to access off-street parking. Entrances to residences shall open directly onto the adjacent sidewalk, supplemental zone, terrace, porch, plaza, or park adjacent to the sidewalk. 
(b)  Primary building entrances shall be elevated a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above grade and no more than sixty (60) inches. 
(c)  Townhome and condominium entrances shall be emphasized with architectural features such as stoops and stairs with decorative railings. Said buildings shall have porches, stoops or wheelchair access at each sidewalk-level entrance. 
(d)  All residential uses not located at sidewalk-level shall have pedestrian access to the required public sidewalk via a lobby fronting and accessible from said sidewalk. 
(e)  Recessed entries for townhomes and condominiums are encouraged to give a sense of privacy and delineate semi-public space. They shall be a maximum of three (3) feet deep and shall be illuminated at night. 
(f)  Single-family homes shall be accessed from a front porch a minimum of eight (8) feet deep. 
(g)  All residences shall have an address identifier displayed at the primary entrance and illuminated at night. The identifier shall be located directly above or beside the primary residential entrance, shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk, and numbers shall have a minimum height of six (6) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-227. - Windows in residential buildings. 
(a)  Windows shall be vertically proportioned in either 1:2 or 1:3 ratios. 
(b)  Grouped windows may have an overall horizontal proportion but shall be internally divided into vertical components. 
(c)  Bay windows may be used as accents and to gain better views down the street. 
(d)  Windows shall be double-hung with true divided lites in a ratio of 1-over-1, 2-over-1, 4-over-1, 2-over-2, and 4-over-4. 
(e)  Small fixed windows may be used as accents but shall be limited to one (1) per façade. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-228. - Façade articulation. 
(a)  Townhome or condominium building façades shall reflect the individual units to reduce the scale and add architectural interest. The dwelling units shall be delineated by pilasters, material or color change, or other façade treatment. 
(b)  The traditional horizontal division of façades into a base, middle and top shall be expressed with cornice lines and material changes. 
(c)  Townhomes or condominium buildings located at important intersections may address the corner in a monumental way, with a chamfered corner or tower element featuring an entrance. 
(d)  Flat façades with little or no articulation or detail are not permitted. 
(e)  Single-family homes constructed on individual lots shall not repeat in elevation or mirror another home within five (5) lots of one another. 
(f)  Ground floor height shall be ten (10) feet to twelve (12) feet to accommodate generous ceilings in the living spaces. 
(g)  Transom windows over doors are encouraged to maximize light penetration and give greater verticality to the entrance. 
(h)  Floor plans shall be organized to place the more public rooms, such as the living room, in the front of the house and the more private rooms towards the rear. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-229. - Roofing on residential buildings. 
(a)  Roofs on townhomes or condominium buildings shall be low-slope ("flat") and incorporate decorative parapets, cornices, or corbelling of the masonry. 
(b)  At a minimum, low-slope roofs shall have a white reflective membrane to help lessen the heat island effect. 
(c)  Roofs on townhomes or condominium buildings are encouraged to be designed as terraces or amenities for residents of the building. They may incorporate native, drought-tolerant plants to add interest to the terrace, help reduce the heat island effect and manage stormwater runoff. 
(d)  Low-slope roofs shall have internal roof drains or be sloped to drain toward the rear of the building. Downspouts and gutters shall not be incorporated into the front façade. 
(e)  Single-family homes shall have simply massed gable or hip roof forms. 
(f)  Single-family homes shall have pitched roofs with a slope between 6/12 and 12/12 and a minimum eighteen (18) inch overhang. Overhangs shall be supported by decorative brackets, where architecturally appropriate. 
(g)  Sloped roofs shall be asphalt shingles or standing seam metal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-230. - Residential nighttime illumination. 
(a)  Building and landscape lighting design shall follow dark sky initiatives and minimize light trespass across property lines. 
(b)  Landscape lighting may include low-level path lighting. 
(c)  All entrances shall be capable of being illuminated at night for security. 
(d)  Single-family lighting should provide visual security by minimizing or eliminating dark shadows and glare around the perimeter of the house. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-231. - Service and utilities. 
(a)  Service and utilities shall be located behind residential buildings whenever possible. If it is not possible to locate them to the rear, a location on the side of the building is acceptable with adequate screening. 
(b)  Utilities shall be screened with vegetation or walls less than forty-two (42) inches tall. 
(c)  Residential trash bins shall be stored in a concealed location, either behind the main house or within an enclosure such as a fence or vegetation screen. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-232. - Sustainable residential design. 
Innovative green building strategies shall be encouraged to further the implementation of sustainable cost-effective residential at the time of application to the ADRB. 
(Ord. No. 15-06, § 2, 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-06, § 2, adopted July 6, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009. 
Sec. 8-8-233. - Parking structures in Main Street Overlay District. 
(a)  Parking structures of one (1) level or more shall be located in the interior of blocks when possible and surrounded by active uses on the perimeter where appropriate. 
(b)  Parking structures of one (1) level or more fronting a public sidewalk shall have active uses such as shops, restaurants, and offices along the primary sidewalk. 
(c)  Vehicular entrances to the parking structure shall not be located on Main Street but instead off of secondary streets and shall be of the minimum width required. Pedestrian entrances may be located on Main Street for ease of access. 
(d)  Architectural treatment of parking structures. 
(1)  The ground floor of a parking structure shall be articulated with the same materials required in mixed-use buildings: brick, ample glass, awnings, and pedestrian-level detail, as required in section 8-8-212. 
(2)  The upper levels shall be articulated in such a way as to conceal the cars parked within. 
(3)  Openings shall be regularly sized and spaces, and have vertical divisions. 
(4)  Emphasize stair towers to add a vertical expression to the façade. 
(5)  The ramping system shall be contained within the bulk of the deck and not expressed on any public façade. 
(6)  Use vegetated screens or planters with hanging plants to enliven the facade with color and help reduce the heat island effect. 
(7)  Use metal architectural grillwork to add interest to openings above the ground floor while still allowing adequate ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-8-234. - Fire sprinkler installation requirements. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this article the following definitions will apply: 
(1)  Approved sprinkler system means any sprinkler system that is designed, installed, and tested according to NFPA 13, 13R, or 13D standards. 
(2)  Assembly occupancies include, but are not limited to, buildings or portions of buildings used for gathering of fifty (50) or more people for such purposes as deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating, drinking, amusement, or awaiting transportation. Assembly occupancies also include special amusement buildings such as fun house amusement structures, regardless of occupant load. 
(3)  Fire protection sprinkler system means an integrated system designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards. The installation includes one (1) or more automatic water supplies, usually activated by heat from a fire, and discharges water over the fire area. 
(4)  New construction means any structure constructed after the date of this article that is used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. For the purpose of this section, "new" shall also include any additions to existing buildings, whether vertical or horizontal, which exceeds thirty-five (35) percent of the original floor area for commercial, townhome and condominium structures or exceeds fifty (50) percent for single-family residential structures; or any existing building or structure which shall be deemed to be a new building in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation, or a fire, or other hazard of serious consequence as determined by the city's fire chief or fire marshal. 
(5)  Substantial renovation means, for nonresidential structures, any construction project where the cumulative costs of any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alterations, remodeling, replacement, renovations, or improvements (collectively called "renovations") to such structures exceeds thirty-five (35) percent of the fair market value of said structure. The fair market value of the building is the current appraised value for the building as determined by the Clayton County Tax Assessor at the time of such renovations. For residential dwellings, substantial renovation means any structural improvement costing more than fifty (50) percent of the building's structure's assessed value as determined by the Clayton County Tax Assessor at the time of such renovations. 
(b)  Sprinklers required. Approved automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed and maintained by the owner in all new and substantially renovated buildings within the Main Street Overlay District as follows: 
(1)  New construction. Throughout all new commercial, retail, office and business structures, new residential structures of any type, repair garages, basements, dormitories, high rise buildings or structures, new hotels, new assembly occupancies, new health care occupancies, new educational occupancies, or new day care occupancies. 
(2)  Existing commercial, retail and office buildings, and multifamily dwellings. Throughout all substantially renovated commercial, retail and office buildings, condominium and townhome dwellings where the cumulative costs of any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alterations, remodeling replacement, renovations, or improvements to such building exceeds thirty-five (35) percent of the fair market value of said building. The fair market value of the building is the current appraised value for the building as determined by the Clayton County Tax Assessor at the time of such repairs, reconstruction, alterations, renovations, or improvements. Nothing contained in this section shall authorize the construction of multifamily dwellings, or residential dwellings other than owner-occupied townhomes and condominiums within the Main Street Overlay District. 
(3)  Existing single-family residential, townhome and condominium dwellings. Throughout all substantially renovated single-family residential dwellings of any type, where the cumulative costs of any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alterations, remodeling replacement, renovations, or improvements to such dwelling exceeds fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of said dwelling. The fair market value of the building is the current appraised value for the dwelling as determined by the Clayton County Tax Assessor at the time of such repairs, reconstruction, alterations, renovations, or improvements. 
(4)  High hazard areas. Throughout those areas of structures used for purposes that involve highly combustible, highly flammable, or explosive products or materials that are likely to burn with extreme rapidity, or that may produce poisonous fumes or gases, including highly toxic or noxious alkalies, acids, or other liquids or chemicals that involve flame, fume, explosive, poisonous, or irritant hazards; that involve flame, fume, explosive, poisonous, or irritant hazards; that involve division of material into fine particle or dust subject to explosion or spontaneous combustion, and that involve a high fire hazard because of the form, character, or volume of the material used. 
(5)  Mercantile, industrial and storage occupancies. Throughout every building occupied in whole for manufacture, storage or sale of combustible goods or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 2010-61, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
CHAPTER 9. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 8-9-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Forest Park Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-2. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Whereas, the mayor and council of the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of Forest Park for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-3. - Definitions. 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 8-9-5 below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area, or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection 8-9-5[(a)] extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the permit and zoning department may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 8-9-3. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. After the effective date of this chapter, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection 8-9-5(b) below. 
(b)  Grandfather provisions. This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this chapter. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this chapter. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; and 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (b)(1), above. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the permit and zoning department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the permit and zoning department to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-5. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(4)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, of a designated wetland in all directions. No stormwater from a proposed development may be discharged into this buffer without having undergone pretreatment prior to the discharge. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this chapter, actions of any property owner of a given property have created a hardship on that property. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this chapter, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this chapter, and the permit and zoning department determines that the requirements of this chapter prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the appeals board of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the appeals board of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this chapter without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the appeals board. The permit and zoning department shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The permit and zoning department shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(3)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
(4)  All variance requests shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. 
d.  The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
e.  Documentation of any unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
f.  At least one (1) alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
g.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
h.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
i.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
j.  The following factors will be considered by planning and zoning in determining whether to issue a variance: 
1.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
2.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
3.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
4.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
5.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
6.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004; Ord. No. 16-02, § 7, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 8-9-6. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law related to buffers. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-7. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include a site plan showing: 
(1)  The location of all streams on the property; 
(2)  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
(3)  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
(4)  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
(5)  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(6)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(7)  Any other documentation that the permit and zoning department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-8. - Responsibility. 
The issuance of a development permit, compliance with the conditions thereof, or with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers, employees, or agents for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-9. - Inspection. 
The permit and zoning department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the permit and zoning department in making such inspections. The permit and zoning department shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while he is in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-10. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent the city from seeking any other legal remedies. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the permit and zoning department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Forest Park Board of Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after 
the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(c)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the permit and zoning department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the permit and zoning department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order—The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy—The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit—The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. Such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties—In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be deemed sufficient) after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties—For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 8-9-11. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of permit and zoning department, may appeal in writing within thirty (30) days after the issuance of such decision or order to the permit and zoning director of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Forest Park within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of permit and zoning department, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
CHAPTER 10 - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 8-10-1. - Purpose, findings, goals. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the siting of telecommunication towers and antennas, and the facilities whereon such towers or antennas are located. 
The mayor and council recognize the need to provide for the location of telecommunication towers and antennas pursuant to the Telecommunication Act of 1996, as amended. The mayor and council also recognize that telecommunication towers and antennas can negatively impact the aesthetic appearance of the city, and can reduce the property value of lots proximately located to such towers, particularly when they are sited adjacent to residential areas. 
The goals of this chapter, therefore, are to: 
(1)  Express the intent of the mayor and council that the construction of new towers be an option of last resort and, to the extent feasible, location of antennas on existing towers, building rooftops, and other suitable structures should first be sought; 
(2)  Encourage the location of towers as far away as practicable from areas of the city zoned residential, and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(3)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(5)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to construct them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers or antennas; 
(6)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
(7)  Develop an inventory of existing sites with specific information about the load capacity of each existing site, remaining developable land area available at the site, and any terms or conditions of the lease which would affect the possibility of co-location at the site; and 
(8)  Provide for the disposition of towers which are abandoned by all users, and set forth the time period within which such requirements would apply and provide for responsibility for the removal of abandoned towers. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
(1)  Alternative tower structure shall mean manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
(2)  Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
(3)  Building inspector shall mean the building inspector for the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(4)  FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(5)  FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
(6)  Guy tower shall mean a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
(7)  Height, when referring to a tower, antenna, or other structure, shall mean the distance measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest point which is defined as the average ground elevation along the structure being measured at either roof or ground level, whichever is applicable. The height of a tower shall include the height of any antenna positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to the highest point on the tower. 
(8)  Lattice or self-supporting tower shall mean a tower that has open-framed supports on three (3) or four (4) sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
(9)  Monopole tower shall mean a telecommunication tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
(10)  Preexisting towers and antennas shall mean any tower, antenna, or monopole for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(11)  Telecommunication facility shall mean a telecommunication tower, a monopole tower, an antenna or any and all buildings, structures, or other supporting equipment used in connection with a telecommunication tower, a monopole tower, or an antenna. 
(12)  Tower shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers or guy towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier-towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like, but specifically excludes monopole towers. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-3. - Conditional use permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, relocate, construct, or maintain within the city any telecommunication facility as defined in this chapter without first obtaining a conditional use permit for such facility in the manner set forth in this chapter and otherwise complying with the terms herein. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-4. - Contents of applications for conditional use permits—General information required of all applicants. 
(a)  Applications for conditional use permits to erect a telecommunication facility shall be made upon forms provided by the building inspector, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the telecommunication facility is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the telecommunication facility; 
(4)  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which or upon which the telecommunication facility is to be erected; 
(5)  A site plan showing existing vegetation to be removed from the site, and vegetation to be replanted to replace the vegetation that will be removed; 
(6)  A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in Georgia that the installation and operation of the antenna, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other telecommunication service enjoyed by adjacent properties; 
(7)  Written certification from the FAA, the FCC, and any appropriate state review authority stating that the proposed telecommunication facility complies with regulations administered by that agency or that the facility is exempt from those regulations. In particular, an application must submit written certification that all emissions from the antenna will comply with FCC frequency emissions standards and that the telecommunication facility has received written clearance from the FAA; and 
(b)  Each application for a conditional use permit for the installation of an antenna shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each application for a conditional use permit for the construction of a tower or monopole shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-5. - Contents of applications for conditional use permits—Antennas. 
In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 8-10-4 above, applications for conditional use permits to install an antenna shall contain or have attached thereto three (3) sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the building or structure for the antenna. The plans for the antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-6. - Contents of applications for conditional use permits—Towers. 
In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 8-10-4 above, applications for conditional use permits to construct a tower shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Three (3) sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the ground for the tower. The plans for the tower construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes, and shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter. In addition, the report from the structural engineer must contain: 
a.  Tower height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross-section of the tower structure shall be included; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
d.  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; 
(2)  An inventory of the applicant's existing telecommunication towers, antennas, or monopole towers that are either within the city or within one (1) mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower, antenna, or monopole. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate telecommunication towers, antennas or monopoles within the city, provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting in any way that such sites are available or suitable for telecommunications towers, antennas or monopoles; 
(3)  An inventory of existing telecommunication towers or monopoles which are owned by persons other than the applicant and are either within the city or within one (1) mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility. In preparing such an inventory, the applicant shall provide the following information: 
a.  Identification of each existing facility by property address, location, Clayton County tax identification number, existing uses, and height of the facility; 
b.  Whether such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna without requiring structural changes be made to the facility. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
c.  Whether each such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the facility. If so, the owner of the facility shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required, and the cost of such changes; 
d.  If structurally able, whether shared use by such existing facility would be precluded for reasons related to radio frequency (RF) or electromagnetic interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if any; and 
e.  If shared use is possible, the amount of the fee that the owner of an existing facility would charge for such shared use. Shared use is not precluded because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared facility. The city may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding the cost of development of a new telecommunication facility are presumed unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-7. - Contents of applications for conditional use permits—Monopole towers. 
In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 8-10-4 above, applications for conditional use permits to construct a monopole tower shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Three (3) sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the ground for the monopole. The plans for the monopole construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes, and shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, monopole height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter. In addition, the report from the structural engineer must contain: 
a.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
b.  Failure characteristics of the monopole tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; and 
(2)  An inventory of the applicant's existing telecommunication towers, antennas, or monopole towers that are either within the city or within one (1) mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower, antenna, or monopole. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate telecommunication towers, antennas or monopoles within the city, provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting in any way that such sites are available or suitable for telecommunication towers, antennas or monopoles; 
(3)  An inventory of existing telecommunication towers, antennas, or monopoles which are owned by persons other than the applicant and are either within the city or within one (1) mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility. In preparing such an inventory, the applicant shall provide the following information; 
a.  Identification of each existing facility by property address location, Clayton County tax identification number, existing uses, and height of the facility; 
b.  Whether such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna without requiring structural changes be made to the facility. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
c.  Whether each such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the facility. If so, the owner of the facility shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required, and the cost of such changes; 
d.  If structurally able, whether shared use by such existing facility would be precluded for reasons related to RF or electromagnetic interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if any; and 
e.  If shared use is possible, the amount of the fee that the owner of an existing facility would charge for such shared use. Shared use is not precluded because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared facility. The city may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fees and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding the cost of development of a new telecommunication facility are presumed unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-8. - Conditional use permits—Issuance standards; denial; appeal. 
(a)  The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit to construct or install a telecommunication tower, antenna, or monopole: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower, antenna, or monopole; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower, antenna, or monopole to residential structures and residential district boundaries, as measured from the base of the tower, monopole, or structure on which the antenna is located to the boundary of a residentially zoned lot; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and surrounding properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Whether the telecommunication facility has a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer to screen the tower, antenna, monopole, or telecommunication facility completely to a height of six (6) feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way; 
(6)  Design of the tower, antenna, or monopole, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness, including but not limited to whether or not the tower, antenna, or monopole in question is camouflaged or concealed, and whether an alternative tower structure is being proposed. 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)  Whether the applicant meets the standards of this chapter and has complied with the conditions to obtain a conditional use permit as set forth in this chapter; and 
(9)  Availability of suitable existing towers, monopolies and other structures for the placement of an antenna. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunication facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall include, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  No existing towers, monopoles or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers, monopoles or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers, monopoles or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause RF or electromagnetic interference with antennas on the existing structures, or the antenna on the existing tower, monopole or structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing facility or to adapt an existing facility for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower or monopole development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(b)  Procedure for issuance or denial of conditional use permit for location of antenna on existing building structure, tower, or monopole. 
(1)  The building inspector shall determine whether a conditional use permit for location of an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole should be issued or denied under the standards of this chapter within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of a complete application. 
(2)  Any decision by the building inspector to deny a conditional use permit application for the location of an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The building inspector's decision to deny an application may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the denial. Failure to file a notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the denial shall constitute a waiver of the applicant's appeal rights. 
(3)  The mayor and council shall hold a hearing within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. In the event the mayor and council affirms the building inspector's decision to deny the application, the decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(c)  Procedure for issuance or denial of conditional use permit for tower or monopole. No conditional use permit for the construction of a tower or monopole shall be issued until the same shall have been submitted to the planning and zoning board for its review. The planning and zoning board shall transmit its report either recommending approval or disapproval of a complete application within sixty (60) days after referral to it. In addition to such recommendation for approval or disapproval, the planning and zoning board may make suggestions as to conditions or limitations to be attached to any recommended approval. Upon receipt of the planning and zoning board's report, or at the expiration of the sixty-day period, the mayor and council of the City of Forest Park shall place the application on the next available agenda and shall proceed to approve or deny the issuance of a conditional use permit. In the event the mayor and council deny the application, the decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(d)  In granting a conditional use permit for the construction of a tower, antenna, or monopole, additional zoning conditions may be imposed to the extent necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower, antenna, or monopole on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-9. - Zoning requirements for location of telecommunication towers, antennas, and monopole towers. 
No conditional use permit to construct a tower or monopole or to locate an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower, or monopole shall be issued unless the location has been zoned industrial under the zoning laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-10. - Location of antenna on an existing building, structure, or telecommunication facility. 
A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole within the city provided that: 
(1)  The existing building, structure, tower or monopole is fifty (50) feet in height or greater; 
(2)  If an antenna is installed on an existing building or structure other than a tower, such antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of the existing building or structure. 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the antenna or telecommunication facility; 
(4)  If an antenna is installed on a structure or building other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure or building so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible; 
(5)  If an antenna is installed on an existing tower of any height, such antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing tower; 
(6)  The antenna is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA, FCC, or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review available lighting alternatives and approve the design which would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(7)  The antenna meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC or such governing agency with the authority to regulate telecommunication towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owner of the antenna shall bring such antenna into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or re-permitting of the antenna at the owner's expense; 
(8)  The antenna complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents; 
(9)  The antenna is equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access; 
(10)  The antenna is set back from any adjoining residentially zoned property a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet, as measured from the side of the existing building or structure which is closest to or facing the adjacent residential property to the boundary of a residentially zoned lot; and 
(11)  The antenna is set back from all property lines a distance of fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-11. - Telecommunication towers. 
A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain a telecommunication tower within the city provided: 
(1)  The tower is not greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in height; 
(2)  The tower maintains a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, is painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness; 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the tower or telecommunication facility; 
(4)  The tower is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other authority for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views; 
(5)  The tower and telecommunication facility uses materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and base facility to the natural setting and built environment; 
(6)  The tower and telecommunication facility meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and other governing agency with the authority to regulate telecommunication towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owner of the tower or telecommunication facility shall bring such tower or facility into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or repermitting of the telecommunication facility at the owner's expense; 
(7)  The applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunication facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(8)  The following setbacks and separation requirements are met: 
a.  All towers, including but not limited to lattice towers and guy towers, must be set back from any property line abutting a residential district, as measured from the base of the tower, a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet. For a guyed structure, such set back shall be adequate to provide a vegetative, topographic, or other buffer sufficient to obscure view to the anchor from such adjoining properties. 
b.  All towers and telecommunication facilities must have a front yard set back of one hundred fifty (150) feet, and sufficient rear and side yard set backs to fully contain the structure in the event of tower failure. 
(9)  The tower and telecommunication facility is equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access; 
(10)  The tower complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents; 
(11)  The tower and telecommunication facility is designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically practical; 
(12)  Landscape buffer/screening requirements. 
a.  Any tower or telecommunication facility which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum fifty-foot landscaped, horizontal buffer that effectively screens the view of the tower and base facility from adjacent property. The buffer must include a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer sufficient to fully screen the tower and base facility completely to a height of six (6) feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. A vegetative buffer is preferred in all cases, including but not limited to trees, bushes, shrubbery and other greenery. When topography and existing conditions allow, the required fifty-foot horizontal buffer should be an undisturbed buffer; provided, however, the buffer may be crossed by an access drive of not greater than twelve (12) feet in width. If an access drive is used, the drive will be equipped with a solid opaque gate of at least the same height as the buffer, and vegetative concealment of the gate is preferred in all cases. 
b.  Any tower or telecommunication facility which abuts property zoned other than residential shall have a minimum fifteen-foot landscaped, horizontal buffer that effectively screens the view of the tower or base facility from adjacent property. The buffer must include a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer sufficient to screen the tower and base facility completely to a height of six (6) feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. 
c.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where towers or facilities are sited on wooded lots in excess of five (5) acres, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. 
d.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower or facility would be minimal, such as developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the building inspector in his sole and absolute discretion. 
(13)  The equipment at the tower or telecommunication facility is automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. 
(14)  All access roads to the tower or telecommunication facility shall be constructed of dustless and durable Portland cement, concrete or asphaltic concrete complying with specifications established by the building inspector and maintained in a usable condition; 
(15)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. All accessory structures shall be made of masonry, brick, or stone, which surfaces shall be maintained in accordance with city ordinances applicable to other structures in the city. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. Any property stored on the site of the tower or monopole shall be stored entirely within the accessory structure, except when repairs are being made. 
b.  Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, set back, separation, and general requirements of this chapter are met, towers may occupy a leased parcel on a site meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the industrial zoning district in which it is located, if any. When joint use of a lot is permitted, the city shall require the execution of a unity of title if two (2) or more lots are utilized for set back purposes or to prohibit the unlawful division of a lot containing a tower and another principal use. The minimum distance between a tower and other principal use located on the same lot shall be the lesser of one hundred (100) percent breakpoint of the tower or one hundred fifty (150) feet. This separation is required to assure compatibility of land uses and to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
c.  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-12. - Monopole towers. 
A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain a monopole tower within the city provided: 
(1)  The monopole tower is not greater than sixty (60) feet in height; 
(2)  The monopole tower is made of wood or, if made of steel, the monopole tower maintains a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, is painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obstrusiveness; 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the monopole tower; 
(4)  The monopole tower is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other governmental authority for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views; 
(5)  The monopole tower meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other governmental agency with the authority to regulate telecommunication facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owner of the monopole shall bring such monopole into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or re-permitting of the antenna at the owner's expense; 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunication facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(7)  The following setbacks and separation requirements are met: 
a.  All monopole towers must be set back from any adjoining residentially zoned property a distance of five hundred (500) feet. 
b.  All monopole towers must have a front yard setback of sixty (60) feet, and sufficient rear and side yard set backs to fully contain the structure in the event of monopole failure. 
c.  Monopole towers over forty (40) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter (¼) mile from any existing telecommunication tower or monopole that is over fifty (50) feet in height. 
(8)  The monopole tower is equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access; 
(9)  The monopole tower complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents. 
(10)  Accessory or principal uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a monopole shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a monopole shall not be stored or parked on the site of the monopole, unless repairs to the monopole are being made. 
b.  Monopoles may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, set back, separation, and general requirements of this ordinance are met, monopoles may occupy a leased parcel on a site meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the industrial zoning district in which it is located, if any. When joint use of a lot is permitted, the city shall require the execution of a unity of title if two (2) or more lots are utilized for set back purposes or to prohibit the unlawful division of a lot containing a monopole and another principal use. The minimum distance between a monopole and other principal use located on the same lot shall be the greater of sixty (60) feet or the one hundred (100) percent breakpoint of the monopole. This separation is required to assure compatibility of land uses and to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-13. - Annual inspection; inspection fee; unsafe facilities; abandoned facilities. 
(a)  Tower, antenna or monopole owners shall provide written evidence that each telecommunication tower, antenna or monopole is in full compliance with all federal requirements, including, but not limited to the FCC frequency emissions standards. Evidence of such compliance shall be submitted annually by the tower or antenna owner. 
(b)  To ensure the structural integrity of towers, antennas, and monopoles, the owner shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building codes and the applicable standards for towers, antennas, and monopoles that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Tower, antenna, and monopole owners shall conduct annual inspections to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the building inspection no later than February 1 of each year. 
(c)  The building inspector shall have the right in the discharge of his official duties to enter upon and inspect any telecommunication facility located within the city. 
(d)  If, upon inspection or upon receipt of an engineer's report submitted pursuant to subsection (a) above, the building inspector determines that a telecommunication facility fails to comply with the city's building and technical codes or with the requirements of this chapter, then upon written notice being provided to the owner of such facility, the owner shall have forty-five (45) days to bring the facility into compliance with this chapter. If the owner fails to bring the telecommunication facility into compliance with said forty-five (45) days, the city may proceed with the removal of such facility pursuant to the provisions of the city's Building Code and place a lien upon the property for the costs of such removal. 
(e)  If, upon inspection or upon receipt of an engineer's report submitted pursuant to subsection (a) above, the building inspector determines that a telecommunication tower, antenna or monopole has not been utilized for a continuous period to twelve (12) months, such tower, antenna or monopole shall be considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If the tower, antenna or monopole is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the city may proceed with the removal of such facility pursuant to the provisions of the city's Building Code and place a lien upon the property for the costs of such removal. If there are two (2) or more users of a single family, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or monopole for a period of twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-14. - Pre-existing antennas, towers, or telecommunication facilities. 
Any pre-existing antenna, tower, or telecommunication facility which does not meet the requirements of this chapter for a conditional use permit at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the non-conforming use provisions of the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Forest Park, Georgia; provided, however, that the installation of a new antenna on a pre-existing tower or monopole shall not constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use provided that the new antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of the pre-existing tower or monopole. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-15. - Construction of new antenna, tower or monopole as expansion of nonconforming use. 
The construction of a new tower or monopole, or the installation of a new antenna shall be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the installation of a new antenna on a pre-existing tower or monopole. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-16. - Measurements by straight line method. 
For purposes of this chapter, all distance measurements shall be by straight line, airline measurement from property line to property line, or from the base of the tower or monopole, as the case may be, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 8-10-17. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A single antenna under seventy (70) feet in height owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. The owner or operator of such antenna, however, shall be required to comply with all applicable city, state and federal codes. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to the installation, maintenance, or use of: 
(1)  A satellite earth station antenna that is two (2) meters or less in diameter and is located or proposed to be located in any area where commercial or industrial uses are generally permitted; or 
(2)  A satellite earth station antenna that is one (1) meter or less in diameter. 
(c)  This chapter shall not apply to those departments, fire and police, who are responsible for the safety and welfare of the public and who make up the emergency response team for the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008; Ord. No. 12-39, § 1, 12-21-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-39, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as § 8-9-16(c). For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 8-10-17(c). 
Sec. 8-10-18. - Penalties. 
Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Title 9 - Licensing and Regulation 
Chapter 1.  General Provisions 
Chapter 2.  Alcoholic Beverages 
Chapter 3.  Pawnbrokers 
Chapter 4.  Wreckers and Wrecker Services 
Chapter 5.  Taxicabs 
Chapter 6.  Peddlers and Solicitors 
Chapter 7.  Massage Establishments 
Chapter 8.  Miscellaneous Regulations 
Chapter 9.  Television 
Chapter 10.  Home Occupations 
Chapter 11.  Used Motor Vehicle Dealers 
Chapter 12.  Adult Entertainment Establishments 
Chapter 13.  Body Piercing 
Chapter 14.  Commercial Parking Lots 
Chapter 15.  Special Events 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Business and occupation taxes, § 3-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-1-1. - License required; annual basis; display of license; license for each place of business. 
(a)  Every person, firm or corporation engaged in any commerce whatsoever within the city shall be required to obtain a license before he shall commence business except as provided by this chapter. This license shall be issued on an annual basis set forth in this chapter and for the fees provided in this chapter. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or any other applicant shall be allowed to renew any annual license nor shall any business license issue unless all past due city taxes and other assessments have been paid prior to the tender of payment of the annual license fee. 
(b)  Every person, firm or corporation shall be required to display his license in a prominent place. He shall be required to obtain a license for each place of business within the city without regard to other business locations previously licensed. This license is not transferable to any new person, firm or corporation. 
(c)  Whenever the term "license" is used herein, such term shall be synonymous with that occupation tax certificate. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the sale of food and/or merchandise under section 9-15-13 or the sale of alcoholic beverages under section 9-15-14. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-1; Ord. No. 86-003, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 94-003, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 16-13, § 1, 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-1-2. - Applications; denial of applications. 
(a)  Every person, firm or corporation shall make application for a license to the office of the director of finance in accordance with the forms and procedures established by that office. The correctness of all information required by the application shall be sworn to or affirmed by the person or principal or corporate officer empowered to make binding agreements by that firm or corporation. Failure to provide any information or knowingly falsifying any information may result in revocation and fines and penalties as provided by this chapter. 
(b)  The director of finance may deny any application for a license or renewal of a license under this chapter whenever he has been provided with a copy of a written order entered by the city manager (or by a hearing officer acting in place of the city manager) pursuant to section 9-1-12 of this Code suspending or revoking any license issued under this chapter, within the immediately preceding twelve-month period. In such an event, no second "show cause hearing" shall be required to establish any of the facts underlying the section 9-1-12 order, but the applicant may request a hearing to contest the validity of the denial of the license by filing a request for a hearing with the city clerk within ten (10) days following the date of his receipt of the denial. The denial shall be sent to the applicant via United States mail overnight delivery to the address provided by the applicant on his application. 
(c)  The director of finance may deny any application for a license or renewal of a license under this chapter when he has been provided information by the city's police department that the applicant has, with knowledge actual or implied (i.e., when the applicant knew or under the circumstances reasonably should have known) allowed conduct within or upon his business premises constituting a violation or violations of any federal or state laws or city ordinances, when such conduct would affect or relate to the applicant's qualification to conduct the business, or where such activities involve, affect or relate to the manner in which the applicant's business would be or is being conducted. The applicant may request a hearing to contest the denial of the license by filing a request for such a hearing with the city clerk within ten (10) days following the date of his receipt of the denial. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 9-1-12 of this Code. The denial shall be sent to the applicant via United States mail overnight delivery to the address provided by the applicant on his application. 
(d)  The applicant may file a petition for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court to contest any decision made pursuant to this section. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the city's governing body from appointing a hearing officer to serve in lieu of the director of finance under this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-47, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Sec. 9-1-3. - Fees. 
Each person, firm or corporation shall register their business and pay any and all occupation taxes required as set forth in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-003, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 9-1-4. - Time for application and payment of fees. 
The license or occupation tax certificate is issued on an annual basis for a period from January 1 through December 31 of the year for which it is issued. The procedure for application is set forth in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-022, 11-1-93; Ord. No. 94-003, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 9-1-5. - Proof of state and county licenses and/or permits as condition of license. 
(a)  Where a license or permit from any state or county office or agency is required as a prerequisite to engaging in any particular type of business, such as, but not limited to, food service establishments, private detectives, child care facilities and nursing homes, or where such a license or permit is required to maintain a particular facility as part of a larger business, such as swimming pools located in health clubs or food counters located in retail establishments, a city business license shall not be issued for that establishment unless proof of the required state or county license or permit accompanies the application for the city business license. 
(b)  Suspension or revocation of any such required license or permit from a state or county office or agency shall result in immediate suspension or revocation of the city business license. 
Sec. 9-1-6. - Change of address. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the director of finance of such move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the director of finance no later than the day of moving. The same business license will be valid at the new location if such new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
Sec. 9-1-7. - Penalties. 
Persons, firms or corporations violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the same penalties as set forth in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-003, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 9-1-8. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, in accordance with section 2-3-2, not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the collection of the license fees hereunder. 
Sec. 9-1-9. - Subsequent amendments. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess, levy and collect any of the license fees prescribed. The payment of any license fee herein provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessments, levy, or collection of additional license fees upon the same person, firm or corporation. 
Sec. 9-1-10. - Effect upon previous ordinances. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of the ordinance heretofore passed where fees levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereafter passed providing for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any fees or assessment required by such ordinance, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such fees, or for the failure to take out a license provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force and effect until such fees or assessments shall be fully paid. 
Sec. 9-1-11. - Effect of this chapter. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the mayor and council of the city, and until such amendment or repeal shall become effective; it not being the intent by the enactment of this chapter to bind the present mayor and council of the city or their successors so as to prevent free legislation with respect to the levy or assessment of occupation taxes and license fees. All provisions herein relating to any form of license fee herein levied and assessed shall remain in full force and effect until such license fees have been paid in full. 
Sec. 9-1-12. - Revocation and suspension of licenses. 
(a)  Application to title 9 provisions. In addition to any other provisions hereinafter contained, the following revocation provisions shall apply to all [chapters] of [title] 9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park. 
(b)  Authority to revoke or suspend licenses for unlawful activities. The city manager for the city is hereby authorized to make investigations, conduct hearings, and suspend or revoke any licenses issued under Title 9 of this Code of Ordinances in accordance with the following procedure. 
(c)  Preliminary investigation; show cause hearing; notice and hearing; findings of fact. Where it is reported to the city manager that any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity holding a license issued under Title 9 of this Code of Ordinances ("the licensee") has, with knowledge actual or implied (i.e., where the licensee knew or under the circumstances should have reasonably known), allowed two (2) or more separate unlawful activities to be carried on within or upon the licensee's place of business or business premises, including activities which would constitute violations of the laws of the State of Georgia or any city ordinances, and where such activities would directly or indirectly affect the licensee's qualification to continue to conduct the licensed business, or where such activities involve or affect the manner in which said business was or is being conducted, the licensee shall be notified to appear before the city manager at a time, date and place certain and show cause why the licensee's business license should not be revoked or suspended. The licensee may appear at the hearing in person and may be represented by counsel (at his own expense), and shall have the right to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The rules of evidence shall not apply, but the hearing shall be conducted in a fundamentally fair manner. Within ten (10) business days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall issue a written order including findings of fact based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, and may: 
(1)  Find that the evidence does not warrant or authorize revocation or suspension of the license; 
(2)  Issue a warning to the licensee; 
(3)  Suspend the license and probate the suspension; 
(4)  Suspend the license for any period up to sixty (60) days; 
(5)  Enter an order revoking the license instanter. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager made pursuant to this section may file a petition for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia, provided that the decision of the city manager shall not be stayed during the pendency of the proceedings in the superior court, nor shall it be stayed in the event of an appeal from the final order and judgment of the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 88-001, 1-18-88; Ord. No. 11-18, § 1, 5-16-2011) 
CHAPTER 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2012, repealed former Ch. 2, §§ 9-2-1—9-2-122, and enacted a new Ch. 2 as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Cross reference— Excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, § 3-4-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-2-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
Pursuant to the power and authority vested in the city's governing body and to promote the general health and welfare, a plan has been devised to regulate and control the package sale of spirituous liquors, distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine and the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. The plan includes reasonable constraints and reasonable taxation of the privilege to engage in the business of selling or otherwise dealing in such substances and products, while incorporating the following: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the governing body upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(2)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and state law. 
(3)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This is a privilege license and may therefore be revoked at anytime with cause, after a hearing." 
(4)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
State Law reference— Permit or license from governing authority required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages; due process guidelines; fingerprints, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 9-2-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Brewery means any establishment where malt beverages are manufactured. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. As used in this paragraph, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, as authorized pursuant to subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, or to the public for consumption off the premises, as authorized pursuant to subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) and paragraph (4) of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, shall not be used. 
City means the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume. 
Eating establishment or restaurant means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public, from a full menu with substantial entrees from which the public may choose, with sufficient employees for cooking and serving such entrees for consumption to the public at tables in dining rooms on the premises, with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all in good condition and fully operational, and all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. An eating establishment will be prepared to serve food every hour they are open and will derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added, including, but not limited to, brandy. 
Gallon or wine gallon means a United States gallon of liquid measurement equivalent to the volume of two hundred thirty-one (231) cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Growler means a container that is filled by a licensee or employee of a licensee with beer or wine from a barrel, keg, or cask for off premises consumption. 
Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the juice of apples, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, flavored or carbonated cider. For purposes of this chapter, hard cider shall be deemed a malt beverage. The term "hard cider" does not include "sweet cider." 
Hotel/motel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either, transient, permanent or residential. Such hotels shall maintain a minimum of fifty (50) rooms available for hire and have one (1) or more public dining rooms with an adequate kitchen as determined by the health department, and approved by the health and fire departments. 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into the State of Georgia and or the city from a foreign country who maintains a stock of such alcoholic beverages and sells the alcoholic beverages to another importer, or a broker, or wholesaler. 
Individual means a natural person. 
License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as one (1) of the classes of licenses described in section 9-2-3(c) of this chapter. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage, and shall also include: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Microbrewery is the term used in this chapter to collectively refer to breweries and brewpubs. 
Open alcoholic beverage container means any bottle, can, or other receptacle that: 
(1)  Contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and 
(2)  Is open, has a broken seal, or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. Retail package alcoholic beverages shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Pouring/alcohol permit means an authorization granted to individuals by the city to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail package dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this code section. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, all definitions as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference thereto and made a part of this chapter, as applicable. 
(c)  In addition, as used in this chapter: 
(1)  Applicant . Any individual applying for any license authorized by this article on an application form supplied by the city for such purpose. 
(2)  Church . Any duly dedicated structure provided for the regular practice of a religious worship. 
(3)  Premises . The interior portion of any improvement situated at the address of a licensee under this chapter, and in the case of a licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may include an outdoor patio that provides tables and seating for a minimum of fifteen (15) persons. 
(4)  Private club . Any nonprofit association organized under the laws of the State of Georgia which: 
a.  Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
b.  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; 
c.  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
1.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment, i.e., a full service kitchen consisting of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments, for the serving of meals for its members and guests; and 
2.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
d.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
For purposes of this section, "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  Private residence. Any structure(s) designed or intended for permanent dwelling by people. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 16-17, § 2, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 17-19, § 1, 6-5-2017) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
Sec. 9-2-3. - License required; violations; classes of licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, serve, furnish, purvey, sell or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, by the package or for consumption on the premises, any alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits of the city without having an applicable license issued by the city under this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, serve, furnish, purvey, sell or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, by the package or for consumption on the premises, any alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits of the city in violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(c)  There shall be the following classes of licenses in the city: 
(1)  Retail dealers of alcoholic beverages by the package (which includes distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine by the package); 
(2)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits by the package; 
(3)  Retail dealers of malt beverages and wine by the package; 
(4)  Retail dealers of malt beverages by the package; 
(5)  Retail dealers of wine by the package; 
(6)  Retail dealers of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises (which includes distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises); 
(7)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(8)  Retail dealers of malt beverages and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(9)  Retail dealers of malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(10)  Retail dealers of wine by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(11)  Wholesale dealers of alcoholic beverages (which includes distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine); 
(12)  Wholesale dealers of distilled spirits; 
(13)  Wholesale dealers of malt beverages and wine; 
(14)  Wholesale dealers of malt beverages; 
(15)  Wholesale dealers of wine; 
(16)  Private club; 
(17)  Hotel/motel in-room service; 
(18)  Alcoholic beverages caterer; 
(19)  Banquet hall; 
(20)  Importer dealer license; 
(21)  Growler; 
(22)  Microbrewery. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The manufacture of malt beverages or wine within the boundaries of a lot upon which a private residence is located when such malt beverages or wine are not to be sold, to be offered for sale, or to be made available for consumption by the general public; 
(2)  The serving or furnishing of any alcoholic beverage by a person within the boundaries of a lot upon which a private residence is located when such serving or furnishing is not made available to the general public and is not undertaken in exchange for money or anything of value; or 
(3)  Any person selling or offering to sell any alcoholic beverage by the drink pursuant to a temporary permit issued under section 9-2-71 if such action occurs on the premises of a special event (and during the operating hours of such event) for which a permit has been issued under Chapter 15 of Title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 3, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 17-10, § 1, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 6-5-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-17, § 3, adopted Oct. 17, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 9-2-4. - Application process and procedures. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made on forms furnished by the city and shall indicate, along with all information reasonably necessary to complete the form, which license is being applied for under section 9-2-3(c)(1) through (20) above. 
(b)  Upon approval of an original or renewal application for a license of one (1) of the above type sales of alcoholic beverages, such sales may be made by the applicant after a license is issued for all the remaining part of a calendar year, unless the same is suspended or revoked for due cause as provided hereinafter. 
(c)  Any and all licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application, with the requisite fee provided for in this chapter, with the city's director of finance or his designee, on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before October 1 of each year; with all fees paid no later than November 15 of each year. Otherwise, a late charge of ten (10) percent, plus interest at the rate set forth in subsection (d) shall be assessed thereafter. No renewal license shall be granted after the previous license has expired on December 31, and any application submitted thereafter shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. All licenses granted under this chapter shall be for the calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year, and shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. License fees shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year, and partial months shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. 
(d)  Any person renewing any license issued under this chapter who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after the date set forth in this chapter for such payment, shall, in addition to the annual fee, pay a late charge of ten (10) percent, and shall also pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(e)  No application will be considered from any applicant who, either individually or in association with any other person or party, shall have at the time any outstanding taxes, fees, special assessments, or any other sums that are due and owing to the city. Further, no application shall be given to any person who does not possess an occupational tax certificate issued by the city, and all applicants shall submit a copy of their most current occupational tax certificate with their application. Any application issued or considered and/or approved contrary to the requirements stated in this subsection, shall be considered and declared null and void, and any and all monies paid by the applicant shall be returned to the applicant. 
(f)  All applicants, by filing any application with the city, do by such filing authorize and give consent to the city's police department to make full and complete investigations into all persons, corporations, or other entities named in such application, and into any person who shall have an interest in any license issued hereunder, and any information sought or required by such department shall be readily furnished by such applicant, and no license shall be considered until such information as requested by such department has been satisfactorily furnished. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-5. - License applications; contents. 
(a)  All applicants, other than individuals, shall list the name, age and home address of all individuals who own any ownership interest in the applicant and the percentage ownership interest held by each such individual, unless the corporate stock or other ownership interest is listed on the stock exchange or is available for over-the-counter sales and subject to regulation by federal and state securities, laws and regulations. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, the application shall contain, under oath, the following information and documents: 
(1)  The address at which the applicant wishes to be granted a license to operate the business in the city. 
(2)  A statement authorizing an investigation by the chief of police into the background of each and every individual described in subsection (a) above. 
(3)  A statement acknowledging that any license, if granted, will be a privilege only and subject to revocation as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  A statement agreeing to immediately notify the chief of police or his designee, in writing, of any change in the individuals comprising the class of people described in subsection (a) above as having an interest and sharing in the profits of the undertaking. 
(5)  A statement of any interest any of the persons described in subparagraph (a) above have in any other retail or wholesale business dealing in alcoholic beverages of any kind including distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine. 
(6)  A certified check in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00), for administrative costs of processing the application and investigating the individuals named in the application. It shall not be refundable in whole or in part whether the application is granted or not and neither shall it constitute a credit against any other tax, fee or license due the city. 
(7)  In addition to the information required above, it shall be the duty of all persons holding a retail license under this chapter to file with the chief of police or his designee the names of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees, with the names of new employees, must be filed with the chief of police or his designee within three (3) days from the date of any such change. 
(8)  In addition to the information required above, it shall be the duty of all persons holding retail licenses under this chapter to file with the chief of police or his designee the names, home addresses and telephone numbers of all managers and co-managers, or any other person who may from time to time assume the duties of a manager or co-manager and hold any supervisory capacity over such sales. Changes in the list of managers and co-managers, with names of new hires, must be filed with the chief of police or his designee within three (3) days from the date of any such change. 
(9)  All employees shall be subject to such investigative rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary by the police department and every applicant shall submit an investigative fee in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) with each application for an employee license (new or renewal), and an E-verification shall be conducted on every employee. 
(c)  Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-6. - Applicant. 
The applicant shall be the owner of the proposed business if the business is solely owned or a jointly-owned partnership or firm. If a proposed licensee is a corporation, the applicant may be the president, a vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation, or the corporation's general manager at the particular business location. Otherwise, no other individual may qualify as an applicant under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-7. - Hours and days of operation. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (f), licensees holding licenses for the retail package sale of wine, malt beverages, or both, shall engage in the retail package sale of wine, malt beverages, or both, only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and until 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  Sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be prohibited between the hours of 3:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages is hereby authorized on any election day pursuant to the authority granted in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b). Said sales shall only be authorized during the hours permitted under this chapter; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place during any time that the polls are open on any election day, and such sales are hereby prohibited. 
(e)  All the preceding notwithstanding, no alcoholic beverages may be sold, traded, dispensed, or delivered on Easter Sunday and Christmas Day. This will begin at 12:00 a.m. on Easter Sunday and Christmas Day. 
(f)  All alcoholic beverages sold, traded, dispensed, or delivered on Sundays shall be allowed only between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 12-36, § 1, 11-19-2012; Ord. No. 17-25, § 1, 10-2-2017; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 2-5-2018) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(3)(A). 
Sec. 9-2-8. - Standards for issuance or denial of licenses under this chapter. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  Licenses under this chapter shall be issued by the director of finance or his designee. Licenses shall be issued only after the following has been determined: 
(1)  The applicant has not been convicted of a violation of any state or federal statute pertaining to any controlled substances; 
(2)  The applicant has not been convicted of a violation of any federal, state, county or city law or regulation regarding alcoholic beverages, their sale, distribution or manufacture within the past ten (10) years from the date of application; 
(3)  The applicant has never had an alcoholic beverage or business license or permit suspended or revoked by the city, the State of Georgia, or any other government, state or political subdivision; 
(4)  The applicant has not in the past conducted any business within the city causing the necessity of police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance or as to the necessity for city action to compel the applicant's adherence to any city law, regulation or ordinance; 
(5)  That the building or other facility where the alcoholic beverages are to be sold or dispensed meets all applicable city ordinances, building codes, fire codes, and similar such codes; 
(6)  The applicant will provide adequate parking spaces/facilities so as not to cause traffic congestion, unlawful parking or unauthorized parking on any nearby properties; 
(7)  The applicant shall owe no monies to the city, Clayton County, the State of Georgia, or the federal government that is delinquent; 
(8)  That applicant has obtained or will obtain a license in compliance with the laws and regulations of the State of Georgia concerning the sale, distribution, and consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
(9)  The proposed location shall meet all of the minimum distance requirements set forth in this chapter, as evidenced by a plat of survey prepared by a surveyor licensed and registered by the State of Georgia; 
(10)  In the case of the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine by the package, the application shall contain a summary of the current inventory required by section 9-2-42 of this chapter; 
(11)  The applicant will ensure that all employees serving, dispensing or handling alcohol will obtain a permit from the city. Such employees must provide valid identification, a Social Security card and complete a notarized criminal history consent form, authorizing the police department to conduct a complete criminal background investigation, with a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The permit can be used at any applicable establishment without the need of obtaining a new permit; 
(12)  The applicant shall have complied with the requirements of section 9-2-31 of this chapter pertaining to the installation and maintenance of video cameras within the applicant's premises. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designee shall cause an appropriate investigation to be made into the persons named and the information given on the application, and shall cause the fingerprinting process as required by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 to be completed and forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the investigation and based upon the criteria specified above, the chief of police or his designee shall approve or deny the application. The chief of police or his designee shall notify the applicant, within ten (10) days, of his decision. 
(1)  Upon approval by the chief of police or his designee and upon receipt of payment of the license fee, the director of finance shall issue the applicable license or licenses to the applicant. The amount of the license fee shall be established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. 
(2)  If the application is denied by the chief of police or his designee, such decision is subject to the right of appeal provided in section 9-2-19 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 14-23, § 1, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 9-2-9. - License fee scale. 
Before a license shall be granted, the applicant thereof shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the governing body regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed, from time to time, by the governing body contained in section 9-2-10 and kept on file in the office of the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-10. - Fees enumerated. 
License fees applicable to this chapter are set out as follows: 
(1)  Retail dealers of alcoholic beverages by the package—$6,000.00 per year; 
(2)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits by the package—$5,000.00 per year; 
(3)  Retail dealers of malt beverages and wine by the package—$3,000.00 per year; 
(4)  Retail dealers of malt beverages by the package—$2,000.00 per year; 
(5)  Retail dealers of wine by the package—$2,000.00 per year; 
(6)  Retail dealers of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises—$5,000.00 per year; 
(7)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises—$4,000.00 per year; 
(8)  Retail dealers of malt beverages and wine to be consumed on the premises—$3,000.00 per year; 
(9)  Retail dealers of malt beverages to be consumed on the premises—$2,000.00 per year; 
(10)  Retail dealers of wine to be consumed on the premises—$2,000.00 per year; 
(11)  Wholesale dealers of alcoholic beverages, principal place of business located in the city—$5,000.00 per year; 
(12)  Wholesale dealers of distilled spirits, principal place of business located in the city—$4,000.00 per year; 
(13)  Wholesale dealers of malt beverages and wine, principal place of business located in the city—$3,000.00 per year; 
(14)  Wholesale dealers in malt beverages, principal place of business located in the city—$1,500.00 per year; 
(15)  Wholesale dealers in wine, principal place of business located in the city—$1,500.00 per year; 
(16)  Private club, malt beverages to be consumed on the premises—$250.00 per year; 
(17)  Private club, wine to be consumed on the premises—$250.00 per year; 
(18)  Private club, malt beverages and wine to be consumed on the premises—$500.00 per year; 
(19)  Private club, distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises—$1,000.00 per year; 
(20)  Private club, alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises—$2,000.00 per year; 
(21)  Hotel-motel "in-room service,"—$500.00 per year. (This is an add-on license to an on-premise consumption license); 
(22)  Alcoholic beverages caterer—$50.00 per event per day; 
(23)  Banquet hall—$2,000.00 per year; 
(24)  Importer dealer license—$100.00 per year; 
(25)  Growler—$2,000.00 per year; 
(26)  Microbrewery—$2,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 17-19, § 3, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 9-2-11. - Collection of fees or taxes sums due. 
If any person shall fail to pay the sum due under this chapter, the director of finance or his designee shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-12. - Location of business. 
(a)  Any business engaged in the sale of any alcoholic beverage shall comply with all distance requirements imposed by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21 and any other applicable provision in Georgia law or in this Code. 
(b)  Any person applying for a license under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall file with the application a plat or survey showing whether the building is in compliance with the distance limitations of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply and control with regard to measurements made under this chapter notwithstanding any provision in any zoning or land use ordinance of the city to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 4, 10-17-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-17, § 4, adopted Oct. 17, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 9-2-13. - Display of license. 
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent location on the licensed premises as required by law at all times. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-14. - Signs. 
(a)  Inscription at entrance required. In retail package stores, a licensee shall have printed on a front window or entrance to the licensed premises the name of the licensee, together with the inscription, "Forest Park Retail Beer/Wine (or Liquor) License No. ___________," in uniform letters not less than four (4), nor more than eight (8), inches in height. 
(b)  Neon and other signs. In retail package stores, the licensee may place a neon sign not exceeding eight (8) inches in height inside any window in such a manner as to be readily visible from the outside of the building, containing the inscription, "Liquor," the inscription, "Beer," or the inscription, "Wine." In no event shall any one (1) retail establishment contain a total of more than three (3) such signs, which may be arranged in any reasonable manner. In no event shall the same word appear in the form of a neon sign more than one (1) time in any retail establishment. No other signs or advertising shall be installed in such a manner as to be readily visible to a passerby from the outside of the establishment. 
(c)  Signs in retail food stores. Retail food stores displaying their merchandise on counters or shelves where signs are erected designating the merchandise may, in the same manner as such other merchandise is displayed, erect a sign or signs indicating the counters or shelves on which beer, wine or beer and wine are located, provided the lettering of such signs does not exceed in size the lettering on signs on counters or shelves where other products are sold. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-15. - Consumption or opening on certain premises; posting of signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverages or to open any container of alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package or on any parking area adjacent thereto. 
(b)  The holder of a license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall display in a conspicuous place within the licensed premises a sign which shall state that it is unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverages or to open any container of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or on any parking area adjacent thereto. It shall be unlawful for any such licensed holder to permit, allow or acquiesce in the consumption of any alcoholic beverages or the opening of any container of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or on any parking area adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-16. - Limitation on number of licenses granted to one applicant; rental agreements. 
(a)  No person or entity shall be issued a license for wholesale dealers of distilled spirits or retail dealers of distilled spirits by the package if such person or entity already has a financial interest in any other business with a license issued by the City of Forest Park for wholesale dealers of distilled spirits or retail dealers of distilled spirits by the package. 
(b)  Additionally, it shall be unlawful for any applicant or license holder to contract with or agree with the owner of premises on which any retail sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted, so as to provide for the payment of rent on a percentage of profit-sharing basis, or for the owner of the leased premises in any way to share directly or in any other way in the profits of the lessee's activity in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages; and the lessor shall not be in or have any other connection with the business of the retail sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 17-10, § 2, 3-6-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-10, § 2, adopted Mar. 6, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 9-2-17. - City officials, city employees and/or their families prohibited from owning license. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or appointed official or employee of the city, or his or her spouse or children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest whatsoever in any license to operate retail businesses engaged in the sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-18. - Brown-bagging. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  Brown-bagging means the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business licensed to operate within the city, but not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designed for private residential occupancy shall not fall within this definition. 
(2)  Brown-bagging shall include the following prohibited acts: 
a.  Any person who brown-bags; 
b.  Any person participating in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brown-bagged; 
c.  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises holding a business license, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown-bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy; 
d.  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs. 
(b)  Brown-bagging is prohibited within the city. 
(c)  The business license of any premises upon which brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference has been allowed shall be subject to suspension or revocation. Such suspension or revocation action shall follow the procedures outlined in section 9-2-16 of this chapter. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the municipal court of the city to a charge of brown-bagging shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-19. - Denials; violations, revocations, suspensions; denial of renewal. 
(a)  Any revocation by the State of Georgia of any permit or license issued to any licensees herein pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages shall automatically revoke any companion permit or license issued by the city, without any action required by the city, and shall not be appealable. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, no license issued hereunder shall be denied, suspended or revoked except for due cause as hereinafter set forth. 
(c)  Due cause defined. "Due cause" for the denial, suspension or revocation of any license issued under this chapter shall consist of: any failure to meet any of the standards for issuance of an original license as set forth in section 9-2-8 of this chapter or of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or the violation any regulations made for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law or regulation which would authorize the refusal of an application for such license. 
(d)  Hearings . 
(1)  No license issued under this article shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. This provision shall also apply to alcoholic beverage permits for employees. 
(2)  The director of finance or his designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his action to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the director of finance may have a review thereof by appeal to the city manager or his designee (hereinafter called "the hearing officer"). Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the director of finance within ten (10) days after the action of the director of finance and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). The director of finance, at his discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing said appeal. Failure to file the appeal within the established time period will result in the action of the director of finance being made final, and no further appeal shall be allowed. 
(3)  Upon a timely filed appeal, a hearing shall be conducted by the hearing officer on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of the appeal with the director of finance, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the director of finance. The hearing officer shall provide notice to all parties of the date, time and location of the hearing. At the hearing, the appellant shall show cause why the revocation or suspension should be reversed. The appellant shall have the right to appear at the hearing in person and to be represented by counsel (at his own expense), and shall have the right to present evidence and to cross-examine any witnesses who are called to testify on behalf of the city. At the hearing, the appellant shall show cause why the revocation or suspension should be reversed. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three (3) days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. The rules of evidence shall not apply to such a hearing, but the hearing shall be conducted in a fundamentally fair manner. Within fifteen (15) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision including findings of fact, and may either (i) find that the evidence warrants the denial, suspension or revocation; or (ii) find that the evidence does not warrant the denial, suspension or revocation, and provide notice of his decision to the parties. 
(4)  The findings of the hearing officer shall not be set aside unless found to be: (1) contrary to law or ordinances; or (2) unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or (3) unreasonable. 
(5)  The findings of the hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of said finding. Any applicant or appellant aggrieved by any decision made by any hearing officer pursuant to this section may file a petition for a writ of certiorari in the superior court to contest any such decision. 
(6)  Any person filing a petition for a writ of certiorari under this section shall pay fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the city clerk to help defray the cost of assembling, preparation of the transcript, copying, and transmitting the record to the superior court. 
(7)  For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States Postal Service by regular U.S. mail, to the addresses provided to the hearing officer by the parties. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-20. - Transfers; changes of ownership; location. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable, except for a change in location, subject to the provisions of subsection (b). 
(b)  Should a transfer of location be requested, such new location shall first be qualified pursuant to the location qualifications of this chapter, and upon same meeting the qualifications as to location, such license may thereafter be duly transferred. 
(c)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of sixty (60) days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur, provided no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization for such license with the director of finance for the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-21. - Commencement of business. 
All licensees must commence business within sixty (60) days of the issuance of any license authorized by this chapter. The failure to offer products authorized by this chapter within such period of time shall operate as an automatic revocation of such license. The failure of any licensee to operate continuously for a six-month period shall likewise cause such existing license to be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-22. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenient stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises, provided such person has been approved for a permit pursuant to this chapter, has a valid work permit issued by the State of Georgia, and has his parent sign a written consent, in person, allowing the child to be so employed. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-23. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served, or permitted to have in his possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. "Identification" in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(b)  The licensee must have written policies and procedures for checking identification and train, instruct and supervise employees to ensure compliance with this section. Further, the licensee must sign an affidavit, along with each employee certifying that the licensee has trained and instructed the employee on the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-24. - Sales to minors and others prohibited. 
The sale of any alcoholic beverage to any person under the minimum legal age established by the laws of the State of Georgia, or to any person in an apparent intoxicated condition, or to any person known to the licensee or his agent to be a habitual drunkard, is hereby prohibited. The solicitation of any such purchase by any minor, or the misrepresentation of any such minor as to his age, is likewise prohibited. 
No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(2)  The prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverages are being sold is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. For the purposes of this subsection, proper identification means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including, but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(3)  Sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his employees. 
(4)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by state law or city ordinance. 
(5)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of the establishment or lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in eating establishments or private clubs as defined in this chapter without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian and provided further that this section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(6)  The penalty for violation of this section by an individual shall be as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
b.  For the second offense and subsequent violations within one (1) year, a minimum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(7)  Any licensed establishment where two (2) or more violations of this section, or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 and related regulations have occurred within any twenty-four-month period shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the second offense within any twenty-four-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
b.  For the third and any subsequent violation within any twenty-four-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
As to the penalties in this subsection, if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessor(s) if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-25. - Purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(a)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-26. - Notice to employees. 
Each alcoholic beverage dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises at all times, and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this chapter; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-27. - Regulations as to employees and manager. 
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages, or serve in any managerial position, by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the chief of police or his designee, indicating that the person is eligible for such employment. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed to include volunteer groups with non-profit tax exempt status from the Internal Revenue Service whose volunteer efforts financially benefit a non-profit organization with no direct financial benefit, either by wages, tips or donations, to the individual volunteer. No volunteer under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders or mix alcoholic beverages. Employees of a licensed establishment whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy(s), cook(s), or dishwasher(s) shall also be excluded from this section. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the chief of police or his designee, and upon paying a fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the person, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The chief of police or his designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the chief of police or his designee shall issue a permit to the person, in person, stating, in writing, that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the person, in writing, that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(5)  No person shall be granted a permit under this chapter unless it appears to the satisfaction of the chief of police or his designee, that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of five (5) years of the date of conviction and has been released from parole or probation. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city or county ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an alcohol permit. 
No person shall be granted a permit under this chapter who has been convicted, plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state, or local law for any felony within five (5) years of the date of conviction and has not been released from parole or probation prior to the filing for application for such permit. 
For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting the first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentence in court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(6)  An alcohol/pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one (1) calendar year from the date of the original application. As noted in subsection (11) below, the alcohol/pouring permit must be in the possession of and worn by the employee at all times while the employee is working at the licensed establishment. This permit must be worn by the employee while the permit holder is working and available for inspection by members of the police department or the code enforcement department. 
(7)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick or scheme while making application to the police department for an alcohol/pouring permit under this section. 
If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a permit is denied for this reason, then sixty (60) calendar days must elapse from the date of notification per regular U.S. mail to the address on file for the person, before a new application and fee may be resubmitted. 
(8)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the chief of police or his designee, or code enforcement. 
(9)  Replacement permits will be issued within thirty (30) days of the original date, upon paying one-half of the fees charged for alcohol/pouring permits. After thirty (30) days of the original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(10)  All permits issued under this chapter remain the property of the police department and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the police department or employee of the business license department or code enforcement department. 
(11)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid city pouring permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the chief of police permit unit may be used for a maximum of thirty (30) days from the date of its issue. Licensees are required by this chapter to inspect and verify that each employee required to do so, has in his possession a valid current alcohol permit. This requirement shall apply to all licensees and all employees working in any retail establishment engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, by the package or for consumption on the premises. 
(12)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police or his designee, the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually during the month of June and again at the time a licensee under this chapter shall apply for a renewal of the license[s]. 
(13)  Any person(s) convicted of any violation(s) of this section shall receive a minimum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-28. - Expiration; renewal of license. 
All licenses granted under this chapter shall be for the calendar year and shall expire on December 31. All licenses hereunder must be renewed by October 1 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-29. - Wholesalers. 
Any wholesaler in alcoholic beverages licensed by the State of Georgia shall be granted a license to distribute such beverage at wholesale in this city upon application. The application shall be accompanied by evidence that the wholesaler understands and agrees to comply with the appropriate provisions of this chapter and to pay the fees below. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-30. - Wholesalers license fee. 
(a)  The wholesaler dealer license fee annually as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Such fee shall be paid on or before October 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-31. - Video cameras. 
During all hours that any licensee is open for the business of the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the city, the licensee shall keep and maintain in the on position one (1) or more fully operational video cameras, which shall be positioned in such a way that the front, side, and rear public entrances and all cash registers of the licensee's premises is constantly captured and recorded on camera with video clarity sufficient to depict all activities conducted within these areas of the licensee's premises. 
Video images recorded by said video cameras shall be stored and maintained by the licensee for a minimum period of thirty (30) days, and shall be promptly made available upon request to any sworn police officer or code enforcement officer of the city for any investigative or law enforcement purposes. 
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the licensee's license in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-32. - Open alcoholic beverage containers. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any licensee to sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide any open alcoholic beverage container to any person for the purpose of removing such container from the licensee's premises; 
(2)  Any person to remove any open alcoholic beverage container from a licensee's premises; 
(3)  Any person to drink (or attempt to drink) any alcoholic beverage from, or to possess, any open alcoholic beverage container on any public street, alley, right-of-way, sidewalk, park, playground, recreation area, or parking lot or on any private parking lot open for public use (regardless of whether any establishment for which such private park lot is used is open or closed for business). 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any licensee selling, offering to sell, or otherwise providing any open alcoholic beverage container if such action occurs on the premises of a special event (and during the operating hours of such event) for which a permit has been issued under Chapter 15 of Title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Any person selling, offering to sell, or otherwise providing any open alcoholic beverage container pursuant to a temporary permit issued under section 9-2-71 if such action occurs on the premises of a special event (and during the operating hours of such event) for which a permit has been issued under Chapter 15 of Title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Any person drinking from, attempting to drink from, or possessing any open alcoholic beverage container if such action occurs on the premises of a special event (and during the operating hours of such event) for which a permit has been issued under Chapter 15 of Title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  A container that has been sealed or resealed pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-4 or 3-6-4 shall not constitute an open alcoholic beverage container for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 5, 10-17-2016) 
Secs. 9-2-33—9-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE—RETAIL PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 9-2-41. - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in section 9-2-2 shall be applicable to this article. 
When any license issued by the state revenue commissioner to engage in the business described in this chapter is revoked, such action shall automatically revoke the license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
State Law reference— Current maximum fee for wholesalers with principal location outside of city is $100.00 pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43. 
Sec. 9-2-42. - Other inventory required. 
(a)  No license shall be granted for the retail sale of malt beverages or wine by the package unless the applicant can show that he has or will have on hand prior to issuance of a license an inventory of foodstuffs having a wholesale value of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), exclusive of alcoholic beverages. Each licensee shall be required to maintain such inventory. "Foodstuffs" shall be defined, for the purposes of this section, as "any matter or substance that can be taken into and assimilated by the body for nourishment." Further, in order to meet the inventory requirement of this section, any merchandise which a licensee desires for inclusion therein must remain on the licensed premises and not be stored in any facility other than such premises. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be charged with the duty of enforcing this section, and he may require an inventory count to be taken from time to time when he is of the opinion that the licensee is not maintaining the inventory required herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-43. - Sale of certain containers unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any malt beverages in any single container, single can, or single glass bottle which shall be smaller than twenty-two (22) ounces in size. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-44. - Importers—Application. 
Any importer in alcoholic beverages licensed by the State of Georgia may be granted a license to distribute such beverage to another importer, wholesaler or broker in this city upon application or letter. The application or letter shall be accompanied by evidence that the importer understands and agrees to comply with the appropriate provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-45. - Importers—Fees. 
(a)  The importer dealer license fee shall be paid annually in the amount established by this chapter. 
(b)  Such fee shall be paid on or before October 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Secs. 9-2-46—9-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - DISTILLED SPIRITS—RETAIL PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 9-2-51. - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in section 9-2-2 shall be applicable to this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-52. - Maximum number of licenses permitted. 
This article provides for the issuance of a combined maximum of seven (7) licenses for wholesale dealers and retail dealers of distilled spirits by the package. No such additional licenses shall be authorized unless and until the population of the city reaches twenty-one thousand (21,000), at which time one (1) additional such license may be permitted, but is not required to be issued, for each three thousand (3,000) in population over the initial twenty-one thousand (21,000) threshold. In determining population, the city shall utilize the most recent population figures published by the Atlanta Regional Commission. In the absence of such figures, the city shall utilize the most recent decennial U.S. Census. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Secs. 9-2-53—9-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 
Cross reference— Excise taxes for on-premises consumption, § 3-4-6 of this Code. 

Sec. 9-2-61. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in section 9-2-2 of this chapter shall be applicable to this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-62. - Premises eligible for license. 
No retail on-premises consumption license shall be issued to any applicant except as for a restaurant, hotel, motel, private club, or banquet hall as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-63. - General provisions. 
(a)  Business location. The premises licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall comply with the minimum distance requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Business entrance. The main entrance of all premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be clearly visible from a public street, except premises located within a motel, hotel, private club, shopping center or multiple story commercial building. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-64. - Hotels, motels. 
Hotel and motel corporations and their franchise restaurant corporations operating as contemplated in these regulations are authorized to apply for and to hold a retail on-premises consumption license in their corporate names. They shall name on such application an agent and/or manager actively employed in the operation of said hotel, motel or franchise restaurant who shall be responsible for operation under said license, and who shall qualify in all respects under these regulations. Should said manager and/or agent leave the employment of the hotel or motel corporation or its franchise restaurant corporation in the city, a new agent and/or manager shall be named by the licensee within ten (10) days thereafter. 
(1)  Each individual licensee shall be a citizen of the United States or shall be an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. 
(2)  Corporations must either be incorporated in the State of Georgia or must have registered to do business in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-65. - Zoning provisions—Sales by the drink. 
No license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be granted in any residential zoning classification, nor within the prohibited distances set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-66. - Hours of operation for sales by the drink. 
Hours of operation for alcohol sales for consumption on the premises are set forth in section 9-2-7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-67. - Vacating premises—Sales by the drink. 
(a)  In all premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink, all patrons must be excluded from the premises within thirty (30) minutes of any closing time required herein. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages in any properly licensed restaurant or dining facility at such times and hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages for on the premises consumption has been prohibited; however, any licensee who desires to engage in such sale shall comply with subsection (a) and may be permitted to conduct such sales only after all patrons who wish to purchase alcoholic beverages on-premises have been excluded from the premises. 
(c)  Licensees may purchase from licensed wholesalers all sizes of packaged alcohol above the quantity of one (1) pint. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-68. - Disturbances prohibited. 
All licensees who are licensed to sell any alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption shall cause to be removed from the premises any patrons behaving in an obnoxiously loud, disrespectful or boisterous manner. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity or public indecency on said premises and the licensee shall be responsible for removing from the premises any person engaging in such conduct. Failure to remove such patrons can result in suspension or loss of any license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-69. - Multiple drink promotions prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee, or employee, or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The gratuitous furnishing of any alcoholic beverage with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two (2) or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)  The sale or serving of two (2) or more alcoholic beverages at the price customarily charged for one (1) such alcoholic beverage; or 
(4)  Requiring or permitting the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased before the first such alcoholic beverage has been consumed by any one (1) person. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Nothing herein contained will be construed to prohibit the dispensing of alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business and the usual, customary or established retail price shall not be reduced. For the purposes of this subsection, a jumbo alcoholic beverage is defined as any alcoholic beverage containing more than one and one-half (1½) ounces of alcohol. 
(2)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package; or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one (1) person. 
(3)  Private functions are exempted from the provisions of this section. A private function within the meaning of this section shall mean any affair where attendance is by invitation only and where the cost of the drinks served is paid by the host. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-70. - Sales outside business. 
(a)  Any sales of alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises shall be prohibited, whether for consumption on or off the premises, except for patios at eating establishments and restaurants. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any licensee selling or offering to sell any alcoholic beverage by the drink if such action occurs on the premises of a special event (and during the operating hours of such event) for which a permit has been issued under Chapter 15 of Title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Any person selling or offering to sell any alcoholic beverage by the drink pursuant to a temporary permit issued under section 9-2-71 if such action occurs on the premises of a special event (and during the operating hours of such event) for which a permit has been issued under Chapter 15 of Title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 6, 10-17-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-17, § 6, adopted Oct. 17, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 9-2-71. - Temporary permit for special events. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic beverage at any special event that is permitted under Chapter 15 of Title 9 in the Code of Ordinances without first obtaining a temporary permit to sell such beverages. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a special event during the operating hours of such event, the city manager may issue such permit to an individual or organization only if the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The applicant shall have been duly licensed by the city or another local governing authority in this state for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(2)  The Georgia Department of Revenue has issued a special event use permit to the applicant for the event in question. 
(3)  The applicant has paid to the Director of the Forest Park Planning, Building and Zoning Department a nonrefundable filing fee and a permit fee, said fees to be in such amounts as may be set from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(4)  The permit will allow sale of alcoholic beverages beyond the premises described in the annual license only in the area specifically described in the application and only during the time in which the special event named occurs. 
(5)  The city has issued a permit for the special event pursuant to Chapter 15 of Title 9 in the Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  The applicant is authorized in writing by the producer of the special event to participate in such event. 
(7)  The application for the permit must have been filed with the Director of the Forest Park Planning, Building and Zoning Department at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the special event. 
(8)  The Director of the Forest Park Planning, Building and Zoning Department, or his or her designee, has reviewed the temporary permit application and recommended that it be granted. 
(9)  The Forest Park Police Department has reviewed the temporary permit application and recommended that it be granted. 
(10)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold only during the hours in which the special event occurs when said event transpires Monday through Saturday. Where the special event occurs on a Sunday, alcoholic beverages may be sold no earlier than 12:30 p.m. and no later than the time at which the special event ends. 
(11)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes governing the sale of alcoholic beverages and all sections of this Code and other city ordinances governing such sales, including but not limited to sections of this Code relating to hours of operation, distance requirements and the permit requirements for employees. 
(12)  Each temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages during a special event shall last a maximum of three (3) consecutive days. 
(13)  No more than two (2) temporary permits to sell alcoholic beverages during a special event shall be issued to any applicant during any calendar year. 
(c)  The Chief of the Forest Park Police Department or his designee may immediately revoke any temporary permit issued under this section in any situation or circumstance where he determines that the continued sale of alcoholic beverages under such permit may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(d)  Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be temporary and shall not vest in the holder any permanent property rights in such permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 7, 10-17-2016) 
Secs. 9-2-72—9-2-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - BANQUET HALLS 

Sec. 9-2-130. - Definitions. 
The definitions of those terms found in section 9-2-2 of this chapter shall be applicable to this article; in addition, the following terms found in this article are defined below. 
Adequate parking means one (1) parking space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of customer service within the premises of the applicant and one (1) parking space per every four (4) employees. 
Authorized catered function means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this section. 
Banquet means the gathering of people upon property or in a building other than a private residence, for the purpose of honoring a person or an event, where liquor, beers or wines can be consumed by persons in attendance. Examples include wedding receptions, retirement parties, birthdays, holiday parties, and similar types of functions. 
Banquet hall means a facility, other than a private residence, hotel, motel, other lodging place, private club, restaurant, bottle house, or lounge, which serves for the purposes of honoring a person or an event, where liquor, beers or wines can be consumed by persons in attendance. 
Event means a social event such as wedding reception, bridal shower, retirement party, holiday party, award dinner or luncheon, bar/bat mitzvah, or similar type of function. 
Food caterer means any person who, for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the state and who possesses a license by a local government in the state authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-131. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or stage a banquet serving alcohol within the city, without having first obtained a permit therefore. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person owning a building or other property to allow said building or property to be used for purposes of a banquet where alcohol is served for which a permit to conduct the same has not been granted. 
(b)  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function in the city, such caterer shall obtain a permit. The application for an event permit shall include the name and address of the alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer's license number, and the location, date, address and time of the event. No permit fee shall be charged for the alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by the city. For caterers, a fee for each event shall be charged in the amount established by this chapter. No permit shall be issued to any person under this section who does not hold an alcoholic beverage caterer's license from a local jurisdiction or the State of Georgia. The permit shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverages to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-132. - Issuance of banquet and/or alcohol beverage caterer permits. 
(a)  Permits for banquets and alcohol beverage caterers shall be issued by the chief of police or other officer designated by the chief to issue permits in his absence. Permits may be issued only after the applicant provides satisfactory evidence of those items listed in section 9-2-8 of this chapter, and also the following: 
(1)  The building or other facility where the banquet is to be held or conducted is a site or location meeting applicable building codes, fire codes, and otherwise appears to be a location where a banquet can be safely held; 
(2)  The availability of parking spaces/facilities so as not to cause traffic congestion, unlawful parking or unauthorized parking on surrounding properties, public safety and the effect of such operation on surrounding property values; 
(3)  The applicant shows proof of hiring a Forest Park police officer obtained and paid for by the applicant to attend the banquet and provide order and security during the conduct of the proceedings; 
(4)  Caterers licensed by a jurisdiction other than Forest Park shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported into the city for the event, and shall pay an excise tax to the city covering all such beverages at the rates provided by section 3-4-1 of this Code. Failure to report and remit the tax within seven (7) days of the conclusion of the event shall be grounds for denial of subsequent permits to that caterer for similar events; 
(5)  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event, by event, and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city; 
(6)  All employees serving, dispensing or handling alcohol are required to obtain a permit. Such employees must provide valid identification, a Social Security card and complete a notarized criminal history consent form, with a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  As a condition to issuance of a permit, alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the City of Forest Park shall be provided a copy of the city's alcoholic beverage ordinances, and shall indicate, by signature, that they have received such ordinances and acknowledge the applicability of such ordinances to their operations in the city. The chief of police or his designee shall consider the application, and if the applicant qualifies then the chief of police or his designee shall issue an event permit upon receipt of payment of a permit fee in an amount established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-133. - Prohibitions. 
Upon the obtaining of a permit, the permittee shall be responsible to ensure that the banquet is conducted in a reasonable and safe manner. In addition, the following prohibitions shall apply to any banquet: 
(1)  The Forest Park police officer hired for the banquet shall be required to be on the banquet premises at all times and shall not be a participant in the banquet festivities; 
(2)  The permittee shall comply with all laws of the State of Georgia and the provisions of this chapter. No alcohol shall be served to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, and no alcohol shall be served to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or who is under the influence of alcohol or other drugs; 
(3)  No controlled substances shall be permitted in or about the banquet premises, and no firearms shall be permitted in or about the banquet premises; 
(4)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be employed to dispense, serve or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-134. - Violations, revocations and penalties. 
(a)  Periodic inspections. 
(1)  Agents of the police department shall have the authority to inspect the premises of all licensees and permittees during legal hours of operation. 
(2)  Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall have his/her banquet permit or alcoholic beverage caterer permit immediately revoked and the conduct of the banquet terminated. In addition, unless provided elsewhere in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, if convicted, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be fined in an amount of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, or be incarcerated for not more than twelve (12) months or both such fine and incarceration. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-135. - Compliance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense, sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages defined herein which include beer, wine, distilled spirits within the city, without having first complied with the provisions of this article, but the properly licensed sale of same is hereby declared lawful. 
(b)  This article shall apply to: 
(1)  Any banquet hall desiring to serve alcohol. 
(2)  Private clubs where the facility is leased to non-members or others, where alcohol is provided by the private club or an alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-136. - Premises eligible for permit. 
(a)  The following persons will not be considered eligible for holding of a banquet permit or alcoholic beverage caterer permit provided herein: 
(1)  Persons suffering under any judicially determined mental incapacity; or 
(2)  Any person, who, within the past ten (10) years from the date of the application, has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime or force or violence, or violation of any taxing statute. For purposes of this article, a conviction includes a plea of guilty, a verdict of guilty, a bond forfeiture, or plea of nolo contendere. 
(b)  No location for a banquet permit shall be approved if it shall manifestly appear that any of the following, as determined by the chief of police and fire marshal or their designee, would result from the issuance of such license: 
(1)  Traffic congestion requiring the services of a police officer for the orderly movement of traffic in and out of the premises; 
(2)  There are inadequate parking facilities/spaces which could cause illegal or unauthorized parking on the street or on surrounding properties; 
(3)  Location within any area not otherwise appropriately zoned; and 
(4)  Proximity to churches, schools, or other premises as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-137. - General provisions. 
(a)  Banquet location. The minimum distance requirements found in this chapter shall be applicable to banquets regulated by this article. 
(b)  Banquet entrance. The main entrance of all permitted premises shall be clearly visible from a public street, except premises located within a motel, hotel, private club, shopping center or multiple story commercial building. 
(c)  Parking . The fire marshal shall inspect the banquet location to determine if adequate parking spaces/facilities exist or whether provisions for adequate parking are available. If parking facilities are to be shared with adjoining property owners or with property in the surrounding area, applicant shall provide a written, signed agreement demonstrating such agreement. Said agreement shall contain language that would indemnify the city against any liability or damage from such agreement. The owner of such banquet facilities shall also be required to show proof of adequate insurance coverage for any such damage or liability. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-138. - Hotels, motels. 
Hotel and motel corporations and their franchise restaurant corporations operating as contemplated in these regulations are authorized to apply for and to hold a retail consumption license in their corporate names. They shall name on such application an agent and/or manager actively employed in the operation of said hotel, motel or franchise restaurant who shall be responsible for operation under said license, and who shall qualify in all respects under these regulations. Should said manager and/or agent leave the employment of the hotel or motel corporation or its franchise restaurant corporation in the city, a new agent and/or manager shall be named by the licensee within ten (10) days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 9-2-139. - Employment of certain persons prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ on the premises any person in any capacity who has been convicted at any time within the past five (5) years of any crimes involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, prostitution, controlled substances, or having to do with alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Minors may be employed, provided however, it shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to take orders for, dispense, serve, sell, handle or deliver alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
ARTICLE F. - GROWLERS 

Sec. 9-2-140. - Growlers license. 
(a)  The retail sale of growlers is authorized for establishments licensed pursuant to this article. 
(b)  A growler license may be obtained only by establishments engaged in the retail sale of growlers. 
(c)  In addition to the retail sale of growlers, a growler licensee is permitted to apply for licenses to engage in the retail sale of beer and/or wine by the package and by the glass for consumption on premises. The obtaining of a license for the on premise consumption of beer and/or wine by the glass shall not authorize consumption from growlers on the premises. After a growler is filled at the licensed premises, it must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original condition and cannot be opened or consumed on the premises. 
(d)  Growlers may only be filled with beer or wine from kegs or barrels procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(e)  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. 
(f)  A growler licensee shall be authorized to offer samples of draft beer or wine to patrons over the age of twenty-one (21). 
(g)  Growler licensees and employee thereof shall be permitted to taste draft beer and wine at the licensed growler premises for quality control or educational purposes only. At no time however, shall a growler licensee and/or employee become intoxicated at the licensed premises. 
(h)  No food purchased at an establishment possessing a growler license may be consumed on premises. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 6, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 9-2-141. - Growlers license, regulations generally. 
The following regulations shall apply to licensed growler establishments: 
(1)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a growler store from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(2)  No sale of beer or wine shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In addition, no sale of beer or wine shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or any other days or times prohibited by state law. 
(3)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of beer and/or wine, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 6, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 9-2-142. - Prohibited locations. 
It shall be prohibited to obtain a growler license within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district or other prohibited zoning district established in the zoning ordinance; and 
(2)  Within any area prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 6, 6-5-2017) 
ARTICLE G. - MICROBREWERIES 

Sec. 9-2-143. - Microbrewery license, regulations generally. 
The following regulations shall apply to licensed microbrewery establishments: 
(1)  A microbrewery license may be obtained only by establishments operating as a brewery or a brewpub. 
(2)  A microbrewery licensee, or employee thereof, shall be permitted a limited exception under this article to taste draft beer and wine at the licensed premises for quality control or educational purposes only. At no time however, shall a microbrewer licensee and/or employee become intoxicated at the licensed premises. 
(3)  An individual applying for a microbrewery license shall indicate on their application whether he or she intends to open and operate a brewery or brewpub. 
(4)  All operations by a microbrewery shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(5)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a microbrewery from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(6)  The state regulations relating to the manufacture, sale, and distribution of beer, as revised from time to time, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 9-2-144. - Provisions applicable to breweries only. 
(a)  A microbrewery licensee operating a brewery shall be authorized to provide guided tours of said brewery, during which a "free tasting" of malt beverages or beer may be conducted by the brewery. Said tours and tastings shall be permitted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No "free tasting" of beer or malt beverages shall be permitted between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. any day of the week. In addition, no pouring or tasting of beer or malt beverages shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or on any other days or times prohibited by state law. Promotional or educational tours of a brewery facility shall also only be permitted within these allowed timeframes. 
(c)  All malt beverages or beer provided at the "free tasting" shall be served by a state licensed representative of the brewery and shall be malt beverages or beer brewed on-site by said brewery. 
(d)  The licensed brewery may elect to provide non-alcoholic food or beverages at no charge to customers or tour-attendees, either directly or indirectly. 
(e)  No person who is a participant in an educational or promotional tour may bring alcoholic beverages obtained off the premises of the licensed brewery to said brewery under any circumstances. 
(f)  Souvenirs may be provided by a brewery, including souvenir containers that may be used in "free tastings" sponsored by the brewery, in compliance with state law, as amended from time to time. 
(g)  Except as set forth in this section, a microbrewery licensee operating a brewery shall be subject to all sections of this article. 
(h)  Operation of a brewery shall prohibit a microbrewery licensee from obtaining any other category of alcohol beverage license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 9-2-145. - Provisions applicable to brewpubs only. 
(a)  A microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub shall be authorized to operate an eating establishment that shall be the sole retail outlet for such malt beverages and that may offer for sale for consumption on the premises any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler and, provided further, in addition to malt beverages manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer. 
(b)  Should a microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub offer for sale other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers on the premises of the brewpub, the licensee shall also be required to obtain an on-premises consumption license. 
(c)  The holder of a microbrewery licensee who is operating a brewpub shall not be entitled by virtue of said microbrewery license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises. A microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub may, however, apply for an additional license to sell alcoholic beverages at such brewpub by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(d)  A microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesale dealers. 
(e)  Except as set forth in this section, a microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub shall be subject to all sections of this article. 
(f)  Brewpubs may not pour or serve malt beverages between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. any day of the week. In addition, no sale or pouring of malt beverages or wine shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or on any other days or times prohibited by state law. Where in conflict with the operating hours permitted for other establishments offering on premises consumption, the operating hours of this subsection shall control for brewpubs. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 9-2-146. - Prohibited locations. 
It shall be prohibited to obtain a microbrewery license within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district or other prohibited zoning district established in the zoning ordinance; and 
(2)  Within any area prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 6-5-2017) 
Secs. 9-2-147—9-2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 5, adopted June 5, 2017, renumbered former Art. F as Art. H. 

Sec. 9-2-161. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, unless specify elsewhere in this chapter, shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, or may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and, if convicted, shall be fined in an amount of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, or be incarcerated for not more than twelve (12) months or both such fine and incarceration. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
CHAPTER 3. - PAWNBROKERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Effect of local laws, O.C.G.A., § 44-12-135; supervision of pawnbrokers by municipalities, O.C.G.A., § 44-12-136. 

Sec. 9-3-1. - Regulation of pawnbrokers. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this chapter: 
Pawnbroker: Any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods; or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time; or engaged, as part of the business activities described above or in conjunction therewith, in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers. 
Person: An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods: Tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this Code section, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction, but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. "Pledged goods" shall not include choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-1; Ord. No. 94-005, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 9-3-2. - License required. 
No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, or maintain an establishment for the purposes of conducting business as a pawnbroker, until a business license has been obtained from the city clerk. Such license application shall be made to the city clerk and license issued only upon approval by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-3) 
Sec. 9-3-3. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for pawnbroker's license shall be taken until the chief of police has reviewed and investigated such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the mayor and council for their consideration, approval or denial. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-4) 
Sec. 9-3-4. - Limitation on issuance. 
(a)  No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person or to any pawnbroker who employs any person who has been convicted of a crime involving as an element thereof the theft of property. 
(b)  No further pawnbrokers licenses shall be issued when the total number of licenses issued and in effect would number more than one (1) for each eight thousand (8,000) persons residing in the city. It is the intent of this provision to require a population of eight thousand (8,000) persons for each license issued. For purposes of complying with this Code section, the most recent decennial census of the United States as published by the United States Bureau of the Census shall be used. Example: (1) population equals less than eight thousand (8,000), then no license may be issued; (2) population equals eight thousand (8,000) to fifteen thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (15,999), then one (1) license may be issued; (3) population equals sixteen thousand (16,000) to twenty-three thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (23,999), then two (2) licenses may issued, etc. If a licensee shall go out of business or if a license is revoked and the number of such licenses in effect shall continue to exceed the limit prescribed herein, such license may not be reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 91-015, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 94-005, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 98-004, § 1, 3-16-98) 
Sec. 9-3-5. - Fee; business permit fee; hours of operation. 
(a)  The annual business permit fee for each pawnbroker doing business within the city or for each individual establishment maintained for the purpose of doing business as a pawnbroker within the city shall be as set forth in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code. 
(b)  The hours within which pawnbrokers may keep open their places of business shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. except the week before Christmas, when the hour of closing shall be 12:00 midnight. 
(Ord. No. 94-003, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 94-005, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 9-3-6. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers; 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material of which it is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom same was deposited or sold; 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished; and 
(3)  A legible thumb print of the depositor. 
(c)  These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as possible, but in no event later than one hour thereafter. 
(d)  Such books and the articles themselves so pledged or sold shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries concerning the transaction named, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and of the property pledged with or sold to them shall be in violation of this chapter and punished as provided by the general penalty in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-7) 
State Law reference— Additional requirements for records are found in O.C.G.A., § 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 9-3-7. - Daily report to police. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the chief of police, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief, of all property pledged to or bought by him during the twenty-four (24) hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such report shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the chief of police, they shall show: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnbroker; 
(2)  The time of the transaction; 
(3)  Serial numbers of pawn tickets; 
(4)  Amount paid or advanced; 
(5)  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, together with all identifying names, marks, and numbers thereon; and 
(6)  Description of persons selling or pawning, including name, address, race, weight, height, and thumb print. 
(b)  Insufficient reports shall be rejected and any pawnbroker making such shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. In addition, pawnbrokers shall make daily reports of all typewriters, adding machines, and radios coming into and going out of their place of business. The daily report shall be in such form and shall contain sufficient information to identify each such article. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-8) 
Sec. 9-3-8. - Ten-day requirement. 
Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, shall hold such goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least ten (10) days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-8.1) 
Sec. 9-3-9. - Pledge of building glass and plumbing material. 
It shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase, advance money on, or take in pawn glass taken from buildings, such as mantle mirrors, art glass, and the like, or copper wire, copper lining of bathtubs, lead pipes, or any kind of plumbing material sold as junk, where same is offered for sale or pawn by other than persons of known good character. In all cases where such goods are purchased or money advanced, the pawnbroker shall keep a record of such purchases or advances, showing the names of the persons from whom received, their residence, the goods so taken, and the amount of money paid or advanced, and this shall be at all times open for inspection to any duly authorized law enforcement officer. In addition, it shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase any such goods, or to advance money thereon, where their appearance indicates that they have been tampered with, or there is an effort to conceal identity, or same are mutilated or otherwise show an effort to destroy evidence of the former location of the property. While such goods are being kept for ten (10) days before being disposed of, they shall be so arranged that they can be inspected by all duly authorized law enforcement officers upon demand. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-9) 
Sec. 9-3-10. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-10) 
Sec. 9-3-11. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe the article was stolen, or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. No pawnbroker shall accept any item, good, or ware upon which a manufacturer's identity or serial number has been removed, obliterated, or in any way caused to become unreadable. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-11) 
Sec. 9-3-12. - Violation. 
Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-1-8 of the code of ordinances of the city, and, in addition, shall be subject to revocation of their license to do business as a pawnbroker in this city. 
(Code 1959, § 12A-12) 
Sec. 9-3-13. - Availability of additional licenses; procedure for obtaining same. 
(a)  If at any such time the city is authorized to issue a new license by reason of population increase, revocation, or surrender of an existing license or licenses, the city manager shall cause to be published in the legal organ of Clayton County a notice setting forth the following: 
(1)  That the city has the ability to issue a pawnbrokers license. 
(2)  That any party wishing to apply for said license shall make application to the city for same within thirty (30) days of the date of publication of the notice. 
(3)  All applications shall be reviewed and approved as qualifying for the license as provided for in section 9-3-3 of this Code. 
(4)  The city manager shall then notify those applicants that are approved of the fact that they have been approved as qualifying for consideration of the issuance of a license. They shall submit the fee provided for in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code within seventy-two (72) hours of their notification. Any applicant who fails to submit the fee shall forfeit its right to be considered as qualifying. 
(b)  In the event that more applicants qualify than the number of licenses or license available, the city manager shall then notify the applicants of a time and date in which to appear in the council chambers of the city for purposes of selecting by random the applicant to whom the license will issue. 
(c)  Those applications not selected shall immediately be refunded the application fee heretofore paid. 
(d)  By submitting an application pursuant to this process, each applicant consents to the process and procedure by which the licensee will be selected and waives any protest or compliant as to the method and manner of selection, acknowledging that the license granted hereunder is a privilege license. 
(Ord. No. 94-005, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 9-3-14. - Moratorium on the licensing of pawnbrokers. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The mayor and council of the City of Forest Park hereby makes the following findings of fact: 
(1)  It appears that the city ordinance on business licensure, as it relates to pawnbrokers and pawn shops, requires an additional review by the City of Forest Park; 
(2)  Substantial disorder, detriment and irreparable harm would result to the citizens, businesses and City of Forest Park if the current regulatory for pawnbrokers and pawn shops in the city were to be utilized prior to more thorough review; 
(3)  The city's ongoing revision of the aforementioned licensure and regulation provisions requires that a cessation of pawn licensing be enacted; and 
(4)  That it is necessary and in the public interest to delay, for a reasonable period of time, the processing of any applications for such businesses, to ensure that the design, development and location of the same are consistent with the long-term planning objectives of the city. 
(b)  Imposition of moratorium: 
(1)  There is hereby imposed a moratorium on the issuance by the staff of the City of Forest Park of development plans, and permits and licenses for all pawn shops and pawn brokerages seeking to operate in the City of Forest Park. 
(2)  The duration of this moratorium shall be until such time as the city completes the hereinafter described studies and takes any appropriate action thereon, including, without limitation, revocation, or the expiration of thirty (30) days from enactment, whichever first occurs. 
(3)  This moratorium shall be effective as of the date of this section. 
(4)  This moratorium shall have no effect upon approvals or permits previously issued or as to development plans previously approved by the city. The provisions of this section shall not affect the issuance of permits or licenses that have received preliminary or final approval by the city on or before the effective date of this section. 
(5)  As of the effective date of this section, no applications for operation of a pawn shop or pawn brokerage business will be accepted by any agent, employee or officer of the city with respect to any property in the City of Forest Park and any application so accepted for filing will be deemed in error, null and void and of no effect whatsoever. 
(6)  The city shall immediately commission a review of its ordinances concerning pawn shop and pawn brokerage licensure. 
(7)  The city shall, after completion of the study, make such changes or additions to the city's ordinances as its studies may warrant. 
(8)  The following procedures shall be put in place immediately. Under the Supreme Court case of Cannon v. Clayton County, 255 Ga. 63 (1985), the Supreme Court stated, 
"Where a landowner makes a substantial change in position by expenditures and reliance on the probability of the issuance of a building permit, based upon an existing zoning ordinance and the assurances of zoning officials, he acquires vested rights and is entitled to have the permit issued despite a change in the zoning ordinance which would otherwise preclude the issuance of a permit." Pursuant to this case, the City of Forest Park recognizes that, unknown to the city, de facto vesting may have occurred. The following procedures are established to provide exemptions from the moratorium where vesting has occurred: 
a.  A written application, including verified supporting data, documents and facts, may be made requesting a review by the mayor and council at a scheduled meeting of any facts or circumstances which the applicant feels substantiates claim for vesting and the grant of an exemption; 
b.  Within one (1) week of the enactment of this moratorium, the city shall cause to issue an advertisement in its legal newspaper to run once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks providing notice to the public of the imposition of this moratorium and the opportunity for review before the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 98-002, § I, 2-26-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-002, adopted Feb. 26, 1998, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, Codification of § I of said ordinance as § 9-3-14 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 9-3-15. - Pawnbroker's license transferrable. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Code, a pawnbroker duly licensed by, and in good standing with, the City of Forest Park may transfer his pawnbroker's license to another person as follows: 
(1)  The holder of the pawnbroker's license shall notify the mayor and council in writing of its desire and intent to transfer its pawnbroker's license, and attach to such notice a completed license application of the intended transferee, including a check for the license fee from the intended transferee. 
(2)  The chief of police shall review and investigate the intended transferee's application, using the same standards as are used for initial applications and forward his recommendation thereon to the mayor and council for their consideration, approval or denial. 
(3)  Upon approval of the intended transferee by the mayor and council, the city clerk shall have authority to amend the existing pawnbroker's license to reflect the transfer. 
(b)  Any misrepresentation on the intended transferee's license application shall be grounds for rejection of the application for transfer. 
(Ord. No. 98-010, § 1, 6-15-98) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 98-010, adopted June 15, 1998, amended the Code by the addition of § 9-3-14 added a new § 9-3-14 to the Code. Inasmuch as provisions already exist under § 9-3-14, said section has been redesignated as § 9-3-15 at the editor's discretion. 
CHAPTER 4. - WRECKERS AND WRECKER SERVICES 

Sec. 9-4-1. - Definition. 
The term "wrecker" as used in this chapter means any vehicle equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked or disabled automobiles or vehicles; and the term "wrecker service" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, or corporation which is engaged solely or partially in the business of towing wrecked or disabled automobiles or vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-1(a)) 
Sec. 9-4-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any of the streets of the city or any area inside the corporate limits, any wrecker without complying with the provisions of this chapter except as provided herein. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-1(b)) 
Sec. 9-4-3. - Business license required; non-transferable. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association, or corporation to operate or cause to be operated, any wrecker, as defined in section 9-4-1 within the corporate limits of the city, which maintains its principal, or any branch office within the corporate city limits, or any wrecker services which generates 50 percent of its gross income by conducting business within the corporate city limits, without first having obtained a business license from the revenue collection division of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-2) 
State Law reference— Municipal license fees and business taxes on wrecker services limited, O.C.G.A., § 48-13-10.1. 
Sec. 9-4-4. - Registration decals required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, a wrecker as defined in subsection 9-4-1, unless the wrecker bears a current registered decal. The decal shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from date of issue and shall bear the registration decal number, the date of issue and the date of expiration, together with any other information deemed appropriate by the chief of police or his delegate. The decal shall be placed on the lower corner of the windshield of the wrecker on the driver's side. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-3) 
Sec. 9-4-5. - Exemption from license and registration decal requirements. 
(a)  No business license shall be required for any wrecker or wrecker service which is operated within the city when the wrecker company is duly licensed and registered in accordance with the laws, if any, of the place having jurisdiction over the business. 
(b)  Any wrecker, or wrecker service, which uses the streets of the city, for purposes of either point of pickup of a motor vehicle or point of delivery of same on a regular basis, shall be required to obtain and display a registration decal as provided in sections 9-4-4 and 9-4-6 of this chapter. A "regular basis" shall be defined for purposes of this chapter as meaning more than one time in a calendar year. 
(c)  The wrecker or wrecker service is not engaged in any activity whereby neither the point of pickup or the point of delivery of any wrecked or disabled vehicle is within the city, or otherwise does not engage in business in the city; provided, that the burden is upon the wrecker, wrecker service, or his agent to prove either the point of pickup or the point of delivery is not within the city limits; specifically a wrecker or wrecker service which merely passes through the city limits is exempt from complying with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-4) 
Sec. 9-4-6. - Application for registered decal; information required in application. 
Application for the registration decal required by section 9-4-4 shall be made to the inspection and permits unit of the city police department on forms prescribed and provided by that department. The application form, which shall be completed under oath, shall contain the name, address and telephone number of any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation operating or causing the operation of the wrecker; the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the wrecker, if different from the operator; the make, model, color, year of manufacture, tag number and vehicle identification number of the wrecker; the date the wrecker was put into service; the state emergency light permit number; and the business license number, if any, and the name and policy number of the casualty insurance carrier covering said vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-5) 
Sec. 9-4-7. - Required information to be printed on side of wrecker. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate or cause to be operated within the city any wrecker as defined in section 9-4-1, unless this vehicle shall have lettered in permanent paint on each side in plain view the following information: the name of the person, partnership, firm, association or corporation owning and causing its wrecker to operate on the streets of the city, the address from which the wrecker is operating and the telephone number. This lettering shall be in contrasting color to the color of the wrecker and shall be at least two and one half (2-½) inches in height. Temporary or removable magnetic signs shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-6) 
Sec. 9-4-8. - Typed, weekly reports of certain vehicles stored by certain businesses required. 
(a)  Wrecker services; storage facilities. The owner or operator of any business providing wrecker service or storage facilities for vehicles shall furnish to the criminal investigation division of the police department, on forms of the type approved by the department, a typed, weekly report listing all motor vehicles towed or stored within the city and remaining within the possession of the business on the Friday following the towing or storage. The vehicle shall be listed in each subsequent weekly report so long as it remains in the possession of the business. 
(b)  Auto salvage; crushing businesses; junk yards. Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation in the business of auto salvage or otherwise in the business of selling used parts from vehicles within the seller's possession and any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation in the business of crushing, cutting up or otherwise permanently destroying vehicles for scrap metal shall furnish to the criminal investigation division of the police department, on forms of a type approved by the department, a typed, weekly report listing all vehicles obtained for the purpose of salvage, used parts, or scrap metal, during the weekly reporting period. The weekly reporting period shall begin at 12:01 a.m. each Saturday. 
(c)  Contents of report. The weekly reports required by subsections (a) and (b) shall be due each Tuesday and shall contain the name of the person, partnership, firm, association, or corporation reporting; the authority under which the vehicle was towed, stored or salvaged for parts or scrap metal; a description of the vehicle; the location of its present storage site, if applicable its tag number, if any; its year and make; its color; and its vehicle identification number. 
(d)  Inability to obtain information without damaging vehicle. If any of the information required by subsection (c) cannot be obtained for the weekly report required by subsection (a) without damaging the vehicle, the fact shall be conveyed by the owner or operator of the wrecker service or storage facility to the police department by telephonic communication and shall also be set forth in the weekly report. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-7) 
Sec. 9-4-9. - Call to scene of accident by certain persons only. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, or his agent, representative or employee, to go to any place where an accident has occurred unless called by the driver or the owner of the disabled vehicle or the owner's authorized representative, or by the police division dispatcher. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, or his agent, representative or employee to go to the place of the wreck by reason of information received by police radio. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-8) 
Sec. 9-4-10. - Responsible for cleaning debris from street and right-of-way. 
All wrecker operators, after having been called to the scene of an accident for the purpose of removing a damaged vehicle, shall clean all debris caused by the accident from the street and right-of-way before they leave. In the event two (2) or more wreckers are called to the same accident, they shall be equally responsible for cleaning. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-9) 
State Law reference— Similar requirement under state law, O.C.G.A., § 40-6-277. 
Sec. 9-4-11. - Solicitation for business by city employees prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any city employee to solicit business for any wrecker owner or operator. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-10) 
Sec. 9-4-12. - Cruising or parking for purpose of soliciting towing work. 
It shall be unlawful to cruise or park on any street or bridge in a wrecker and solicit towing work. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-11) 
Sec. 9-4-13. - Revocation of license and recall and cancellation of decals generally. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his delegate, may petition the city business license section to revoke the business license and recall and cancel the decals of any wrecker or owner or operator when he has been found in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  if the registration was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact as to ownership, use, possession or operation; 
(2)  if the owner or licensee is found at the scene of an accident in violation of the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  if the licensee uses a police radio to obtain information as to the location of the scene of the accident; or 
(4)  if the licensee shall pay in the form of gratuity any person not involved in the accident for information as to the location of the accident. 
(b)  This revocation shall terminate all authority and permission granted by the registration to the wrecker owner. Any person whose registration has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a license for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance of the original license. 
(c)  Any person whose license has been revoked or decal has been cancelled by the business license section may file an appeal therefrom to the mayor and council within 20 days from the date of this revocation. The mayor and council shall give the operator at least 10 days' notice in advance of the date of a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not his business license and/or wrecker decal to operate a wrecker shall be revoked and/or cancelled. Upon hearing the facts, the mayor and council, by majority vote, may reverse, vacate, or modify the order of the business license section. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-12) 
Sec. 9-4-14. - Notification of police department upon removal of vehicles at request of any person other than the active duty police officer. 
The operator of any wrecker removing a private motor vehicle at the request of another person not the owner thereof, other than a city police officer on duty shall report this action to the city police along with the following information: the location of its present storage place, a description of the vehicle, the tag number and the vehicle identification number. This report shall be made by the wrecker operator by telephonic communication to the police within one (1) hour of the deposit of the vehicle at its storage point. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-13) 
Sec. 9-4-15. - Penalties for violation of this chapter. 
Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation that violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. Each day's unlawful violation shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. The chief of police or his delegate shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 23A-14) 
CHAPTER 5. - TAXICABS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, adopted May 21, 2001 amended Ch. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5, §§ 9-1—9-5-19, 9-5-21—9-5-26 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1959 Code, §§ 22-1—22-3, 22-8, 22-9, 22-13—22-17, 22-19, 22-21; Ord. No. 85-004, adopted July 1, 1985; Ord. No. 86-007, adopted May 5, 1986; Ord. No. 89-003, adopted Feb. 6, 1989; Ord. No. 96-011, adopted Aug. 5, 1996; Ord. No. 99-007, adopted Apr. 5, 1999; Ord. No. 99-008, § 1, adopted Apr. 5, 1999; Ord. No. 00-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2000. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter have the meanings as set out herein: 
(1)  Taxicab is hereby defined to be a motor vehicle operated for hire, the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger transported therein. 
(2)  Highway means any of the public streets, alleys, lanes, boulevards, avenues, drives, circles, or roads of the city. 
(3)  Owner shall mean and include any person having control of the operation or maintenance and collection of the revenue derived from cabs. 
(4)  Driver and operator shall mean and include any and every person in charge of driving or operating a taxicab, as defined herein, whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise. 
(5)  License shall mean the license or authority granted by the governing body to engage in the taxicab business within the city. 
(6)  Driver's permit means the permission granted by the governing body to a person to drive a taxicab within the city. 
(7)  Limousine service shall mean a service whereby a vehicle is held out for hire, including the services of the driver of said vehicle, for purposes of traveling from one destination to another for a specified fee, or is contracted for or engaged on an hourly basis. The provisions of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances are hereby made applicable to any limousine service which wishes to be located and operate within the city. 
(8)  Operator of taxicab business shall mean any person who shall engage in the operation of furnishing taxi or limousine service within the corporate limits of the city, whether by being physically located within the corporate limits thereof, or by actively soliciting and regularly offering service to persons located within the corporate limits. It shall not include those operations delivering passengers to the city from points exterior to the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-2. - Compliance with chapter provisions prerequisite to operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be operated within the limits of the city unless and until the owner and operator shall have complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-3. - Licensees responsible for violations by drivers. 
Licensees under this chapter are responsible for violations of this chapter by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-4. - Requirement for registered agent; service of notice. 
(a)  All businesses licensed under this chapter must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of Clayton County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent with the city and shall be in such form as prescribed. 
(b)  Service of notice under this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  By delivery to the owner or registered agent personally; 
(2)  By registered or certified mail with postage prepaid deposited in the United States mail addressed to the owner's or occupant's last known address; or 
(3)  If service of notice cannot be accomplished by using the methods stated in subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises of the company base of operations in the county. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-5. - Appearance and hygiene of drivers; responsibility of licensees for driver dress and conduct. 
Drivers shall, while on duty, practice good personal hygiene and wear proper dress while operating a vehicle for hire. Proper dress shall mean the wearing of shoes, ankle-length pants, as well as a shirt or blouse with sleeves and collar. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. Licensees under this chapter are responsible for driver dress and conduct. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-6. - Drivers smoking, playing radios, possessing alcohol or controlled substances. 
(a)  A driver while operating a vehicle for hire is not to smoke or play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
(b)  No person operating a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter shall transport or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug or controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-7. - Storage or transport of hazardous materials. 
The storage or transport of hazardous material in the exterior, interior compartment, or trunk of a taxicab is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-8. - Lost articles. 
Every taxicab driver shall inspect his or her vehicle after the departure of each passenger to ascertain that no article has been left behind. In the event that a passenger does leave an article in a cab, the driver shall immediately attempt to return it. If the driver is unable to immediately return the article, the dispatcher shall be notified and the article shall be turned in to the business office not later than the end of the driver's shift. The taxicab owner and business shall make a diligent effort to locate the owner of any lost article and shall retain the article at its business office for at least thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-9. - Stands. 
Taxicabs shall be operated only from an established place of business, and before using the streets as parking places, operators of such taxicab must secure a permit from the city traffic engineer to park at a particular place, which permit shall not be granted except by and with the consent of adjacent property owners, and no space shall allow more than two (2) vehicles in one (1) particular locality; provided that nothing herein shall prohibit the concentration of a larger number of taxicabs at places where the public is assembled in large groups, such as baseball and football games, city auditorium, churches, schools, and like gathering places. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-10. - Receiving and discharging passengers; away from traffic. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab operator to stop his or her taxicab for the purpose of discharging or receiving passengers except at a point as near his or her right-hand sidewalk or curb as possible. 
(b)  Taxicab divers carrying passengers for hire on the streets of the city shall receive and discharge passengers through the door(s) away from the vehicular portion of the streets. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-11. - Safe and legal operation. 
Every taxicab driver shall operate his or her taxi in accordance with the laws of the state and the city, and with due regard for the safety, convenience and comfort of passengers and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-12. - Rates of fare, meters; deception of passengers prohibited. 
(a)  The governing body reserves the right to regulate the rates and fares from time to time to be charged by taxicabs and owners of taxicabs in the city. 
(b)  The owner and driver of every taxicab operated in the city shall have posted at a conspicuous place inside the taxicab where all passengers may see the same, the rates charged for carrying passengers and the manner of determining the fare to be charged passengers. This provision shall not be applicable to limousines. 
(c)  If a fare is to be determined by time or mileage or both, then the taxicab shall be equipped with a meter in good condition to record the amount to be charged on each trip, which amount shall be shown in figures visible to the passenger. The meters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the city police department. This provision shall not be applicable to limousines. 
(d)  No taxicab driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may ride in his or her taxicab or who may desire to ride in his or her taxicab as to the destination or the rate of fare to be charged, nor shall the driver convey or cause to be conveyed any passenger to a place other than the one (1) designated by the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-13. - Transfer. 
All business licenses, driver permits and individual vehicle stickers required by this chapter are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-14. - Penalties. 
(a)  Penalty for violation of chapter provisions. Any person who drives a taxicab upon the streets of the city without a permit required by this chapter or who drives a taxicab upon such streets while his or her driver's permit is suspended or revoked, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Liability of vehicle owner. Any person who knowingly authorizes or permits a taxicab, limousine or other vehicle for hire, owned by him or her or under his or her control, to be operated for hire within the city by any person who is not authorized under this chapter, or who is not permitted under this chapter, or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a person knowingly authorizes or permits a taxicab, limousine, or other vehicle for hire, owned or operated by him or under his control, to be driven within the city by any person who is not authorized under this chapter or in or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation. 
(c)  Revocation of driver's permit upon conviction. In addition to other penalties provided in the Charter of the city, this Code of Ordinances, and laws of the state, the judge of the municipal court of the city shall have the authority to revoke a taxicab driver's permit when the holder thereof is convicted of a violation of the Code of the Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-15. - Conflicts between provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Secs. 9-5-16—9-5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-5-31. - Operation of business; driving vehicle; permit and license prerequisite. 
No person shall operate any taxicab business within the city until the license provided for in this chapter has been granted and issued. No person shall drive a taxicab within the city without first having obtained a driver's permit as provided in this chapter. Incidental, intermittent and unscheduled passenger deliveries into the city by taxicab operators located and situated exterior to the city shall not require the driver's permit as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-32. - Investigation of applications and renewals. 
The chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made into the truthfulness of the information provided by the applicant and into the personal and occupational history of the applicant. The chief of police shall determine on the basis of the investigation whether the license or permit should be issued or renewed. If the chief of police decides that the license or permit should be issued or renewed, he shall immediately notify the applicant. If the chief of police decides that the permit or license should not be issued or renewed, he shall immediately notify the applicant and inform the applicant of the reasons for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-33. - Suspension or revocation; preliminary investigation; show cause hearing. 
(a)  Grounds for suspension or revocation. A business license or driver's permit may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a license or permit. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges. 
(3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or driver's permit. 
(4)  Failure to have the driver's permit posted in the taxicab in a place and manner clearly visible to all passengers at all times. 
(5)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the chief of police. 
(6)  Having four (4) or more moving traffic violations while operating any taxicab, limousine or passenger-carrying vehicle, during any twelve-month period. 
(7)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, gender or sexual orientation. Sexual orientation shall mean the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(8)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing a vehicle to operate in the city without an inspection sticker. 
(9)  For violation of any part of this chapter. 
(b)  Preliminary investigation; show cause hearing; findings of fact. Where it is reported to the chief of police that a business licensee or driver permittee is engaged in any conduct set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the chief of police shall conduct a preliminary investigation in order to determine whether there is a basis for the report. If his preliminary investigation reveals that there may be a basis for revocation or suspension of the license or permit, the license or permit holder shall be notified to appear before the chief of police on a date certain and show cause why the license or permit should not be revoked or suspended. The license or permit holder may appear in person at such hearing or be represented by counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the chief of police, based upon the evidence submitted at such hearing, shall enter an order make a finding of fact, and then: 
(1)  Find that the evidence does not authorize a revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Issue a warning to the license or permit holder; 
(3)  Suspend the license or permit and probate suspension; 
(4)  Suspend the license or permit for up to thirty (30) days; or 
(5)  Suspend the license or permit pending a hearing by the mayor and counsel on revocation. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-34. - Appeals from decisions of chief of police as to applications, renewal, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Appeals. Decisions of the chief of police that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant, renewal applicant, licensee, or permittee may be appealed to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the chief of police within ten (10) days after the decision of the chief of police. The chief of police shall schedule a hearing before the mayor and council and notify the petitioner of the time and date of the hearing. Either party shall have the right to subpoena witnesses at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor and council may affirm, overrule, partially affirm and partially overrule the decision of the chief of police. 
(b)  Remedies within the authority of the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Find in favor of the applicant, licensee or permittee; 
(2)  Deny the grant or renewal of the application; 
(3)  Issue a warning to the licensee or permittee; 
(4)  Suspend the license or permit and probate suspension; 
(5)  Revoke the license or permit and probate revocation; 
(6)  Suspend the license or permit for a definite period of time; 
(7)  Revoke the license or permit; 
(8)  Take any other appropriate action regarding the licensee or permittee. 
(c)  Disposition of decisions. The decisions of the mayor and council shall be in writing, indicating therein the reasons for the hearing, the evidence and/or testimony presented, a finding of fact, the final decision, and the reasons therefor. A copy of the decision shall be sent by certified or registered mail to the last address furnished by the applicant, licensee, or permittee. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Secs. 9-5-35—9-5-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-5-46. - Taxicab owner's business license; application. 
(a)  No owner shall operate, or allow others to operate a taxicab on the streets of Forest Park, Georgia, without first obtaining a taxicab owner's business license. The taxicab owner's business license application form will be obtained from the office of the Police Chief of Forest Park, Georgia. The application form will require the following information: 
(1)  Full name and address of person proposing to operate or conduct a taxicab business within the city. A statement that the applicant is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. No license to operate a taxicab business shall be granted to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  A full and complete statement of the business to be engaged in and the type of equipment to be used. 
(3)  Addresses of the dispatch location or place from which the business is to be operated or conducted, the telephone switchboard location, and the parking area location for the taxicab businesses' vehicles. 
(4)  Whether the operator of the taxicab business for which the license is sought is a corporation, partnership, or individual. 
(5)  Trade name of the taxicab business to be operated. 
(6)  If an individual, the owner's name and home address. 
(7)  If a partnership, the names and addresses, including street and post office boxes, of all partners and the extent of each partner's interest. 
(8)  If a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and the amount of its capital stock. 
(9)  General description of identifying words and color scheme of the taxicab fleet. 
(10)  A list of all drivers who will be scheduled for licensing under this chapter. The list must indicate whether the drivers are employees of the business or independent contractors. 
(11)  The make, model, year, and passenger capacity of all vehicles to be operated under the license. 
(12)  Name and policy number of the insurance carrier providing liability coverage for the taxicabs, as well as the amount of coverage, which in no event shall be less than the amount of coverage required under section 9-5-48 of this chapter. 
(13)  An affirmative statement that any business conducted under the license granted upon such application shall be in full and complete compliance with all national, state, county, municipal and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, with a particular reference to wages, hours, conditions of employment, and the protection by liability insurance of all persons whom the law requires the operators of such a business to protect. 
(14)  A copy of the rate schedule. 
(15)  The daily hours of operation for the business. 
(16)  Any and all other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
(b)  Upon approval by the chief of police of the taxicab owners' business license, the owner must have on record with the chief of police the original and a copy of the insurance policy of the business covering all taxicabs, evidence that the business has purchased the required business license from the city, and each taxicab to be operated must have an inspection sticker properly affixed, before beginning operation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-47. - License fee and business tax. 
Every person engaged in the business of conducting a taxicab business in the city shall pay to the city an annual license fee in advance for the privilege of using the streets for carrying on the same as provided in chapter 1 of this title. In addition, the license holder shall pay such business and occupation tax as provided in title 3, chapter 3. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-48. - Insurance required. 
No license to operate any taxicab business within the city shall be issued or continued in operation unless the operator of the taxicab business has in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for each taxicab in an amount that shall not be less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for bodily injury to any one (1) person; fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for injuries to more than one (1) person which are sustained in the same accident; and twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. Such insurance policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured, or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of the holder of any taxicab license, his servants, or agents. Such insurance shall be with a company authorized to do business in the state, and such insurance shall be kept in force. It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city to enforce this requirement. Such insurance shall be subject to approval of the city, and termination of the insurance protection shall automatically operate as a revocation of the license to operate a taxicab business within the city. License holders shall file policies of insurance with the police department, and license holders shall ensure that their insurance carriers provide the city a written notice at least ten (10) days before the cancellation of any policy. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Secs. 9-5-49—9-5-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 9-5-60. - Taxicab driver permits; application. 
No driver shall operate or be allowed to operate a taxicab for hire on the streets of Forest Park, Georgia, unless the operator shall have a current and unrevoked taxicab driver's permit. The taxicab driver's permit application form will be obtained from the office of the police chief. The application form will require the following information: 
(1)  Name and home address of driver. 
(2)  A statement that the applicant is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. No driver's permit shall be granted to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(3)  Name, address, and license number of the taxicab company under which the driver operates or is to operate the taxicab. 
(4)  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant is proficient with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers, and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. No driver's permit shall be granted to any person who does not exhibit such a proficiency. 
(6)  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeited bond as to any of the violations and offenses set forth in section 9-5-61 of the Code of Ordinances. No driver's permit shall be granted to any person who has committed any such violations and offenses. 
(7)  A statement from a licensed physician that the driver has no physical infirmities which will adversely affect his or her ability to drive. 
(8)  Driver's license number issued by the State of Georgia and its date of expiration, as well as a statement that the applicant's license is not limited as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-58 and O.C.G.A. § 40-5-64. No driver's permit shall be granted to any person who does not possess a current valid Georgia driver's license or whose license is limited as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-58 and O.C.G.A. § 40-5-64. 
(9)  A copy of chapter 5 of the Code of the city shall be provided to each taxicab driver by the city police department at the time a taxicab driver receives an original taxicab driver permit. 
(10)  A signed statement consenting and granting to the city the right to investigate the applicant's personal and occupational history, including, but not limited to, the right to fingerprint the applicant and to conduct a criminal history background check. 
(11)  Any and all other information as may be required by the city manager or chief of police which in his opinion is needed to protect the health and welfare of the persons in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-61. - Criminal record of driver applicant. 
(a)  Before issuing any driver permit to a taxicab driver applicant, the police chief shall make a background check of the applicant to determine whether or not he has a criminal record. 
(b)  No person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeited bond on any federal or state felony offense within five (5) years of the application for a driver permit shall be issued such a permit, nor shall such permit be renewed. 
(c)  No person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeited bond on any federal or state misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude or alcohol or drugs within three (3) years of the application for a driver permit shall be issued such a permit, nor shall any such permit be renewed. 
(d)  No person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeited bond on any ordinance violation involving alcohol or drugs or sexual conduct in Forest Park, Georgia, or any other political subdivision within one (1) year of the application for a driver permit, shall be issued such a permit, nor shall any such be renewed. 
(e)  No person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeited bond on four (4) or more moving traffic violations under either state or local or federal law within one (1) year of the application for a driver permit shall be issued such a permit, nor shall any such permit be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-62. - Report of changes in qualifications or permitting information. 
Drivers are responsible for reporting any change(s) in the qualifications or other permitting information previously supplied to the chief of police within ten (10) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-63. - Notification of dismissal of taxicab driver. 
Whenever a taxicab driver is dismissed from the employment of a taxicab business, the licensee shall notify the chief of police in writing within forty-eight (48) hours of such dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-64. - Application fee and permit renewal. 
The applicant shall pay to the city such sum as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council when the application is filed. Should it be granted, the applicant's license fee will then be considered as paid in full for the remainder of the calendar year. Within the first ten (10) days of December of each year, all taxicab drivers who expect to drive in the following year shall make application for renewal of their permits. The chief shall provide a form for this purpose, and the applicant shall pay an additional fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council with each renewal application filed. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-65. - Content of permit and the posting of permit and inspection sticker; responsibility of licensees. 
(a)  A taxicab driver's permit shall bear the name, address and age of the driver. Additionally, the permit shall show the name of the driver's employer and shall have thereon a specimen signature of the driver and shall display a current photograph of the driver. 
(b)  The permit shall be posted in the taxicab being driven in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while the taxicab is being operated. 
(c)  Licensees under this chapter are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has in his or her possession a current driver permit and that the permit is posted in the taxicab in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers along with a visible vehicle inspection sticker. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Secs. 9-5-66—9-5-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - VEHICLE CONDITIONS AND EQUIPMENT; INSPECTION 

Sec. 9-5-77. - Responsibility for vehicle maintenance. 
Drivers and licensees are responsible for maintaining each vehicle for hire in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in section 9-5-79. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-78. - Operating requirements generally. 
Drivers are not to drive and licensees are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the required markings, top light, and inspection sticker as outlined in this article. Limousines are excepted from having markings, top lights, two-way radios or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating the business name of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-79. - Annual inspection; sticker; vehicle requirements. 
All vehicles for hire to be used by a licensee in the city shall be inspected annually and approved by the chief of police, such inspection to be made prior to the issuance or renewal of a company license. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, a sticker will be affixed to the left side of the windshield. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection. Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. The tire tread depth shall be no less than three thirty-seconds inch ( 3/32 ) on an original or retreaded tire, with no cuts or breaks in the side wall. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. All vehicles for hire operated by a single company or licensee shall be painted a uniform color. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection. Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. Vehicles for hire shall have posted therein in a place plainly visible to passengers hiring such vehicle a schedule of rates, the size, form and substance of which shall be approved by the police chief. 
(3)  Other required features and equipment. The vehicle shall have a spare tire and jack. The spare tire shall be securely attached and in proper serviceable condition. 
(4)  Random inspection; removal; sticker removal; additional requirements. Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall be subject to immediate vehicle inspection sticker removal by the chief of police. 
(5)  Sticker proof of meeting licensing and insurance and last inspection requirements. The inspection sticker is proof that the company met the licensing and insurance requirements at the time of license issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection. Each vehicle operator must have in the vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any company or vehicle letting insurance coverage lapse shall have the inspection sticker removed by the chief of police and be subject to suspension of its business license. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the chief of police, the license reinstated and the vehicle or vehicles reinspected and new inspection stickers issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-80. - Inspection and sticker required for vehicle use. 
No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and had the city inspection sticker affixed. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-81. - Sticker restrictions. 
Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle and are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The chief of police must be notified within ten (10) days of any vehicle being taken out of service. Stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the chief of police. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-82. - Inspection fees; re-inspections; inspection stickers; renewals. 
(a)  A fee shall be charged for the first initial inspection of the vehicle in an amount established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance, and for each renewal inspection annually in an amount established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. Each vehicle for hire must be inspected each year. The inspection stickers shall expire on December 31 of each year, provided that if an initial inspection sticker is obtained on or after July 1, it shall not expire until December 31 of the following year. Renewal inspections are conducted each year between October 1 and December 31. There are a limited number of inspections which can be conducted each day within this time period and failure to obtain a renewal inspection shall not be excused by the inability of the city to conduct more inspections than are done on any given day during said period. 
(b)  Reinspection fees. If vehicle fails to pass the requirements of any initial or renewal inspection, then the operator shall be issued a correction slip listing the items that need correction. The correction slip must be kept with the vehicle until it passes inspection, and the vehicle may not be operated as a vehicle for hire within the city until it successfully passes inspection. The owner of any vehicle that does not pass inspection shall be charged an additional fee for each reinspection of the vehicle, in an amount established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. 
(c)  Fees nonrefundable and not prorated. Fees for vehicle inspections are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(d)  Responsibility for fees. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the payment of all inspection fees. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 08-11, §§ 29, 30, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 9-5-83. - Random inspections. 
(a)  Vehicles for hire shall be subject to random inspections at any time and such inspections are hereby authorized by the city personnel as the chief of police may designate. 
(b)  The owner of any taxicab may also be notified to produce his or her vehicle for a random inspection at the driver's convenience within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of notification. 
(c)  Authorized city personnel who find that any of the requirements of this article are not met shall report the deficiency to the owner of the vehicle and to the chief of police. In the event the deficiency is not repaired within fifteen (15) days, the owner of the vehicle shall be cited to appear in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-84. - Duty to inspect vehicle. 
Every taxicab driver prior to the beginning of each shift and at the end of each shift shall inspect the vehicle to make sure that all equipment on the vehicle is operating properly and that there is no major body damage to the cab. All equipment defects or body damage shall immediately be reported to the owner of the vehicle and the taxicab business licensee. No driver shall operate any taxi vehicle which is unsafe or which has major body damage. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-85. - Suspension of vehicles found to be unsafe. 
The chief of police may suspend from operation any vehicle for hire found to be unsafe, and any vehicle so suspended shall not be operated again until repaired and put in proper condition for use, and then only after its condition has been approved by the chief of police. All vehicles in excess of fifteen (15) years of age may be deemed unsafe. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 9-5-86. - Information to be painted on vehicle. 
The correct name or trade name and telephone number of the owner of each taxicab, his license number and a taxicab number to distinguish such taxicab from other taxicabs operated in the city shall be painted or otherwise firmly and substantially affixed on each side of such taxicab, such numbers and lettering to be prescribed by the city manager and chief of police, all such words, letters, and figures shall be of sufficient size and height to be readily distinguished at a distance of fifty (50) yards in the daytime. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
CHAPTER 6. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing of peddlers by counties, O.C.G.A., § 43-32-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A., § 43-46-1 et seq. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, O.C.G.A., § 40-6-98; solicitation of sale of merchandise on public roads prohibited, O.C.G.A., § 32-6-1. 

ARTICLE A. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITING 

Sec. 9-6-1. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for a peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor as defined below to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 9-6-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor is defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within said city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, or boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction provided that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person, firm, or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(b)  The word peddler as used herein shall include any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(c)  A canvasser or solicitor is defined as any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Sec. 9-6-3. - Application. 
Applicants for permits under this article must file with the chief of police a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  address; 
(3)  a brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  if employed, the name and address of the employer; 
(5)  the length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  if a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification; and 
(7)  a statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
Sec. 9-6-4. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police may appeal such decision to the city manager. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall, upon receipt of payment of the prescribed permit fee, deliver to the applicant his permit. The chief shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
Sec. 9-6-5. - Fees. 
The permit fee which shall be charged by the city for such permit shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, provided that no fee shall be charged to farmers engaged in direct sales of produce or other farm products produced on their own farms. 
Sec. 9-6-6. - Exhibition of permits. 
(a)  Itinerant merchants. The permit issued hereunder for itinerant merchants and dealers and transient merchants shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons applying for said permit shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate permits may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(b)  Peddlers. Peddlers, solicitors and canvasses are required to exhibit their permit at the request of any citizen. 
Sec. 9-6-7. - Transfer. 
No permit or badge issued under the provisions of this article shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
Sec. 9-6-8. - Use of streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under the provisions of this article to conduct any business transaction in any area which is within 35 feet of any street, alley, road or highway. 
Sec. 9-6-9. - Revocation of permits. 
Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on any business contemplated hereunder; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting any business contemplated hereunder, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
Sec. 9-6-10. - Regulation of hours. 
All activity regulated hereunder shall occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time. 
Sec. 9-6-11. - Door-to-door activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under this article to make a call at any residence, where the owner or any person residing therein has posted a sign reading as follows: NO SOLICITORS, without the express prior permission of the occupant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under this article to fail to immediately leave the premises of any person when requested to do so. 
Sec. 9-6-12. - Peddling ice cream, other refreshments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, sell, or offer to sell at retail upon the streets, alleys, lanes, roads or highways within the city from any automobile, truck, pushcart or other vehicle within the city, any ice cream, ice cream product in modified form, or any other cold or frozen food, refreshment, soft drink or delicacy. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any sort of musical instrument upon the streets, roads, lanes, alleys and highways within the limits of the city, for the purpose of advertising and soliciting and attracting sales and customers with respect to such articles, foods, and refreshments, whether the same is attached to or used in connection with a truck or vehicle which is used for making such sales. 
Sec. 9-6-13. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both, to be set by the city's municipal court judge presiding at the time. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 31, 3-17-2008) 
Secs. 9-6-14—9-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 9-6-21. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this article unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  Solicit and solicitation shall mean the request directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this article. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as herein defined: 
a.  Any oral or written request; 
b.  The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or publication; 
c.  The making of any announcement to the press, over the radio, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith; or 
d.  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale, or any part of the proceeds from any such sale, will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose. 
"Solicitation" as defined herein shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. 
(2)  Charitable shall mean and include the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
(3)  Religious and religion as used herein shall not mean and include the word "charitable" as herein defined, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
(4)  Contributions shall mean the promise or grant of any money or property of any kind or value. 
(5)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock, organization or league, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof. 
(6)  Promoter shall mean any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign or solicitations. 
(Code 1959, § 13-5) 
Sec. 9-6-22. - Solicitations permit; required. 
No person shall solicit contributions within the city without a permit from the police department authorizing such solicitation; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established persons organized and operating exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for the making of such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person. 
Sec. 9-6-23. - Same; application. 
An application for a permit to solicit shall be made to the police department upon forms provided by the city. The application herein required shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name and address or headquarters of the person applying; 
(2)  The purpose of the solicitation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitations; 
(4)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations; 
(5)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation; 
(6)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons; 
(7)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be reasonably necessary and required by the police department in order for the department to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare. 
Sec. 9-6-24. - Same; investigation of application. 
The police department shall examine all applications filed under this article and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigations as deemed necessary to perform the duties hereunder. Upon request by the department any applicant shall make available for inspection by the department, or any person designated by the department, all of the applicant's books, records and papers at any reasonable time. 
Sec. 9-6-25. - Same; standards for issuance. 
The police department shall issue the permit herein provided for provided the following facts are found to exist: 
(1)  That all of the statements made in the application are true; 
(2)  That the applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual, that every person responsible for such organization is of good character and has a reputation for honesty and integrity; 
(3)  That the control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons; 
(4)  That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise; and 
(5)  That the solicitation is promoted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
Sec. 9-6-26. - Use of fictitious name. 
No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 13-10) 
ARTICLE C. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 9-6-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates another meaning: 
Base of operation means any permitted location in which food is kept, handled, prepared, packaged, stored or placed in containers for subsequent transport, sale or service elsewhere. 
Director means the Director of the Planning, Building and Zoning Department of the City of Forest Park, including his or her designee. In the absence of the employment by the city of a director of the planning, building and zoning department, the term shall mean the individual designated by the city to oversee the enforcement of this article. 
Ice cream truck means a motor vehicle primarily carrying ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets, or other frozen desserts of any kind for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. 
Mobile food truck means a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a base of operation and is readily moveable, is a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle designed and equipped to serve food. 
Mobile food vendor unit means an ice cream truck, a mobile food truck or a pushcart. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or any other entity of any kind. 
Pushcart means a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving commissary prepared or prepackaged food and non-potentially hazardous food, unless the equipment is commercially designed and approved to handle food preparation and service. Pushcarts shall not be required to comply with mobile vehicular safety requirements. 
Vendor permit means a permit issued under this article for the operation of a mobile food vendor unit. 
Vendor permit fee means the monetary charge required to be paid pursuant to this article for the issuance of a vendor permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-28. - Permit requirement. 
(a)  In general. No person shall operate a mobile food vendor unit without first obtaining the proper licenses and/or permits from the State of Georgia, Clayton County and the city. The operator of any mobile food vendor unit shall comply at all times with the provisions of this article and all other applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Specific requirements. Any person intending to operate a mobile food vendor unit within the municipal limits of the city, prior to commencing such operation, shall obtain: 
(1)  All permits or licenses as may be required by the State of Georgia, including the Department of Public Health, and Clayton County, including the Clayton County Health Department; 
(2)  A vendor permit issued by the city; and 
(3)  An occupational tax certificate issued by the city or other jurisdictions. 
(c)  Multiple mobile food vendor units. A vendor permit shall be required for each mobile food vendor unit operated within the city, notwithstanding unity of ownership or operation of any such unit and a previously obtained vendor permit for another such unit. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-29. - Application. 
(a)  Any person seeking the issuance of a vendor permit shall submit, on an annual basis, a written application for such permit with the director. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the director. 
(b)  Each application for a vendor permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as may be set from time to time by resolution by the governing authority. 
(c)  An application for a vendor permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  the name, address, telephone number and email address of the person who is the owner of the mobile food vendor unit and the individual(s) who will operate such unit if different from the owner. Where the owner is not an individual, the application shall identify all partners, officers, directors or other individuals with a financial interest in such owner, including the name, address, telephone number and email address of each such individual. 
(2)  If applicable, the make, model, vehicle identification number and license plate number of the mobile food vendor unit. 
(3)  A photograph of the mobile food vendor unit. 
(4)  The corporate and, where applicable, trade name of the base of operation associated with the mobile food vendor unit and a copy of the occupational tax certificate issued by the city to the base of operation. If the base of operation is located outside the municipal limits of the city, the applicant shall provide a copy of the occupational tax certificate issued by the base of operation by the jurisdiction in which it is located. 
(5)  A copy of the approved permit for the mobile food vendor unit issued by the Georgia Department of Public Health. 
(6)  A copy of the approved permit for the mobile food vendor unit issued by the Clayton County Health Department. 
(7)  Identification of the location or locations, the date or dates, and the times in which the mobile food vendor unit intends to conduct business. 
(8)  If the mobile food vendor unit intends to conduct business from private property, written proof that the owner(s) of such property consents to its use for such purpose. 
(9)  Proof of a current, valid driver's license issued by the State of Georgia for each individual expected to operate the mobile food vendor unit. 
(10)  A copy of the mobile food vendor unit's food and beverage menu. 
(11)  Proof of the liability insurance coverage required in section 9-6-32(e). 
(12)  Where temporary seating is provided to patrons, a scaled drawing for each site indicating where such seating will be located and the number of seats (and, if applicable, tables) to be furnished. 
(13)  Any other information that the director may deem necessary to determine that the requested vendor permit would meet all requirements of this article, any other applicable law or regulation of the city, any applicable law or regulation of Clayton County, or any applicable law or regulation of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-30. - Decision on application for a vendor permit; review. 
(a)  Section 9-6-29 and the full amount of the nonrefundable application fee, the director shall review such application and any accompanying documents and shall render a decision on the application within thirty (30) calendar days of such receipt. 
(1)  The director may grant the application only if he determines that the requested vendor permit complies with all requirements of this article and all other applicable laws and regulations of the city or the State of Georgia. If the application is granted, the director shall notify the applicant, in writing, of that decision within the twenty-day period following his receipt of a complete application and the full amount of the nonrefundable fee. 
(2)  The director shall deny the application if he determines that the application contains materially false information, material omissions, or substantially misleading information or that the requested vendor permit would violate any provision of this article or any applicable law or regulation of the city or the State of Georgia. If the application is denied, the director shall notify the applicant, in writing, of that decision within the thirty-day period following his receipt of the completed application and the full amount of the nonrefundable fee. 
(b)  Any person whose application for a vendor permit is denied shall have the right to appeal such denial to the city manager. Any such notice of appeal must be in writing and must be received by the city manager or his designee within ten (10) calendar days of the director's notification of the denial. The city manager or his designee shall note, in writing, on the notice of the appeal the date that he received the item. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the city manager or his designee shall render a decision on such appeal and shall inform the appellant in writing of that decision. In the event that the city manager or his designee approves the application, the director thereafter shall issue the vendor permit pursuant to section 9-6-31. 
(c)  Any appeal of the decision of the city manager or his designee affirming the denial of an application for a vendor permit shall be taken to the superior court by a petition for a writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-31. - Issuance of vendor permit; vendor permit fees. 
(a)  In the event that an application for a vendor permit is granted, the director shall make available to the applicant the vendor permit within three (3) business days of the city's receipt of the full amount of the vendor permit fee required by subsection (c) and any other fees which may be required by any other applicable ordinance or regulation. 
(b)  The director may determine the format and content of the vendor permit but, notwithstanding, each vendor permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the person to whom such permit is issued. 
(2)  Address and phone number of the person to whom such permit is issued. 
(3)  The date that the permit is issued. 
(4)  The location(s), the date(s) and the hour(s) of operation for which such permit is issued. 
(c)  The vendor permit fee shall be in such amount as may be set by resolution from time to time by the governing authority. 
(d)  A vendor permit shall be issued on an annual basis, with such period commencing on the date that the permit is issued and expiring one (1) year later. 
(e)  No vendor permit may be sold, transferred, assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom such permit is issued. 
(f)  A vendor permit shall be valid only for the location(s), the date(s) and the hour(s) of operation specified in such permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-32. - Operational regulations. 
(a)  No mobile food vendor unit shall conduct business during any time or from any location other than the locations, the dates and times stated in the vendor permit. 
(b)  No mobile food vendor unit shall conduct business on private property without the prior written consent of the owner. 
(c)  A mobile food vendor unit may conduct business only in the following locations: 
(1)  The main street overlay district; 
(2)  Any paved public parking area (and excluding any privately owned lot or any unpaved public property) that is: 
a.  Adjacent to the portion of Lake Drive that is south of the intersection of Bennett Alley and Lake Drive and north of the intersection of Lake Drive and West Street; 
b.  Adjacent to the portion of South Avenue that is east of the intersection of South Avenue and West Street and west of the intersection of South Avenue and Park Avenue; 
c.  Adjacent to the portion of Park Avenue that is south of the intersection of Park Avenue and Forest Parkway and that is north of the intersection of Park Avenue and South Avenue; or 
d.  Adjacent to the portion of Bridge Avenue (also known as Hines Ward Way) that is east of the intersection of Bridge Avenue and Lake Drive and west of the intersection of Bridge Avenue and Park Avenue; or 
(3)  The Gillem Logistics Center. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (c), no mobile food vendor unit shall conduct any business on any public street, road, highway or sidewalk or on any other public property. 
(e)  Except for pushcarts, no mobile food vendor unit shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk or within ten (10) feet of any driveway. 
(f)  No pushcart shall be located within ten (10) feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk or within ten (10) feet of any driveway. 
(g)  No mobile food vendor unit may conduct business between 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. 
(h)  A mobile food vendor unit may sell food (including ice cream and other frozen dessert items) and beverage items. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to a mobile food vendor unit during any period in which such unit is participating in a special event pursuant to section 9-15-13. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-33. - Additional requirements and prohibited conduct. 
(a)  A mobile food vendor unit shall maintain a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Georgia, protecting the mobile food vendor, the public and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the vendor permit. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without thirty (30) days' advanced written notice to the city. 
(b)  All mobile food vendor units shall comply with the city's noise ordinance. Except as provided in subsection (g)(1), no mobile food vendor unit may utilize any amplified sound device. 
(c)  The vendor permit and all applicable licenses or permits issued by the city, Clayton County or the State of Georgia shall be firmly attached to the mobile food vendor unit in a manner that they are readily visible to the public. 
(d)  Each individual driver of a mobile food vendor unit must possess a valid driver's license issued by the State of Georgia. 
(e)  No mobile food vendor unit shall display any signage that is not approved by the planning, building and zoning department. 
(f)  No mobile food vendor unit shall be left unattended or otherwise stored on sites from which it offers the sale of food or beverage items to the public. Every mobile food vendor unit must return to its base of operation when not in use. 
(g)  The following safety regulations shall apply to any mobile food vendor unit other than a pushcart: 
(1)  Every vehicle shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. 
(2)  Every vehicle shall be equipped with two (2) rear-vision mirrors, one (1) at each side, firmly attached to the outside of such vehicle and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the roadway to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. 
(h)  No mobile food vendor unit may conduct business in a location that might block or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(i)  A mobile food vendor unit must maintain a state of mobile readiness at all times. The director may prohibit any alteration, removal, attachment, placement or change in, under or upon such unit that would prevent or otherwise reduce ready mobility. 
(j)  All equipment or service items utilized in the business operation of a mobile food vendor unit must remain on such vehicle or the premises of the base of operation at all times. The placement of any such items (including, but not limited to, coolers, propane tanks, generators, barbeque pits and cash registers) on the ground surface outside of a mobile food vendor unit is subject to the approval of the director of planning, building and zoning. 
(k)  A mobile food vendor unit must be self-supporting for all required utilities during any time it is conducting business. No electrical wires, plumbing or water lines/hoses, or gas lines may be attached to such unit during the time that it is conducting business. 
(1)  No mobile food vendor unit may conduct business with any individual while such individual is situated in a motor vehicle. 
(m)  All mobile food vendor units shall comply with all applicable health and safety laws, regulations and rules of the city, Clayton County, the State of Georgia and the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-34. - Litter. 
(a)  No mobile food vendor unit may sell any food or beverage for immediate consumption unless it has made available for public use a suitably sized receptacle for litter. Such receptacle shall be maintained and regularly emptied. all waste generated by the mobile food vendor unit's operation, including that associated with its customers and employees, must be disposed of at the base of operation. 
(b)  The area within which a mobile food vendor unit operates shall, at all times, be kept clean and free of litter, garbage and debris. The operator of such unit shall be responsible for maintaining the premises upon which it is situated in a safe and hygienic manner. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-35. - Fire safety. 
To minimize the threat of fire to the public, the following requirements apply: 
(1)  Combustible gas detector. Prior to the operation of any combustible gas-fueled appliance in a mobile food vendor unit, all visible connections shall be inspected for leaks by utilizing a combustible gas detector. Detected leaks shall be repaired before any gas-fueled appliance is operated. 
(2)  Propane cylinders. No combustible gas fuel tank or cylinder may be connected to any cooking device in a mobile food vendor unit while such vehicle is travelling upon any street, road or highway. 
(3)  Portable fire extinguishers. All mobile food vendor units shall be equipped with a readily accessible multipurpose dry chemical portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 2A 10BC. All mobile food vendor units utilizing fats or cooking oils, including those that produce grease, grease-laden vapors or oily by-products shall, in addition to such fire extinguisher, be equipped with a readily accessible class K fire extinguisher. 
(4)  Operations prior to set up. All mobile food vendor units are prohibited from igniting, starting or operating any appliances requiring heat, electricity or combustible gases while traveling upon any street, road or highway. 
(5)  Exhaust. The emission of exhaust gases or smoke from the operation of a mobile food vendor unit shall be handled in such a manner that such emission does not constitute a nuisance. 
(6)  Hood cleaning and maintenance. All cooking hoods and ventilation mechanisms in a mobile food vendor unit shall be maintained and regularly cleaned to minimize the buildup of grease and other combustible residue. Such maintenance and cleaning shall extend to all interior and exterior surfaces upon which grease may accumulate. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-36. - Indemnity. 
As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person seeking a vendor permit under this article shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the City of Forest Park, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions, and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-37. - Revocation and suspension; review. 
(a)  The city may revoke or suspend a vendor permit issued under the provisions of this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a vendor permit; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on any business contemplated by this article; 
(3)  A violation of this article or any provision of the Code of Ordinances or the laws and regulations of Clayton County or the State of Georgia; or 
(4)  Conducting any business activity contemplated by this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
The decision to revoke or suspend any vendor permit shall be in writing, shall set forth the reasons for such action and shall be mailed or hand delivered to the person to whom such permit was issued. 
(b)  In the event that the city revokes or suspends any vendor permit issued under this article, the person to whom such permit was issued shall have the right to appeal such revocation or suspension to the city manager. Any such notice of appeal must be in writing and must be received by the city manager or his designee within ten (10) calendar days of the city's notification of the revocation or suspension. The city manager or his designee shall note, in writing, on the notice of appeal the date that he received the item. Within twenty (20) calendar days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the city manager or his designee shall render a decision on such appeal and shall inform the appellant in writing of that decision. 
(c)  Any appeal of the decision of the city manager or his designee affirming the revocation or suspension of a vendor permit shall be taken to the superior court by a petition for a writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-38. - Permit not in lieu of occupation tax certificate. 
Any vendor permit issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any occupation tax certificate issued by the city under chapter 1 of title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-39. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any mobile food vendor unit that has not obtained a permit under section 9-6-31 but seeks to conduct business within the city only in connection with a special event pursuant to section 9-15-13. The requirements of chapter 15 of title 9 of the Code of Ordinances shall apply under said circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-6-40. - Violation. 
Any person violating any section of this article shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-1-8 and, in addition, shall be subject to revocation or suspension of the vendor permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
CHAPTER 7. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Giving of massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, etc., O.C.G.A., § 16-6-17. 

Sec. 9-7-1. - Massages; purpose. 
To protect public health, safety, welfare and morals, the following provisions are ordained for the privilege of carrying on the business, trade or profession of masseur and for the operation or carrying on of the businesses, trades, or professions commonly known as massage parlors, health salons, physical culture studios, or similar establishments by whatever name designated, wherein massage or other physical manipulation of the human body is carried on or practiced. 
Sec. 9-7-2. - Exemptions. 
The following classes of persons are exempted from this chapter: 
(1)  Physicians, osteopaths, physical therapists, podiatrists or chiropractors licensed to practice in the state; 
(2)  Nurses, registered nurses and licensed practical nurses performing in their usual nursing duties; 
(3)  Cosmetologists and barbers duly licensed under the laws of this state, insofar as their usual profession and ordinary vocation is concerned, as defined by the laws of the state; 
(4)  Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team within the framework of athletic participation; 
(5)  Massage practiced at any state accredited school, college, university or seminary; and 
(6)  Massage practiced at any hospital, clinic, nursing home, convalescent home or sanitarium established and licensed pursuant to the laws of this state. 
Sec. 9-7-3. - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Massage means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or otherwise, by hand or mechanical device used manually. 
(2)  Massage business means any establishment or business wherein massage is practiced, including establishments commonly known as health clubs, physical culture studios, and massage studios. 
(3)  Business or profession of massage includes the massage or treatment of any person for a fee or in expectation of a gratuity from the person massaged. 
(4)  Masseur means any person engaged in the business or profession of massage. The term includes the feminine gender as well as the masculine. 
(5)  Conviction. The result of a criminal trial which ends in a judgment that the defendant is guilty as charged. 
Sec. 9-7-4. - Licensing of massage business operators and masseurs. 
(a)  No person, partnership, corporation or association shall operate a massage business as herein defined, or engage in the business or profession of massage, unless such person, partnership, corporation or association shall have first applied for and received the license provided by this chapter. 
(b)  Every application for the license prescribed herein shall be upon a form approved by the city manager and shall be filed with the city manager or his designated representative. Every such application shall be made under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is a person, the full legal name, as well as all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names used by the applicant, and residence address of such person. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or association, the name and residence address of all persons having any legal or beneficial interest in such applicant. 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application, and the address of the premises where the massage business shall be located. 
(3)  A complete statement of all convictions of any laws and the grounds therefor for any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above; 
(4)  Written proof that any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above is twenty-one (21) years of age or over; 
(5)  The height, weight, color of eyes and hair for any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above; 
(6)  Two current photographs of any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(8)  Any massage or similar business license history of any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  Any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above shall be fingerprinted by the city, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application; 
(10)  Any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above shall be examined, within thirty (30) days prior to the date of the application and within thirty (30) days of the annual application renewal date, by a physician duly licensed by the state and a certificate from the physician, certifying that the applicant is in sound mental and physical health and free of all contagious or communicable diseases, shall be attached to the application; 
(11)  A certified copy of a diploma of graduation and a certificate of graduation in good standing from an accredited school of massage; such diploma shall be received by the city directly from the school; such diploma must be representative of the fact that such applicant attended a course of study of not less than six (6) months or a four-month intensive course, provided such course is a 1000-hour approved course, wherein such courses of study consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, health service management and other such subjects. If such applicant should not have such diploma, the applicant must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two (2) years in a place of massage or physical culture studio in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and other such subjects; the applicant must furnish with such application an affidavit of previous employment, together with an affidavit of the person under whom such apprenticeship or practical experience was obtained, specifying that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this subsection; and 
(12)  A list of the names, addresses, home telephone numbers and other places of employment of all employees of any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above. 
(c)  The city manager shall transmit a copy of the application to the chief of police for an investigative report; to the building inspector to determine compliance with all zoning and building regulations and ordinances; and to the fire marshal to determine compliance with any law relating to the fire protection. The above named officials shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, report the results of their examinations to the city manager. 
(d)  An application in proper form, accompanied by all reports required by this section, shall be placed on the printed agenda of the earliest regular meeting of the mayor and council following the completion of the reports. The mayor and council shall approve such application if it determines that: 
(1)  The application contains no misstatement of fact; 
(2)  The applicant, or any person having any legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not been convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct; any crime evidencing moral turpitude; any federal statute relating to prostitution; or any law or ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or profession of massage; 
(3)  The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning, building, and fire prevention codes; 
(4)  The applicant or person having a legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant has not, for the three (3) year period preceding the application, had a previously issued license for engaging in the business or profession of massage revoked; 
(5)  The business, by reason of the manner or place in which it is to be conducted, will not constitute a nuisance or in any other manner amount to a menace to good order, the public health, safety or morals; and 
(6)  If the applicant is applying for a license as a masseur, in addition to the above requirements for application approval, the mayor and council shall not approve such application without written proof that the applicant is over twenty-one (21) years of age, and free from communicable disease as evidenced in the medical certificate required herein. 
(e)  Upon approval of the application by the council, and upon receipt of a license fee, as established in this chapter, the city manager shall issue a license to the applicant. 
(f)  The mayor and council shall have authority at any time to direct that any person licensed under this section submit to a medical examination by a licensed physician approved by the mayor and council. This authority shall be exercised only when the mayor and council have reason to believe that any such person has contracted a communicable disease. Refusal to submit to such examination shall be grounds for revocation of such license as provided in this chapter. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, every person licensed under this section shall file and continue to file with the city clerk a new medical certificate with each application for renewal of the license prescribed by this chapter. Failure to file such updated certificates shall be grounds for revocation of such license as provided in this chapter. 
(g)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97) 
Sec. 9-7-5. - Qualifications of masseur. 
(a)  No applicant may be issued a license as a masseur unless such person shall have filed the application required in this chapter, and the applicant must be: 
(1)  Of good moral character; 
(2)  In sound physical and mental health; and 
(3)  Qualified through graduation from a school of massage or from practical experience, provided such accredited school or approved school of massage must include a course of study of not less than six months or a four-month intensive course, provided such course is a 1000-hour approved course, and such practical experience or apprenticeship is for a period of not less than two (2) years in a place of massage or a physical culture studio in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and other such subjects. 
(b)  No license shall be issued unless the application required in this section and all the attached documentation and exhibits so required shall have been filed by the applicant, and no license shall be issued if it appears that the application has been materially falsified or if the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97) 
Sec. 9-7-6. - Qualifications of massage business. 
(a)  A corporate applicant for a massage business license must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the massage business. Applications shall be submitted to the department of police services on forms provided by the department. A masseur who is a sole proprietor shall be required to obtain a massage business license. 
(b)  No massage business license shall be issued unless the application required under this chapter and all the attached documentation and exhibits so required shall have been filed by the applicant, and no license shall be issued if it appears that the application has been materially falsified or if the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained therein. 
(c)  No license to conduct a massage business shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage business, provided also that all such signs shall otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of this Code; 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code; 
(4)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for massage shall be provided; 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided; 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; 
(7)  Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for customers; 
(8)  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(9)  Clean and sanitary towels and linen shall be provided for customers receiving massage services; no common use of towels or linen shall be permitted; and 
(10)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license, must be in complete compliance with the city fire code, the city electrical code, the city plumbing code, and with all other requirements of federal, state, county and municipal law designed to protect the health, welfare and safety of the persons who come into contact with the establishment. 
(d)  All masseurs, licensed under this division to massage, shall be completely clothed during all times when administering a massage. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and such pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two (2) inches above the knee. The holder of the license shall have the license subject to revocation for violation of this subsection. 
(e)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within a massage business is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97) 
Sec. 9-7-7. - Revocation. 
(a)  The license of a masseur may be revoked by the mayor and council upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The licensee has violated any provision of this chapter; 
(3)  The licensee is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage or fraud or deceit in the licensee's being licensed to the practice of massage; 
(4)  The licensee is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(5)  The licensee is afflicted with a communicable disease; 
(6)  The licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that the person is unable to perform the person's professional duties; 
(7)  The licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices any other licensed profession without legal authority; 
(8)  The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of materials depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law or has been convicted of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(9)  There has been the occurrence of a fact which would have barred the issuance of the original permit; or 
(10)  The licensee has failed to be examined by a licensed physician when required by the mayor and council pursuant to this chapter, or to file any medical certificate required by this chapter. 
(b)  The license of a massage business operator may be revoked by the mayor and council upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The licensee is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed masseur and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in the establishment; 
(3)  The premises in which the massage business is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designated for the health, protection and safety of the occupants; 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the city's building code or of this chapter; 
(5)  The original application or renewal thereof contains materially false information or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The licensee or any of the licensee's employees or agents has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contender to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of incest, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire or the distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law and in connection with the operation of the massage business; 
(7)  The licensee or the licensee's employees have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any section of this article; 
(8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers; 
(9)  The licensee violates any zoning, building or fire prevention ordinance; or 
(10)  The licensed business is conducted or allowed to be conducted in a manner constituting a public nuisance. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to this chapter is void if the licensee moves or ceases operating a massage business at the location required to be stated in the application for license pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97) 
Sec. 9-7-8. - Employer to use only licensed employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or association licensed under this chapter to allow or permit any person to massage or treat any person upon the premises operated by the licensee unless the person giving such massage or treatment has complied with all requirements of licensing under the chapter including periodic medical examinations by a licensed physician. Violation of this section shall also be grounds for revocation of the license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 9-7-9. - posting of license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any masseur to fail to post the license required by this chapter in his or her work area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or association licensed under this chapter not to display such license in a prominent place. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation. 
Sec. 9-7-10. - Employees under the age of 21; filing of employees names. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or association licensed pursuant to this chapter to employ any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years in the operation of a massage business. A violation of this subsection shall also be grounds for revocation of any license issued to such violator pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person holding a license under this article to file with the police chief the names of all employees, their home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the police chief within three (3) days from the date of any such change. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97) 
Sec. 9-7-11. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a masseur to massage or treat any person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or association licensed under this chapter to admit customers or prospective customers, or remain open for business, or allow, permit or condone any massage or treatment of any person upon the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be deemed sufficient grounds for revocation of a license. 
Sec. 9-7-12. - Massage of private parts of another for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage or offer to massage as defined in section 9-7-3, the private parts of another for hire. "Private parts" means the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva or vaginal area. A violation of this section shall be deemed sufficient grounds for revocation of a license. 
Sec. 9-7-13. - Notice and hearing. 
Before the mayor and council revokes a license issued pursuant to this chapter, and before the mayor and council considers an application for the license pursuant to this chapter, a written notice shall be sent by certified mail to the licensee affected or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license or application. The notice shall advise the affected party of a right to appear before the mayor and council, with or without legal counsel, at a stated time and place at least 10 days following the date of notice, for the purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to such revocation or denial, and for the purpose of hearing all evidence submitted and examining or cross-examining any person providing such evidence. A revocation hearing can be initiated by the chief of police or by the mayor and council, upon its own motion. Notices of denial shall be sent by the city manager. Notices of revocation shall be sent by the chief of police or the mayor and council and appropriate copies of all agenda requests and notices shall be sent to the city manager and the city attorney. 
Sec. 9-7-14. - Compliance with provisions. 
All persons operating massage businesses or engaging in the profession of massage at the time of adoption of this chapter, shall have a period of thirty (30) days from the effective date of the chapter to file application for a license or licenses under this chapter. 
Sec. 9-7-15. - Annual license. 
The licenses required under this chapter are annual licenses. Such license fees shall be due and payable in the same manner as prescribed for other business licenses issued by the city pursuant to this title. 
Sec. 9-7-16. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by fine or imprisonment as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
Sec. 9-7-17. - Patronage of massage businesses by underage person. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to patronize any massage business unless such person carries, at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given and signed by a regularly licensed physician or such person's parent or guardian. If consent is given by a parent or guardian, such consent must be signed in the presence of the masseur or the massage business operator. 
(b)  Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage business to determine the age of the persons patronizing such massage business, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage business. It shall be conclusively presumed that the operator of such massage business knows the correct age of all persons patronizing the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97) 
Sec. 9-7-18. - Fees. 
(a)  Each new application for a license to operate a massage business shall include payment of an investigative fee and an annual license fee in amounts to be determined by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. 
(b)  Each application of a person for a license to engage in the trade or profession of a massage therapist or masseuse or masseur shall include payment of an investigative fee and an annual license fee in amounts to be determined by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. 
(c)  Renewal fees shall be the same as the original license fee. 
(d)  The regulatory fees in this section are in addition to all other license fees as prescribed in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97; Ord. No. 08-11, § 32, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 9-7-19. - Records of licensee. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at the establishment, the type of treatment administered and the name of the person of the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any member of the department of police. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 1, 5-5-97) 
CHAPTER 8. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-8-1. - Garage sales, rummage sales, and yard sales. 
(a)  Sales commonly known as "garage sales" or "rummage sales", conducted on residential property shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Such sales shall be conducted only by the owner or tenant of residential property. 
(2)  Only three (3) such sales shall be permitted in any twelve (12) month period on one residential lot. No sale shall run longer than three (3) consecutive days. 
(3)  No wares, goods, or merchandise shall be advertised or offered for sale, or swap, or given away except goods, wares, and merchandise owned by the property owner or tenant conducting the sale. 
(4)  No goods, wares or merchandise shall be purchased by the owner or tenant for the purpose of selling, swapping, or giving away same at such a sale. 
(5)  Any person desiring to conduct such a sale shall obtain a permit prior to the time that such sale is to begin. The business license clerk or their authorized representatives, shall issue a permit to the person to conduct such a sale upon payment of such permit fee as fixed time to time by the mayor and council, if the applicant otherwise meets the requirements of this section. 
(6)  A permit issued for a garage sale, rummage sale, or yard sale shall only be valid for the days specified on the permit. In the event of inclement weather or other acts of God, such permit may be validated by the business license clerk or their authorized representatives, for use on comparable days, without the payment of any additional permit fee. 
(7)  A permit issued for a garage sale, rummage sale, or yard sale shall be maintained at the sales location at all times, and shall, upon request, be made available for inspection by the business license clerk or their authorized representatives or any law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer of the city. 
(b)  (1)  Sales by religious or charitable organizations may be conducted on the property of the organization provided that they meet all requirements of items (1) through (7) above. No fee shall be required of such organizations. 
(2)  Such sales may be located on commercial premises not otherwise owned by the organization, provided prior written consent by the owner be displayed when obtaining the permit for such sale. Any such off-premises sale shall be limited to a total of two (2) per year, per location. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale, rummage sale, or yard sale without first obtaining a permit as described herein or in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of this section and the code enforcement officers and police department are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Only those signs issued by the city for "yard sales" are allowed, and shall be limited to two (2) such signs per yard. All other signs promoting or advertising garage sales, rummage sales, or yard sales are prohibited. The two (2) signs provided by the city may be placed as follows: 
(1)  One (1) corner directional sign may be displayed on private property with the private property owner's permission. 
(2)  One (1) sign may be displayed on the property at the place of such sale. 
(3)  No signs may be placed on utility poles or on traffic signs. 
(4)  No signs may be placed on city rights-of-way, or within five (5) feet of any street, highway, or sidewalk. 
(5)  No sign may be placed on city property. 
(Code 1986, § 9-8-1; Ord. No. 88-012, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 99-018, § 1, 10-4-99; Ord. No. 11-08, §§ 1—7, 3-7-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-012 added subsection (b) (2) allowing sales on commercial property by religious or charitable organizations with certain limitations. 
Sec. 9-8-2. - Bonds; requirement to post. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a business license to write or post bail bond the applicant shall be required to post a surety bond with a value as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, but not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). The bond shall be payable to the mayor in his official capacity, and shall be contingent upon the payment of sums due the city on forfeited bonds written by the applicant. The bond shall be approved by the city manager and the chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to write or post bail bonds in the city and engage in the bail bonds business, unless and until such person, firm, or corporation has obtained a license as provided in this title and has posted an approved bond as provided herein. 
Sec. 9-8-3. - Vending machines and amusement devices. 
Vending machines, being those mechanical devices which, without attendants and for a charge, dispense products to retail purchasers, shall be allowed in the city only in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Each coin-operated vending machine or amusement device which is operated, maintained or used within the city shall have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner or operator thereof. Such identification shall be provided by the owner or operator of the machine at his or her own expense. Each machine shall be properly licensed pursuant to Title 3, Chapter 3, and a sticker evidencing payment of the city license tax shall be provided by the city for each machine so licensed and shall be affixed to the machine by the owner or operator thereof. 
(2)  Each machine must be located behind the building setback lines established in the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Electrical and water service must be in compliance with all city codes. 
(4)  In the RM-85, RM-100, and RM-125 zoning districts, each machine must be located either: 
a.  Inside an enclosed structure; 
b.  Under a protective awning or eave; or 
c.  Within an accessory structure with at least three (3) enclosed sides. 
(5)  In addition, in these zoning districts, each machine must be located or screened in such a manner that no part of the machine is visible from a public thoroughfare or from adjoining residentially zoned or developed property. 
(6)  Vending machines shall be allowed only in the following zoning districts: RM-85, RM-100, RM-125, C-1, C-2, C-3, L-I, H-I, P-I and PUD. 
(Ord. No. 92-017A, § 1, 8-31-92) 
Secs. 9-8-4—9-8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - TATOO ARTISTS AND OPERATORS 

Sec. 9-8-11. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases when used herein shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Tattoo shall mean to mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form indelible marks or figures or by the production of scars; provided, however, that the word "tattoo" shall not mean a tattoo placed upon the skin by a physician for medical identification purposes. 
(2)  Tattoo artist shall mean any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
(3)  Tattoo establishment shall mean any room or place where tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. 
(4)  Tattoo operator shall mean any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
(Code 1959, § 1SA-1) 
Sec. 9-8-12. - Permit required. 
No person shall operate a tattoo establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist unless and until the person has first secured a license to do so from the city. Each application for a license to engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall include payment of an investigative fee and an annual license fee in amounts to be determined by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 18A-2; Ord. No. 08-11, § 33, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 9-8-13. - Application to be made to police department; minimum age; fingerprinting, photographing, medical certificate required. 
Any person desiring to operate a tattoo establishment or desiring to operate as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall make application for a permit to the police department, on forms supplied by that department. The minimum age of each applicant shall be eighteen (18) years of age. Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken by the bureau. Applicants for permits shall also furnish to the detective bureau two (2) photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two and one-half (2½) inches by two and three-fourths (2¾) inches. Applicants for permits shall present to the bureau a medical certificate from a medical doctor certifying that the person is sound physically, mentally, has good eyesight and is not infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. 
(Code 1959, § 18A-9) 
Sec. 9-8-14. - Permit issued in name of applicant; nontransferable. 
All licenses granted shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefor, shall contain the location of the tattoo establishment where the applicant shall operate and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1959, § 18A-4) 
Sec. 9-8-15. - Tattooing certain persons prohibited. 
No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person who is a minor, any person who is under either the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants, or depressants or any person of unsound mind. 
(Code 1959, § 18A-5) 
Sec. 9-8-16. - Grounds for revocation of permit. 
Any person who shall conduct a tattoo establishment or engage in the business as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without first securing a permit therefor or who shall knowingly violate any of the sections of this article shall subject the permit to revocation upon appropriate notice of hearing. An artist's or operator's permit shall be subject to revocation upon proof that the holder of the permit has become infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. 
Sec. 9-8-17. - Location restricted. 
No permit shall issue for the operation of a tattoo establishment or to any person engaged as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist in any area which is zoned for residential use by the zoning ordinance of the city as it may now or hereafter exist. 
(Code 1959, § 18A-7) 
Sec. 9-8-18. - Permit not in lieu of business license. 
The permits issued hereunder shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license issued by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 18A-8) 
Secs. 9-8-19—9-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - STREET VENDING 

Sec. 9-8-41. - Purpose of article. 
Pursuant to the power and authority vested in the official governing body and to promote the general health and welfare, and in order to improve the aesthetic appearance of streets and roadways within the city, it is hereby necessary to regulate and control the display of merchandise, inventory, and goods of like kind on the streets of said city. 
(Code 1959, § 15B-1) 
Sec. 9-8-42. - Restrictions and exceptions thereto. 
(a)  No merchant, firm, corporation, or individual who has been duly licensed by the city in order to conduct business herein shall at any time display, exhibit, or hold out goods which are for sale to the general public on the outside of any building in which he carries on his regular trade in such a manner as to impede or hamper the access or approach of fire personnel or safety officials to any part of the outside of the structure. 
(b)  No merchant, firm, corporation, or individual who has been duly licensed by the city in order to conduct business herein shall at any time display, exhibit, or hold out any goods whatsoever which are for sale to the general public on the exterior of any premises occupied by such licensee, unless said goods are primarily manufactured, designed, and produced for use in an outdoor environment. 
(c)  (1) In order to encourage and promote industry and trade, and to generate greater revenue, upon application, by a qualified business, firm, organization, or corporation, the city shall issue a permit in order to enable those businesses, firms, organizations and corporations to conduct outdoor sales. 
(2)  A qualified business, firm, organization, or corporation, shall include those entities which have an annual gross sales receipts of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) or greater. 
(3)  Application shall be submitted to the police department on such forms as they shall require. Said applications shall set forth the location of the business, the dates of the sale, and the hours during which the sale is to be conducted. 
(4)  In no event, shall a permit be issued for a period of time in excess of seven (7) days, and no permits shall be granted more than once during any three-month period. 
(5)  The cost of the application and permit shall be set by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 15B-21; Ord. No. 82-269, 12-6-82; Ord. No. 83-281, 10-17-83) 
Sec. 9-8-43. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police, or any officer designated by him to inspect all such licensed businesses in order to make a determination of compliance with section 9-8-42 of this article. Any merchant found to permit such a condition to exist on his premises shall be advised of said condition and be allowed ten (10) days in order to rectify this condition. In the event that the merchant fails to comply, a citation for violating the terms of this article. shall be issued. A "merchant" shall be defined for purposes of this article as any person, partnership, or corporation licensed to conduct business within the corporate limits of this municipality. 
(Code 1959, § 15B-22; Ord. No. 82-269, 12-6-82) 
Sec. 9-8-44. - Sidewalk sales. 
Conducting a sidewalk sale is expressly prohibited under the provisions of this article, provided that merchants may use sidewalks and portions of parking lots located exclusively on private property for three (3) sales only each year. Each sale shall be limited to seven (7) consecutive days in duration. Any merchant desiring to conduct a sidewalk sale pursuant to the exception provided in this section shall secure a permit from the department of planning, building and zoning in advance of the proposed sale. A "sidewalk sale" shall be defined as any offer of goods for sale to the buying public held outside the established business premises. 
(Ord. No. 99-018, § 2, 10-4-99) 
Sec. 9-8-45. - Outdoor displays of merchandise; obstruction of sidewalks, public parking areas, and other public areas prohibited. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code of Ordinances, merchants may display and hold out goods and merchandise for sale outdoors only if such goods and merchandise are located within and confined to an area extending not more than four (4) feet into the sidewalk measured from the outside wall of their licensed premises, but in no event shall any such goods and merchandise be placed in any portion of the sidewalk that lies within an area of at least three (3) feet in width as measured from the outer edge of the sidewalk toward the licensed premises, nor shall any such goods and merchandise be placed in any other paved areas on or adjacent to the licensed premises which are dedicated or intended for public parking or for traversing by pedestrians or motor vehicles, nor in any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following goods and merchandise shall not be displayed outdoors: any apparel, including, but not limited to, suits, shirts, pants, jackets, socks, stockings, shoes, sandals, boots, hats, dresses, coats, and similar items intended for dressing. 
(c)  Motor vehicles, whether new or used, may be displayed outdoors provided that they are displayed in accordance with other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, and state and federal law. 
(d)  Other items allowed for outdoor display include motor homes, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and other units that constitute portable signs or attractions within the meaning of chapter 3, title 8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  It is the intent of the mayor and city council for the City of Forest Park, Georgia that the use of public sidewalks as regulated and restricted herein shall not constitute a "nonconforming use" of property as that phrase is defined in the zoning ordinance of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, title 8, chapter 8, article D, section 8-8-31. 
(f)  As used in this section, the term "public sidewalk" shall mean and include any paved area or passageway lying adjacent to a public street or right-of-way that is dedicated or intended for traversing by the general public, on foot, by motor vehicles, or otherwise, whether such area or passageway is owned by a private party or in the public right-of-way, or not, and shall specifically include, without limitation of the generality of the foregoing, any parking spaces open to the public and other public areas dedicated or intended for traversing by the general public, on foot, by motor vehicles, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 92-002, 2-17-92; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 9-8-46. - Penalties. 
Any party found to be in violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 15B-2) 
Sec. 9-8-47. - Severability. 
In the event that any part or parts of this article should be found unconstitutional for any reason whatsoever, then only that part shall be deemed stricken from the code of ordinances, and all remaining parts shall be enforced as they now exist or may be amended in the future. 
(Ord. No. 82-264, 5-17-82; Ord. No. 82-269, 12-6-82) 
Secs. 9-8-48—9-8-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES 

Sec. 9-8-61. - Nature and scope of article. 
(a)  Pursuant to the power and authority vested in the official governing body and in order to promote the general health and welfare, a plan has been devised in order to regulate and control the operation of carnivals, circuses, road shows, tent shows, amusement rides, and migratory entertainment of like kind; said operations are hereinafter referred to in this article as an "enterprise". 
(b)  This article shall apply to those firms, businesses, corporations, partnerships, and sole proprietorships who derive their income by placing various forms of entertainment upon the property of another for the purpose of amusing or entertaining the general public in the form of amusement rides, exhibitions, shows, and demonstrations, and charging a fee for their use and enjoyment, the same being commonly known as carnivals, circuses, road shows, tent shows, and the like. 
(c)  There is hereby adopted by and for the city the Standard Amusement Device Code, 1985 edition, with any subsequent amendments, deletions, or additions thereto, and future updated editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., which code is adopted, referred to, and made a part of this article as if fully set out at length herein, a copy of which shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Standard Amusement Device Code, and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, shall prevail and be controlling. 
Sec. 9-8-62. - Liability insurance required for operators of certain amusement devices. 
All persons, firms, or corporations shall prior to operating an amusement device where human beings are conveyed obtain from the city a permit. Upon requesting a permit the applicant must show evidence of personal liability insurance in an amount as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, but in no event less than $100,000 for each person and $300,000 for each accident plus $10,000 property damages and name of agent for service domiciled in Clayton County. 
(Code 1959, § 10-33, as amended by Ord. No. 83-271, 1-3-83) 
Sec. 9-8-63. - Licensing procedure and requirements. 
(a)  Any enterprise desiring to conduct business shall apply for a business license at city hall during regular business hours. 
(b)  Said application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in such an amount as the mayor and council may require. 
(1)  The deposit shall secure the removal of all litter and refuse as may be generated by said enterprise. 
(2)  After the removal of all equipment, and upon inspection by the director of public works, or his authorized representative, the deposit shall be refunded to the enterprise. 
(c)  The application shall also be accompanied by a certification of the owner of said property as hereinafter set forth. 
(d)  The application shall also contain a certification by the enterprise of the total number of seats available on each and every amusement ride. 
(Ord. No. 83-271, 1-3-83) 
Sec. 9-8-64. - Parking facilities required. 
(a)  Any enterprise which engages in the operation of various amusement rides, i.e., Ferris wheel, merry-go-round and rides or devices of a similar nature, must meet a minimum requirement for parking space for use by its patrons. 
(b)  Said minimum parking facility shall be as follows: 
(1)  For every 15 seats that are available for use by the public on each and every amusement ride, there must be one (1) parking space available for use by the patrons. 
(2)  However, a minimum number of 25 parking spaces shall be required at all times for each and every enterprise regulated under the terms of this article. 
(c)  The enterprise shall obtain and supply the city upon application with a certification by the owner of the property upon whose premises the enterprise will operate, or upon whose premises the automobiles are to be parked, that there exists on said property sufficient parking space for a given number of vehicles, and further, that the minimum number of parking spaces is equal to, or greater than, one (1) ride for every 15 seats available on said amusement rides, and that there exist 25 parking spaces available to the public on the leased premises. Any property owner who gives false certification shall be deemed to be in violation of the terms of this article and shall be cited according to law. 
(Ord. No. 83-271, 1-3-83, as amended by Ord. No. 83-273, 2-21-83) 
Sec. 9-8-65. - Term of license. 
(a)  At such time as the city may issue a license as set forth above, said license shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 days from the date of issuance. 
(b)  At the expiration of 15 days, no such license shall be renewed or reissued to the same enterprise until such time as a period of 30 days has elapsed after the expiration date of the original license term. 
(Ord. No. 83-271, 1-3-83) 
Sec. 9-8-66. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation properly cited with a violation of this city ordinance shall be punished as set forth in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 83-271, 1-3-83) 
Secs. 9-8-67—9-8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - FLEA MARKETS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— License tax for flea market promoters and vendors, § 3-3-4(6). 

Sec. 9-8-81. - Flea market defined. 
A "flea market" shall be and include any business that is located within a "flea market" promotion or which derives twenty-five (25) percent or more of its gross receipts from the sale, trade or barter of used and previously owned personal property, other than operable motor vehicles. In this connection, therefore, all businesses in the city which meet the definition contained herein shall be subject to the provisions of this and the following sections dealing with flea markets, whether the same be generally known as jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores or by any other name or names; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall apply to any purchase where the retail value of the merchandise or goods is ten dollars ($10.00) or less. 
(Code 1959, § 12-32.2) 
Sec. 9-8-82. - Flea market promoters and vendors; license required—Revocation of same. 
(a)  Flea market promoters. All persons, before beginning the business of operating and promoting a flea market, shall first file an application with the city manager for a license to conduct such business. Such application shall be made on a form presented by the city manager and shall contain such information, as in the opinion of the city manager, is necessary to properly regulate the business. A promoter's license fee shall be as contained in section 3-3-4(5) of this Code. 
(b)  Flea market vendors. All persons, before beginning the business of selling, buying, trading or bartering in a flea market, shall first file an application with the city manager for a license to conduct such business. Such application shall be made on a form presented by the city manager and shall contain such information as, in the opinion of the city manager, is necessary to properly regulate the business. A vendor's license fee shall be as prescribed in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code. 
(c)  Investigation of applications. The chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made into the information contained in the applications described above (promoter's and vendor's) and into the background, character and reputation of applicants as the chief deems advisable. After such investigation, the chief shall file a written report with the city manager, whose duty it shall be to make a decision on the issuance of the license. 
(d)  Revocation of license. The city manager shall have the duty to revoke the license of any flea market promoter when, in the sole discretion of the city manager, such revocation is necessary to prevent the purchase, sale, barter or trade of stolen property or to prevent the purchase, sale, barter or trade of property with minors and provided the promoter has been previously warned of such activity and has not taken action to prevent a reoccurrence. The city manager shall have the duty to revoke the license of any vendor when, in the discretion of the city manager, such revocation is necessary to prevent the activity described above concerning stolen property, minors and the failure to keep and provide accurate records as required by section 9-6-83 shall be prima facie evidence of a vendor dealing in stolen property or with minors or both. 
(Code 1959, § 12-32.2; Ord. No. 94-003, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 9-8-83. - Same—Precautions to be taken. 
(a)  Records; identification. All vendors in flea markets and all other businesses similarly situated and which meet the definition in section 9-8-81 shall keep accurate records of all transactions of ten dollars ($10.00) or more where cash, credit or merchandise is bought or traded for by such vendors. The record of each transaction shall be made on a form prescribed by the city manager and furnished by vendor. The form shall be dated and require an accurate description of the personal property, including identifying marks, numbers and manufacturers, and shall include personal identification as to name, address, sex, race, height, weight and date of birth and shall include either a legible thumbprint or information showing that the vendor was shown positive identification by the seller or trader of the property. A valid driver's license with a photo or identification of like quality shall be required, and such identification shall be all that is acceptable as positive identification. The city manager may from time to time describe identification other than driver's licenses that may be accepted as positive identification and which, in his opinion, is of like quality. 
(b)  Forms to be supplied to law enforcement officers. Each business covered by the preceding subsection shall provide law enforcement officers with the forms completed since the last previous request for same. 
(c)  Dealing with minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any flea market vendor or other business owner similarly situated, his agents or employees to purchase or trade for any merchandise or property with minors. The burden to ascertain age shall be upon the vendor or business. 
(Code 1959, § 12-32.4) 
Sec. 9-8-84. - Same—Holding period for certain merchandise. 
Any person operating under a flea market promoter's or a flea market vendor's license or any precious metal dealers who takes any used or previously owned merchandise by purchase, trade or barter shall hold such merchandise for at least ten (10) days before disposing of same by sale, trade, barter, transfer or shipment. 
Such merchandise shall be kept readily available for inspection by law enforcement officers of the city. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to merchandise having a retail value of ten dollars ($10.00) or less. 
(Code 1959, § 12-32.5) 
Secs. 9-8-85—9-8-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - ADVERTISING[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, § 8-3-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— False advertising, O.C.G.A., § 10-1-420 et seq. 

Sec. 9-8-91. - Deceptive representations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, by means of exaggerated variations in the comparative size, location or position of letters, figures or other markings or characters in any price tag, or other public representation of any nature whatsoever, to mislead or deceive the public as to the true nature, price, quantity, quality, brand or character or any goods or services, or as to the nature of, or the reason for the sale so being made to the public. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2) 
Sec. 9-8-92. - Price reductions must be bona fide. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or otherwise represent to the public, in any manner whatsoever, a reduction in the price of goods, or service, of whatsoever kind offered to the public, where the reduction is not based upon a previous bona fide sale price or cost price previously advertised or represented to the public for the articles or services so offered to the public. 
(Code 1959, § 3-3) 
Sec. 9-8-93. - Notices, handbills or signs, posting prohibited; on utility poles or public buildings, exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or place, or cause to be posted, painted or placed, any notice, sign, handbill, picture or advertisement whatever on any street telegraph or telephone pole, lamppost or upon the walls of any public building, or upon any property of the city except that legal elections and similar notices may be posted on bulletin boards. 
(Code 1959, § 3-4) 
Sec. 9-8-94. - Same; on private buildings or fences, exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or place, or cause to be posted, painted or placed upon any private building or fence, any handbills, pictures, signs or advertisement whatsoever without the consent of the owner thereof first had and obtained in writing. 
(Code 1959, § 3-5) 
Sec. 9-8-95. - Handbills. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, scatter, toss or throw any handbill, circular, advertising pamphlet or similar matter on any yard, lawn, driveway or porch, or into the vestibule of any building or in any doorway where they may reasonably be expected to be blown by the wind or scattered in such a manner as to litter the streets and sidewalks, clog catch basins and sewers, create fire hazards, obstruct passage or create an unclean or filthy condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or on any unoccupied or unattended automobile or other vehicle in the city, any handbill, circular, advertising pamphlet or similar matter; provided, however, distribution of such materials may be permitted directly to any occupant of a vehicle willing to accept same. 
(c)  This section shall be liberally construed to permit the reasonable circulation of printed information in order not to suppress the freedom of the press, but shall be enforced in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
Secs. 9-8-96—9-8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE G. - BILLIARD ROOMS AND POOL HALLS 

Sec. 9-8-101. - Nature and scope of article. 
(a)  Pursuant to the power and authority vested in the official governing body and in order to promote the general health and welfare, a plan has been devised in order to regulate and control the operation of billiard rooms and pool halls within the city. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority granted municipal corporations by virtue of their home rule, it is the intention of the governing body that section 43-8-1 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall not apply to the City of Forest Park, and pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth herein, said city shall provide for the licensing and regulation of billiard rooms and pool halls located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-276, 4-16-83) 
State Law reference— Provisions of state law governing billiard rooms (O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.) do not apply to counties or municipalities having population of 100,000 or more if the governing body so provides by local ordinance or resolution, O.C.G.A., § 43-8-16. 
Sec. 9-8-102. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, a "billiard room" or "pool hall" shall be defined as the following: 
(1)  Any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards or pool; 
(2)  More than four (4) billiard or pool tables are made available for use; and 
(3)  For which a charge is made for use of the equipment. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the term "billiards" shall mean any of several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the game commonly known as carom billiards, pocket billiards, and English billiards. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 83-276, 4-16-83. 
Sec. 9-8-103. - Licensing procedure and requirements. 
(a)  Application . Any person desiring to operate a billiard room or pool hall within the city shall make application to the director of finance or his/her designated representative and shall show that: 
(1)  Applicant has never been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Applicant will not permit any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or who is visibly under the influence of alcohol or other drugs to enter or play in his place of business; 
(3)  Applicant will have personal charge and management of the business; and 
(4)  Applicant will not permit gambling within his establishment. 
(b)  Applicant shall post a bond in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) payable to the city and conditioned upon his faithful compliance of the rules and regulations promulgated herein; the bond shall be signed by applicant as principal and provide a surety company as securities therefor. 
(c)  Upon applicant meeting the requirements hereinabove set forth, a license shall be issued by the city for the fee as shall be contained in the licensing chapter of the Code of Ordinances (chapter 1 of this title). 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 2, 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-05, § 2, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 83-276, 4-16-83; Ord. No. 98-001, § 1, 2-2-98. 
Sec. 9-8-104. - Operating standards; conduct; exceptions. 
(a)  All billiard rooms and pool halls shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall comply with all sanitary rules and regulations of the department of human resources and of the county board of health, which are incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  No person who operates a billiard room or pool hall shall permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions to be used to prevent a clear view of the interior, which clear view must be maintained at all times. In addition, no partitions forming rooms, stalls, or other enclosures shall be permitted. Nothing herein shall be construed as to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes, and other maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room or pool hall between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room or pool hall between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on premises. 
(d)  No dice, cards, dominoes, or other games of change [chance] shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling allowed, in any billiard room or pool hall, or in any other business place operated in connection therewith. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other constituted authorities, to inspect all public billiard rooms or pool halls in the city for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this article are being observed. 
(f)  This article shall not apply to billiard tables or pool tables operated by private industrial concerns, such as young mens christian associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Ord. No. 83-276, 4-16-83; Ord. No. 90-002, 3-5-90) 
Sec. 9-8-105. - Penalty for violation. 
In the event that any owner of a billiard room or pool hall is found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this article, he shall be cited for such violation as provided herein and shall be punished as set forth in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Further, the licensee shall be subject to forfeiture of the license and shall not be permitted to obtain any credit for any unused portion of such license. 
(Ord. No. 83-276, 4-16-83) 
Secs. 9-8-106—9-8-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H. - SPECIAL SALES 

Sec. 9-8-111. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(1)  Fire and other altered goods sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
(2)  Going-out-of-business sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, the following sales: adjuster's; adjustment; alteration; assignee's; bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditor's end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvent's; last days; lease expired; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's; quitting business. 
(3)  Goods is meant to include any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
(4)  Removal of business sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
Sec. 9-8-112. - License required. 
A license issued by the finance director shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: 
(1)  going-out-of-business sale; 
(2)  removal of business sale; and 
(3)  fire and other altered stock sale. 
Sec. 9-8-113. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  Provisions supplement general licensing ordinance. The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of the general licensing ordinance of this city. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by the general licensing ordinance of this city this article shall control. 
(2)  Exception for survivors of businessmen. Upon the death of a person doing business in this city, his or her heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license hereunder. 
(b)  (1) Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the application, within one (1) year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license. 
(c)  Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one (1) place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one (1) store or branch specified in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(d)  Persons exempted. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
(3)  duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auctions; 
(4)  persons conducting a sale of the type regulated herein on the effective date of this article, unless such sale is continued for a period of more than 30 days from and after such effective date, in which event, such person, at the lapse of the 30 days period, shall comply with the provisions of this article; 
(5)  any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. 
Sec. 9-8-114. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the finance director setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale. 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition. 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held. 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sub-lease and the effective date of the termination of such occupancy. 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted. 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising the sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. The inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
a.  Bona fide orders. All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
b.  Goods purchased for sale hereunder. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase, or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within 30 days before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(b)  License fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the finance director with his application a license fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. Any applicant for a renewal license hereunder shall submit to the finance director with his renewal application a renewal license fee. 
Sec. 9-8-115. - Effect of license. 
A license shall be issued hereunder on the following terms: 
(1)  Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof. 
a.  Renewal procedure. The finance director and city manager shall renew a license for one (1) period of time only, this period to be in addition to the 30 days permitted in the original license and not to exceed 30 consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when they find: 
1.  That facts exist justifying the license renewal; 
2.  That the licensee has filed an application for renewal; and 
3.  That the licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application. 
b.  After a license has been renewed once pursuant to paragraph a. above, any subsequent renewal shall require approval by the mayor and council. 
c.  For the purpose of this subsection, any application for a license under the provisions of this article covering any goods previously inventoried as required hereunder, shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant, or by any other person. 
(2)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the one (1) type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(3)  Saleable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(4)  Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license hereunder for a going-out-of-business sale the licensee shall surrender to the finance director for all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this article. 
(5)  Nontransferability. Any license herein provided for shall not be assignable or transferable. 
Sec. 9-8-116. - Duties of licensee. 
A licensee hereunder shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
Sec. 9-8-117. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating this article, or any part thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
CHAPTER 9. - TELEVISION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Historical Note: The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, are derived from Ord. No. 87-004, adopted 3-16-87. 

Sec. 9-9-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the same meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(1)  City means the City of Forest Park, a municipal corporation in the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Mayor means the existing or succeeding chief executive officer of the city, or his designate. 
(3)  Council means the present governing body of the city or any successor to the legislative powers of the present city council. 
(4)  CATV means Community Antenna Television. 
(5)  Community Antenna Television System (hereinafter called "CATV system") means any facility which (i) in whole or in part receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television and AM and FM radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services; (ii) distributes by cable or wire news, weather and other information including civil defense type information as required as an incidental part of CATV service to all subscribers without additional charge; (iii) distributes any and all other lawful communications of a specialized nature provided that it shall not mean or include any facility to which is transmitted any special television program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in a manner commonly known and referred to as pay television, except as may be permitted by the federal, state, and/or local regulatory agencies. 
(6)  Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
(7)  Applicant means any person submitting an application to the city for a franchise to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the city council. 
(8)  Grantee means the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the city council under this chapter or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
(9)  Gross subscriber revenue means all revenue derived from the monthly charges from all subscribers. 
(10)  Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and its grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting CATV system transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system. 
(11)  Residential subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
(12)  Commercial subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who or which is not a residential subscriber. 
(13)  Basic service means the simultaneous delivery by the grantee to television receivers (or any other suitable types of audio-video communication receivers) of all subscribers in the city of all signals of over-the-air television broadcasts required by the FCC to be carried by a CATV system as defined hereinabove. "Basic service" shall also include grantee channels, city channels, except as may be designated for special purposes by the mayor, public channels and additional channels at the option of the grantee, or as directed by the city council. 
(14)  Additional service means any communications service other than basic service provided over its CATV system by a grantee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates, or any other person engaged in communications services including, but not limited to, burglar alarm, data, or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction meter reading and home shopping. 
(15)  Channel means a band of frequencies, six (6) megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of non-video signals or several thousand non-video signals. 
(16)  City channels means channels of the CATV system which are reserved by this chapter for use by the city. 
(17)  Public channels means channels on the CATV system which are reserved for carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time and, if necessary, studio facilities from a grantee for the presentation of programs. 
(18)  Grantee channels means the channels on the system which are reserved by this chapter for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC's cable casting rules and regulations. 
(19)  Federal Communications Commission or FCC means that agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress or any successor agency. 
(20)  Certificate of compliance means that approval required by the FCC in order for a grantee of a CATV franchise to begin operation within the city. 
(21)  Pay television means the delivery over the CATV system of video signals in intelligible form to residential subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for basic service) on a per program, per channel or other subscription basis. 
Sec. 9-9-2. - Grant of authority. 
The City Council of the City of Forest Park is hereby authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the streets of the city for a period of 10 years from and after the passage, acceptance and effective date of this chapter, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided; and said right, privilege and franchise may be granted to any qualified applicant who, upon the proper showing, shall fulfill all the requirements and conditions of this chapter and franchise. 
Sec. 9-9-3. - Franchise term. 
The franchise, authority or permit granted grantee herein shall terminate 10 years from date of grant and may be renewed for successive 10 year terms on the same terms or conditions as contained herein, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the city council, and consistent with the requirements of rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC. 
Sec. 9-9-4. - Application of CATV franchise. 
(a)  No CATV franchise or renewal thereof shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the city council. 
(b)  The form shall set forth such facts in detail as the city council may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignment for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this chapter. 
(2)  If the applicant is a non public corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of the said corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all CATV facilities and shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(c)  The council may request such other information as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the council, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)  All applications shall be considered firm offers to the city, shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
Sec. 9-9-5. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay to the city, on or before March 31 of each year, a three percent (3%) franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues received for cable television operations in the city for the preceding calendar year. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed, except that the city council may impose a fee in excess of three percent (3%) but no more than five percent (5%) of gross subscriber revenues received from cable television operations in the city, provided that the FCC certifies, after appropriate showing made by grantee, that a franchise fee in excess of three percent (3%) but no greater than five percent (5%) will not interfere with the effectuation of federal regulatory goals in the field of cable television and after appropriate showing made by the city council that the franchise fee in excess of three percent (3%) but no greater than five percent (5%) is appropriate in light of the city's planned regulatory program for cable television. A grantee shall file with the city within 30 days after the expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise shall be in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross annual subscriber revenues as defined herein of grantee during the preceding year. It shall be the duty of a grantee to pay to the city at the time for filing such statement the sum hereinabove prescribed. A grantee shall also file within 90 days following the conclusion of each fiscal year of a grantee an annual report prepared and audited by an independent certified public accountant acceptable to the city showing the yearly total gross subscriber revenues and payments to the city and any further relevant financial information in regard to the grantee as may be required by the mayor and city council. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the city from requiring a grantee to provide free of charge and as consideration under this contract, certain public, educational and governmental access channels as set forth in FCC regulations 47 C.F.R. section 76.251 (a)(4), (5), and (6). 
(b)  In the event the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic 10 year term, a grantee shall immediately submit to the city a financial statement, prepared as before required, showing the gross subscriber revenues of a grantee for the time elapsed since the last period for which a grantee has paid to the city the required percentage of gross annual subscriber revenues, and a grantee shall pay to the city not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of such revenues and any other sums legally due and owing to the city. 
(c)  In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) hereof, a penalty on such payments shall be due and payable in the amount of 10 percent of the amount of tax due. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect a grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or for any other performance or obligation of grantee hereunder. 
(e)  Payments of compensation made by a grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the State of Georgia or the city. 
Sec. 9-9-6. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the franchise, grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the city executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payment of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a grantee under franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000 per personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned by the operation of grantee under the franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $250,000 for property damage to any one person and $500,000 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  $1,000,000 for all other types of liability. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in any form satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the State of Georgia and acceptable to the city, and they shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the city and a grantee herein, and a copy of said policy shall be filed with the city. 
(c)  The city hereby expressly reserves the right to review all liability insurance coverage obtained by the grantee pursuant to this section and to alter the minimum required insurance coverage set forth hereinabove. 
Sec. 9-9-7. - Surety bonds. 
(a)  A grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise, specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the term of the franchise, a faithful performance, license, and franchise bond running in favor of the city, written by an approved corporate surety in such penal sum as may be determined by the governing body, conditioned that a grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term and condition of the franchise, and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of a grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond, and shall keep the same in force and effect at all times throughout the term of the franchise, including the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(c)  The bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 30 days after written notice to that effect is given to the city and a grantee herein. 
(d)  The bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the city, and a duplicate copy of it, along with written evidence of payment of the required premium, shall be filed with the city during the term of the franchise. 
(e)  After a period of three (3) years has elapsed since the date of the granting of the franchise, a grantee may request that the governing body review the surety bond requirement hereinabove set forth. 
(f)  Upon receiving said request, the governing body shall review the past performance of the grantee and consider the nature of work remaining to be performed. After said review, the governing body is authorized to reduce the principal amount of the surety bond, and set a new amount, and require said new amount to be secured in any form that the governing body deems appropriate. 
Sec. 9-9-8. - Indemnity. 
Grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage. 
(1)  These damages or penalties shall include but shall not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(2)  A grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damage and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
Sec. 9-9-9. - Books and records of grantee. 
(a)  A grantee shall file with the city engineer a copy, true and accurate, of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer and shall be kept continuously up to date. Copies of maps and proposed installations of the CATV system shall be submitted to the city engineer prior to the installation of any facilities in the city. A permit to install the proposed installations must be obtained prior to commencement of any work in or above a city street. After the initial phase of the installation is completed, any addition to or extension of the CATV network would require prior approval before any work commences. 
(b)  A grantee shall continually keep on file with the city a current list of its shareholders holding over three percent (3%) of the outstanding stock and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the city shall be made available for inspection and audit by the mayor or his designate within 30 days after any request for such inspection of [sic] audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of CATV under the franchise shall be filed with the city and at the local office of a grantee. 
Sec. 9-9-10. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of said streets. The CATV systems shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted city and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not simply because it shall be more convenient, economical or profitable for a grantee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the city engineer, under such conditions as he shall prescribe for the public welfare, a grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the streets of the city for the conduct of its CATV systems but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The city shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use such facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the CATV system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the city until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of such cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys, or highways within the city where such installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the city engineer and approved by that department in writing. 
(d)  Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the city other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then in that event, before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for grantee any of such property in the street, the nature of such property shall be disclosed to the city engineer for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street and only installed under such conditions as he shall prescribe concerning such location or installation. 
(e)  Whenever the city or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the streets of the city, it shall be the obligation of a grantee, upon notice of such requirements, to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the city or state. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of grantee. 
(f)  Whenever, in any place within the city, all the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee to locate or cause its property to be located underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the city after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, nevertheless, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in such places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the actual additional cost paid by the property owner. 
(g)  Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of a grantee. 
(h)  In case of disturbance of any street caused by a grantee, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer, replace and restore such street in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Provided, that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. The restoration of streets shall be in accordance with standards and specifications for streets in the City of Forest Park. Grassy areas or road shoulders which are disturbed during the installations of underground wires and cables shall be restored in good condition and seeded in grass. 
(i)  A grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one (1) year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents, provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by grantee. 
(j)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and a grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, such disagreement will be resolved by the city engineer. 
(k)  If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the city it shall become necessary, in the judgment of the mayor or the chief of the fire department, to cut or move any of the wire cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done, and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by a grantee, at its own cost and expense and without charge against the city. 
(l)  Grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
Sec. 9-9-11. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  The grantee, within one (1) year from the date the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) certifies grantee's compliance with its rules and regulations governing cable television operations in and for the city, shall extend energized trunk cable to 20 percent of the city and shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the city within four (4) years thereafter unless additional time is granted by the city council upon request by grantee for good cause shown. 
Sec. 9-9-12. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five (5) subscribers within 660 feet of its system, shall extend such system to such subscribers at no costs to the subscribers for systems extension other than the usual connect fees for all subscribers. The 660 feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscribers' homes or premises. 
(b)  In addition, the city engineer may, upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the city, order the extension of the system to such subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to a grantee. In such cases, the city engineer, in his discretion, may order such extension to any subscriber only upon reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of said extension. 
Sec. 9-9-13. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed, and a grantee shall be required by the city engineer to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the advances in the state of the art of CATV systems design. 
Sec. 9-9-14. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the industry to the end that the subscriber may receive the highest and most desirable form of service. 
(b)  In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)  That the CATV system is installed and remains capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum and that it shall have the further capability of converting VHF for the distribution to subscribers on the VHF band. 
(2)  That the CATV system as installed is capable of transmitting and passing the entire color television signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence. 
(3)  That the CATV system is designed and capable of 24 hours a day continuous operation. 
(4)  That the CATV system is capable of and will produce a picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture) that is undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by proper sound assuming the technical, standard production television set is in good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission is satisfactory. In any event, the picture produced shall be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(5)  [That] the CATV system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound in all television receivers of all subscribers without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other electrical or electronic systems. 
(6)  That the CATV system as installed has a minimum capacity of 20 channels. 
(7)  That a grantee shall provide, upon request and without charge, one (1) outlet to each public office building, fire station, police station and public and private school that is passed by its cable. If more than one outlet is required at any of the said locations, a grantee shall install at the cost of time and material only, and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at said locations except for additional outlets. 
(8)  That a grantee shall make its studio facilities, including color cameras and other equipment, available for use by public and private schools for local origination programs and for closed circuit educational films subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to such use by grantee and in such manner as to not duly interfere with the cable television operations of a grantee. Services rendered to all users by a grantee under the terms of the franchise shall at all times be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(9)  That a grantee shall provide at least one (1) free dedicated noncommercial public access channel to be available on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(10)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one (1) channel solely for educational use on a developmental basis, and that upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five (5) years thereafter at least one (1) channel will be made available free. 
(11)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one (1) channel solely for use by state and local governments on a developmental basis and that, upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five (5) years thereafter at least one (1) channel will be remain free. 
(12)  That the cable television system shall be installed with the capacity for two-way communication in accordance with the regulations of the FCC now in effect or which may be promulgated. 
(c)  A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for such good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(d)  A grantee shall maintain an office in Clayton County which shall be open during all usual business hours, have necessary listed telephones, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(e)  The City Manager of Forest Park or his designee shall be directly responsible for receiving and acting upon subscriber complaints. The grantee shall be responsible for disseminating to the public the name, address and telephone number of the city manager or his designee and the fact that the city manager or his designee is the appropriate governmental official to whom all subscriber complaints shall be directed. 
Sec. 9-9-15. - Supervision by the city. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)  The city engineer may, from time to time, issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the city council or any agency or official of the city are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official, the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this chapter or by law in the council or any agency or official of the city. 
Sec. 9-9-16. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its CATV system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the CATV system for a continuous period of six (6) months from the date of said occurrence. 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct said system as hereinafter provided. 
(3)  The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided herein. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the city setting forth one or more of the occurrences hereinabove enumerated or such other occurrence hereinbefore or hereinafter provided and shall have 90 days from the date upon which said notice is received to remove such properties as hereinabove required. 
Sec. 9-9-17. - Operational reports. 
(a)  Within six (6) months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a grantee shall submit to the city engineer and the mayor an installation plan for the entire city, indicating the date on which a grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the city. 
(b)  A grantee shall furnish the city engineer with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. Such period reports shall be furnished at three (3) month intervals, the first report to be made three (3) months after the construction commencement date. 
Sec. 9-9-18. - Off-the-air programming. 
(a)  A grantee shall carry the signals of all television stations licensed to communities within 35 miles of the city pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. 
(b)  A grantee may also transmit or distribute the full output of FM radio stations provided that a grantee transmits or distributes all of the FM stations whose broadcasting studios are now located within the city or within 35 miles of the limits thereof. 
Sec. 9-9-19. - Cable casting of city and public channels. 
For the presentation of programming on public channels, a grantee shall make available free time and, if necessary, adequate studio facilities to members of the public at rates filed with the council and subject to the council's review. Appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished by a grantee. Time shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, except that a grantee shall endeavor to grant such channel time to as many different persons as is practical, it being the intention of the council that such public channels serve as a significant source of diversified expression. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, such programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law. The council may direct that a grantee discontinue, or not deliver, a program on the public channels which it finds to be essentially promotional or otherwise related primarily to the conduct of a business, trade or profession; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed as a prohibition of advertiser-supported programming on public channels. 
Sec. 9-9-20. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his written request. Such removal shall be at no cost to the subscriber. 
Sec. 9-9-21. - Emergency use of facilities. 
(a)  In the event of an emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the mayor, make available its facilities to the city at no cost for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(b)  A grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the city, in times of crisis, may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
Sec. 9-9-22. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)  A grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof, and if any state or federal law or regulation shall require a grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service or shall permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, a grantee shall notify the mayor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the city or the franchise, and a grantee shall be governed by the advice of the mayor. 
(b)  Grantee shall be subject to all city ordinances as set forth herein, and grantee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission for CATV systems. 
(c)  If the council determines that a material provision of this chapter is affected by such subsequent action, the council shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter. 
Sec. 9-9-23. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting CATV operation shall also be submitted to the city. 
Sec. 9-9-24. - Restrictions against assignment. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, leased or sublet in any manner, or shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the city council. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the council to any assignment, lease, transfer or sublease of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets. 
(c)  Prior approval of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than 10 percent of the right of control of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls 10 percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively at the date the franchise is granted. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the council shall constitute a violation of this chapter by a grantee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the CATV system equipment or any part hereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person of said CATV system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. 
Sec. 9-9-25. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
A grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, connection and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of grantee. 
Sec. 9-9-26. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all of the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee hereunder in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of this chapter and within 30 days following written demand by the city shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  Any provision of this chapter shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and council further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise herein granted. 
(3)  A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged a bankrupt or all or part of grantee's facilities should be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by grantee within 30 days from said sale. 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall not be declared in fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
Sec. 9-9-27. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any inquiry, proceedings, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the mayor and council in regard to the operations of grantee's cable television system other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section, but including action in regard to a change in subscription rates, shall be taken only after 30 days' public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city; a copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on grantee; and the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at a hearing as may be specified by the mayor and council, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person or persons in authority to whom such responses should be addressed, and other procedures as may be specified by the mayor and council. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint shall be submitted to the mayor and council in writing and shall contain the name and address of the complainant, the name of the cable system against which the complaint is made and a complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(1)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the mayor and council will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within such time as may be prescribed by the mayor and council, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the mayor and council of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (2) hereof. The mayor and council will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the mayor and council, and the mayor and council will forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(2)  If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the mayor and council, a statement must be filed with the mayor and council setting forth when and how the complainant has been satisfied. 
(3)  When a complaint has not been satisfied pursuant to subparagraph (2) hereof, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the mayor and council in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the mayor and council must be filed within six (6) months from the date of the mayor and council's statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice or refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the mayor and council must make reference to the date of the complaint filed with the mayor and council and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the mayor and council. If no complaint is filed with the mayor and council within the six (6) month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
Sec. 9-9-28. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the city nor for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against a grantee and in favor of the city. 
Sec. 9-9-29. - Failure of city to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
Sec. 9-9-30. - Time essence of this agreement. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke the franchise. 
Sec. 9-9-31. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the city in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the city had not power or authority to make such term or condition but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
Sec. 9-9-32. - Rights reserved to the city. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the said city. 
(2)  To determine through the council any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
Sec. 9-9-33. - Acceptance. 
This chapter and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by grantee and filed with the clerk of the city council. Said agreement shall incorporate grantee's written application to the city for the CATV franchise and shall bind grantee to the provisions of said application. The council may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
Sec. 9-9-34. - Extension of city limit. 
Upon the annexation of any territory to the city (other than through a governmental consolidation process, as to which the city makes no agreement), the right and franchise hereby granted shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent the city has authority; and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by grantee, located within, under or over streets of the territory so annexed, shall thereafter be subject to all terms hereof. 
Sec. 9-9-35. - Local office. 
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain within the city a local business office or agent. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if grantee maintains a local business headquarters office within 10 air miles of the center of the city; provides the mayor and council with the name, address and phone number of a resident of the county who will act as grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters; and at least once a week informs all subscribers by appropriate announcement (e.g., by a slide card) over the system's originations cablecasting channel of the name, address and phone number of the grantee's registered agent for the city. 
Sec. 9-9-36. - Employment regulations. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, creed, color or national origin. A grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated equally during employment without regard to their sex, race, creed, color or national origin. This requirement shall apply to but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment advertising, layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation. 
Sec. 9-9-37. - Modification of FCC rules. 
Consistent with the requirements of rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC, any modification of rule 76.31 resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of this franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be incorporated in such franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the city council within one (1) year from the effective date of the FCC's amendment or at the time of renewal of this franchise, whichever occurs first. 
Sec. 9-9-38. - Joint use of poles. 
Each grantee shall grant to the city, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles by it for any proper municipal purpose insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the grantee's own wires and fixtures. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules governing construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. 
Sec. 9-9-39. - Disposition of system in the event of nonrenewal or forfeiture of franchise. 
In the event the company fails to renew its option at the termination of the franchise period, or in the event that the franchise is forfeited due to the failure of the company to fully comply with all terms and conditions of this agreement, the distribution systems of the company shall be placed for sale at current market value, and the City of Forest Park shall have first option of refusal on the purchase of the system. 
CHAPTER 10. - HOME OCCUPATIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-013, adopted July 20, 1998 amended Ch. 10 in its entirety, in effect repealing §§ 9-10-1—9-10-20 and enacting similar new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 9-10-01—9-10-4. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. 88-019, adopted Nov. 5, 1988 and Ord. No. 89-005, adopted Feb. 20, 1989. 

Sec. 9-10-01. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the orderly conduct of a limited commercial activity on property otherwise zoned for residential purposes. Such activity shall not be of a nature that would impose any disruption to the quality of life, safety, character, health, welfare or appearance of a residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 98-013, § 1, 7-20-98) 
Sec. 9-10-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for a permanent living quarter for one (1) or more persons. 
Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, and including not more than three (3) unrelated persons. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Floor area. The gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, exclusive of garages, carports, basements, open porches and equipment and service areas, measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a building. 
Home occupations. Business occupations, trades or professions customarily carried on by occupants in dwelling units at secondary uses of such dwellings and which are clearly incidental to the use of dwelling units for residential purposes. 
Person. An individual who operates a business qualifying as a home occupation under this section, either as a sole entrepreneur, general or limited partner, shareholder or any other legal capacity, so long as said individual controls and directs the operation of the business. 
Sign. An attached or freestanding structure which directs attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-013, § 1, 7-20-98) 
Sec. 9-10-2. - License fees; violations; penalties. 
All persons conduction a business, occupation, trade or profession in a residence, shall obtain a home occupation permit from the finance director or his designee. The fee for such permit shall be in an amount established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. The conduct of any business, trade or profession within a residence in the city without compliance with this section shall be a violation thereof, and upon conviction, shall subject the offender to the punishments provided for in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-013, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 08-11, § 34, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 9-10-3. - Operating regulations. 
All business occupations, trades or professions qualifying as home occupations under this chapter shall exist and operate subject to the following provisions, conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  Location. Home occupation shall be conducted only within the principal residential structure, including garage area, and only if garage door remains closed. 
a.  No home occupation permit/license shall be issued for a hotel, motel, intown suite, extended stay facility or any similar type facility. 
(2)  Use of premises. An area equal to not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the full area of the principal structure and garage area may be utilized for home occupational purposes. 
(3)  Group instruction/assembly. No home occupation shall be permitted wherein group instruction or group assembly or activity is involved. To that end, no dance instruction, exercise classes or similar activities. 
(4)  Employees. Only members of a family residing on the premises may be employed on the premises in pursuit of the business, trade or occupation or profession. 
(5)  Commodity. No commodity shall be sold on the premises. 
(6)  Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of any items related to the business, trade, profession or occupation shall be allowed in connection with any home occupation. 
(7)  Maintenance of residential character. No alteration of the residential character of the premises may be made, and the home occupation shall not be allowed to create a nuisance or to create any undue disturbance. 
(8)  Signs. No signs relating to the home occupation shall be allowed on the premises. 
(9)  Noise. No business, trade, profession or occupation shall qualify as a home occupation if the pursuit of such generates noise which is audible beyond the property lines of the property upon which the premise is located. 
(10)  Vehicles. 
a.  No business, trade, profession or occupation which generates vehicular trips or nonresidents to the premises exceeding ten (10) per day shall qualify as a home occupation. No business delivery may be made to the premises holding the home occupation license by any semi-tractor trailer. 
b.  For purposes of this paragraph, the term "common carrier" shall include any delivery vehicle having more than two (2) axles. 
(11)  Vehicle advertising. No vehicles which display advertising relating to an occupation, business, trade or profession carried on the premises of a home occupation may be utilized in such a manner so as to avoid the restriction on signs contained above. 
(12)  Vehicle limitations. No more than one (1) passenger vehicle displaying advertising relating to the business, trade, profession or occupation carried on the premises may be parked on or about the premises at any one time. Off street parking must be provided on paved surfaces. 
(13)  Storage or parking of equipment. Except as allowed by Item (12) above, no business, trade, occupation or profession otherwise qualifying as a home occupation shall be permitted to park or store any vehicular or motorized equipment, including, but not limited to, trucks, vans, tractors, earth moving equipment, construction vehicles, trailers, or like items used in conducting of such business on the premises. 
(14)  Chemicals. No business, trade, occupation or profession which would otherwise qualify as home occupation may store any chemical not normally used for common household purposes on the premises. 
(15)  Inspections. As a condition for the granting of the home occupation license, the licensee agrees the city shall conduct an inspection during normal business hours for the purpose of determining whether or not the provisions of this Code section are being complied with. 
(16)  Occasional use. The occasional use of portions of the premises for the receipt of telephone calls, of consultation with clients, or the maintenance of a home office by an employee or owner of a business which maintains an active office location in a properly zoned area shall not require a home occupation permit, provided that all the other limitations of this section shall control. 
(17)  Produce. Nothing contained within this chapter shall prohibit the occasional sales of seasonal produce grown entirely upon the premises from a home garden. 
(Ord. No. 98-013, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 11-12, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 9-10-4. - Occupation limited to dwellers therein; landlord permission for tenants. 
The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and shall be supervised by one (1) or more persons living within the premises. 
Written consent by the owner of the property is required to engage in any form of home occupation by a tenant; such is required to be presented at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 98-013, § 1, 7-20-98) 
Sec. 9-10-5. - Approval of application; administrative procedures. 
All applications for home occupation permits shall be reviewed by the finance director and/or their designee regarding compliance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(a)  All applicants must provide two (2) proofs of residence. A Georgia Driver's license and a utility bill, and a copy of the applicant's lease, if they are renting the dwelling. 
(b)  Submitted applications which fail to comply with the provisions of this Code shall be denied, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the findings of fact causing the denial. 
(c)  Applications found to be in compliance with all the provisions of this Code shall be approved upon the posting requirements set forth in section 9-10-6, and issued a permit, provided that all written objections to the applications, if any, have been reviewed and found to be without merit and unsupported by fact. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 9-10-6. - Posting required for permit application. 
All applicants for a home occupation permit shall be required to place a notice on the premises, setting forth the fact that a home occupation permit has been applied for. This notice shall be posted on the premises for at least ten (10) days prior to the disposition of the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 3, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 9-10-7. - Appeals and hearing on application disposition. 
Applications which are denied by the finance director and/or their designee shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and delivered to the city manager no less than ten (10) days after the denial of the application. The appeal shall be ruled upon by the city manager within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal. The city manager shall have the right to overturn, modify, or affirm the decision made by the finance director and/or their designee. The city manager's ruling in the matter shall be final. Any person aggrieved by a decision by the city manager shall then have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of Clayton County by writ of certiorari within thirty (30) days of the city manager's denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 4, 4-18-2011) 
CHAPTER 11. - USED MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS 

Sec. 9-11-1. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A § 43-47-14, authorizing the lawful regulation and licensing of used car dealers by municipalities and of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4 authorizing ordinances requiring the removal of junk from the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Antique vehicle means a motor vehicle manufactured no later than 50 years prior to the date of enforcement. 
(2)  Classic vehicle means a motor vehicle manufactured between the years 1925 and 1942. 
(3)  Historic vehicle means a motor vehicle which is over 30 years old and which is owned solely as a collector's item and for participation in club activities, exhibitions, tours, parades and similar uses, but which is in no event to be used for general transportation. 
(4)  Junk vehicle means any motor vehicle, the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or discarded, in such a manner as to (a) create an unsightly condition or (b) be rendered unroadworthy according to standards established by O.C.G.A, Title 40, Chapter 8. 
(5)  Used motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, other than a motor vehicle which has never been the subject of a retail sale by a new motor vehicle dealer or a used motor vehicle dealer, to a consumer for his own use or for resale or to other licensed dealers. 
(6)  Used motor vehicle dealer means any person who for commission or with the intent to make a profit or gain of money or other thing of value, sells, exchanges, rents with option to purchase, offers or attempts to negotiate a sale or exchange of an interest in used motor vehicles or who is engaged wholly or in part in the business of selling used motor vehicles, whether or not such motor vehicles are owned by such person. For purposes of this chapter, "used motor vehicle dealer" shall include those persons and exclude those persons included or excluded within the definition of "used motor vehicle dealer" as codified in O.C.G.A., §43-47-2 (6)(A). 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-3. - Applicability of provisions. 
Classic, antique and historic vehicles which meet the definition of "junk vehicle" shall be subject to all restrictions on junk vehicles enacted by this chapter, and no special exemption from the regulations of this chapter shall be established for those vehicles merely by their categorization as classic, antique or historic. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-4. - Business license. 
All used motor vehicle dealers operating within the city shall obtain a city business license and pay the appropriate license fees and taxes therefor as a condition of carrying on such a business. No business license shall be issued to a used motor vehicle dealer unless the applicant presents proof of a current state license to operate as a used car dealer under O.C.G.A., Title 43, Chapter 47. No person holding a state license as a used motor vehicle dismantler, rebuilder or salvage dealer, (O.C.G.A., Title 43, Chapter 48) shall be allowed to operate in the City as a used motor vehicle dealer. Responsibility for compliance with the terms of this chapter shall rest jointly on the license holder and upon any person involved in the management of said business. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-5. - Open storage of vehicles. 
The open storage and/or display of used motor vehicles, other than junk vehicles, is permitted by used motor vehicle dealers, provided the location of such storage or display areas meets all requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-6. - Display of junk vehicles. 
Junk vehicles may not be maintained on open lots or be located upon premises of a used motor vehicle dealer so as to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. All junk vehicles shall be completely enclosed within a building or stored behind a solid opaque fence at least eight (8) feet in height. Such fence shall meet the setback requirements of sections 8-8-36 and 8-8-78 of the city zoning ordinance. The use of webbing in chain-link fences to meet the requirements of this section is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-7. - Notice to remove: service. 
(a)  Whenever the director of public services, or his authorized designee, determines that a junk vehicle has been maintained in public view in violation of section 9-11-6, he shall provide notice to the owner and/or operator of the business to remove the junk vehicle from the premises or to otherwise bring the premises into compliance with the standards of section 9-11-6. Such notice shall be in writing, shall describe the offending vehicle by color and make, and shall provide five (5) days within which to comply with this chapter. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall be served by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Personal service. 
(2)  Certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(3)  Where service has been attempted and cannot be accomplished by either personal service or certified mail, the notice may be served by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, with adequate postage attached thereto, to the last known address of the owner and by posting of a copy of the notice on the business premises. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-8. - Failure to comply with notice. 
Upon receipt of a notice to remove a junk vehicle from licensed premises or to otherwise to come into conformance with this chapter, and upon failure of the owner or operator of those premises to so conform within the period of time stated in the notice, the director of public services or his designee, may proceed to cite the owner and/or operator of the business for violation of this chapter. Such notice of violation shall include a summons to appear in the municipal court of the city on a date certain to answer the charge of violation of the ordinance. Each and every vehicle maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and each day beyond the five (5) day notice period during which such vehicle or vehicles remain(s) on the property shall also be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-9. - Inspection authority. 
The director of public services, or his designee, shall have the right to enter onto premises licensed under this chapter, at reasonable times, to inspect the premises for compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
Sec. 9-11-10. - Penalties for violation. 
Upon conviction of or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a citation under this chapter, the person cited shall be subject to the penalties as set out in section 1-1-8 of this Code. In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed by the preceding sentence, upon the third conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere within a 12 month period, the business license of the license holder shall be suspended for a period of six (6) months. A fourth conviction or plea to a similar offense within 12 months shall result in forfeiture of the business license. No new business license shall issue to a person whose license has been forfeited for the same category of business within the city for a period of 12 months. Suspension and/or forfeiture of licenses shall be accomplished through use of the procedures outlined in section 9-1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 91-013, 6-17-91) 
CHAPTER 12. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 2014, repealed former Ch. 12, §§ 9-12-1—9-12-15, and enacted a new Ch. 12 as set out herein. Former Ch. 12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 11-48, § 1, 12-28-2011. 

Sec. 9-12-1. - Findings; public purpose. 
The governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia is aware of the following evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the mayor and city council for the City of Forest Park, Georgia (hereinafter the "governing body"): 
(a)  Findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Rome, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; Ellicottville, New York; Newport News, Virginia; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Centralia, Washington; Whittier, California; Denver, Colorado; Dallas, Texas and environs; Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas; Jewett, New York; El Paso, Texas; Palm Beach, Florida; American Center for Law and Justice; Oconee County, Georgia; City of Lilburn, Georgia; City of Roswell, Georgia; City of Sandy Springs, Georgia; City of Carrollton, Georgia; Manatee County, Florida; St. Paul, Minnesota; Troup County, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas, and numerous other studies, articles, and court decisions, all of which have been presented to the mayor and city council in bound form and/or on diskette and incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(b)  Certain affidavits and other written evidence of criminal activity, improper conduct, and other adverse secondary effects in adult entertainment establishments in the past which have been produced to the mayor and city council through litigation involving the adult clubs, and copies of which have been presented to the mayor and city council and incorporated into the record of proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(c)  A presentation and accompanying report given to the mayor and city council by Dr. Richard McCleary of the University of California at Irvine detailing the criminal activities and other adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses, explaining the criminological theories supporting ties between adult entertainment and criminal activity, and documenting evidence of the adverse secondary criminological effects of adult entertainment establishments, incorporated into the record of proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(d)  A presentation and accompanying report given to the mayor and city council by Ms. Connie Cooper detailing the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments in the areas of planning and development and property values, incorporated into the record of proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(e)  A presentation and report given to the mayor and city council by private investigator Guy Watkins of BCI, Inc. detailing the findings and observations of private investigators who recently visited adult entertainment establishments in the nearby City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, finding evidence of criminal activity, including crimes of assault and prostitution, which has been incorporated into the record of proceedings of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(f)  The transcript of proceedings before the city council of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia of December 20, 2007 and December 27, 2007 which documents extensive evidence of adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment, a copy of which has been presented to the mayor and city council, and incorporated into the record of proceedings of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(g)  The following special reports relating to the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on real property values: September 2004 Survey of Appraisers, Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas; May 2008, Survey of Appraisers, Palm Beach County, Florida; and June 2008 Survey of Texas Appraisers, Texas City Attorneys Association incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(h)  Certain documents and information consisting of thirty-nine (39) pages relating to the guilty plea and plea agreement in the criminal prosecution case of former Fulton County Police Lieutenant Mark Timothy Lance incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(i)  A report by BCI private investigators relating to adult bookstores in Sandy Springs, Georgia incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(j)  A report by BCI private investigators relating to adult cabarets in Sandy Springs, Georgia incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(k)  Affidavits and reports of BCI private investigators relating to and reporting inappropriate and criminal activity taking place within adult entertainment establishments; and 
(l)  Police records of prosecutions of criminal charges relating to activities taking place within adult entertainment establishments; and 
(m)  The affidavits of Police Chief Dwayne Hobbs and Captain Mark Harris in connection with litigation in the City of Forest Park, Georgia over adult entertainment establishments incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(n)  The opinion of the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, Ga., 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010), which discusses extensive evidence of negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments in Fulton County, Georgia incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(o)  Three (3) articles authored or co-authored by Dr. Richard McCleary, Professor at the University of California, Irvine, entitled "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Business" (2008); "Do Peep Shows 'Cause' Crime? A Response to Linz, Paul, and Yao" (2006); and "Do 'Off-Site' Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence" (2009), incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the Governing Body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and 
(p)  Other evidence presented at various hearings and meetings of the mayor and city council relating to adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment, which has been recorded and incorporated into the record of proceedings of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, including past meetings of the governing body. 
Based upon all of this evidence, the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, also known as adult entertainment establishments, lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled or inadequately controlled by the operators of the establishments. The commercial exploitation of human sexuality, in all forms in which such exploitation may be manifested has a deleterious effect on the community where it takes place as heretofore mentioned. Sexually oriented businesses cause an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use, assaults and batteries, and corruption of public officials. 
(2)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses. Offering or providing private or semi-private space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments escalate and exacerbate undesirable community conditions, including, but not limited to, blight, diminished property values, increased need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, and increased burden on the judicial system as a result of the criminal behavior which the governing body finds such business establishments bring to a community. The secondary negative effects that are caused by such businesses are not limited to such facilities that offer live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts but other forms of sexually oriented businesses that also have a deleterious effect on nearby neighborhoods, commercial districts and on urban life in general. These other types of such businesses include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, peep shows, massage parlors, bath houses, adult gift and novelty shops, and lingerie or nude modeling studios. 
(4)  Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(5)  Communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components. 
(7)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(8)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(9)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in some areas of some sexually oriented businesses. 
(10)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (9) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(11)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(12)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult entertainment establishments as defined herein. 
(13)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(14)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and other secondary negative effects as described herein. 
(15)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(16)  The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
(17)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult entertainment establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(18)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the City of Forest Park, Georgia will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities as described above, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and based on the documentary and oral evidence presented at the public hearings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia held prior to the adoption of this chapter and in particular on July 21, 2009; and based on the evidence and statements of persons who have appeared before members of the governing body on other occasions, and on other documentary evidence submitted to the governing body, the governing body for the City of Forest Park, Georgia takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the finding of the governing body that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with commercial nudity and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment, are criminal activity, depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove referenced. The governing body finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the City of Forest Park, Georgia, as well unless these regulations are adopted. 
Furthermore, it is the finding of the governing body that nude or semi-nude live entertainment and other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in the city and surrounding communities. 
The governing body further finds that each separate adverse secondary effect of adult entertainment businesses and sexually oriented businesses constitutes a substantial government interest, that each substantial government interest includes, but is not limited to, preventing future adverse secondary effects of both pre-existing sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment businesses in the City of Forest Park, Georgia and those that may open in the future, and the viability of each separate substantial government interest of the City of Forest Park, Georgia addressed herein does not depend upon any comparative analysis between adult entertainment businesses and non-adult entertainment businesses. 
The governing body therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the governing body of the City of Forest Park, Georgia finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment, and finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions. The governing body further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To all of these ends, this chapter is hereby adopted. 
Also based upon all of the information, studies, reports, statements, findings in court decisions, and testimony referenced above, as well as the well known and self evident conditions and secondary effects caused by the commercial exploitation of commercial nudity combined with the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages, the governing body also finds and concludes that the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages of any kind in an adult entertainment establishment as defined herein tends to independently create, aggravate, exacerbate, and add to all of those negative secondary effects set forth in this section. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to address and forestall those negative secondary effects in the City of Forest Park, Georgia within the permissible limits and parameters of the Georgia and United States constitutions. 
Simultaneously upon restatement of this chapter, the city has executed a settlement document by and between Jack Galardi, Red Eyed, Inc. d/b/a Crazy Horse Saloon, (hereinafter referred to as "Crazy Horse") Walleye, LLC ("Walleye"), Mia Luna, Inc. d/b/a Pink Pony South (hereinafter referred to as "Pink Pony South"), and JGP&P, LLC (hereinafter referred to as "JGP&P"), (hereinafter "Settlement Agreement") and a consent order in litigation in both the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division, styled as Jack Galardi, Red Eyed, Inc. d/b/a Crazy Horse Saloon, Walleye, LLC, Mia Luna, Inc. d/b/a Pink Pony South, and JGP&P, LLC v. City of Forest Park, Corine Deyton, Sparkle Adams, Maudie McCord, Linda Lord, and John Parker, individually (Civil Action File No. 1:12-CV-0531-SCJ), and in the Court of Appeals of the State of Georgia, styled as Jack Galardi, Red Eyed, Inc., dba Crazy Horse Saloon, and Walleye, LLC; Mia Luna, Inc., dba Pink Pony South and JGP&P, LLC, v. City of Forest Park, Georgia (Appeal No. A15A0023) (hereinafter the "Court Order") which Settlement Agreement and Court Order are elsewhere referred to in this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-2. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the foregoing book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which either: (1) more than fifty (50) square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale or rental of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and/or (2) twenty-five (25) percent or more of its display area is used for the display or offer for sale or rental of those media or materials. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who performs live in a manner so as to feature, depict, show, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, female breasts, or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this chapter, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors, and persons who are not compensated or paid. Adult entertainers may appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity as applicable provided said nude or semi-nude appearances comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." Adult entertainment includes trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes, movies, photographs, or films, as well as live performances, that predominantly feature, simulate, or depict performances by persons that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, and/or performances that feature, depict, or emphasize performers' genitals, pubic region, anus, female breasts below the top of the point immediately above the areola, or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of businesses: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where such performances are distinguished or characterized by a simulated depiction of "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, which performances are considered "live adult entertainment" as defined below; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment in which persons perform live in a manner so as to feature, depict, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, female breasts, or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein, which performances are considered "live adult entertainment" as defined below; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and/or (2) above; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than fifty (50) square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which utilizes twenty-five (25) percent or more of its display area for the display or offer for sale or rental such media or materials, or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, bar, restaurant, dinner theater, karaoke bars or restaurants, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. For purposes of this subsection, such performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least eighty (80) percent of all annual performances or showings. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel which: 
(1)  Makes available to patrons any material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from any public right-of-way advertising that such material is available; or 
(2)  Regularly offers a room or rooms for rent for any period of time that is less than twelve (12) consecutive hours; or 
(3)  Regularly allows a tenant or occupant of a room or rooms to sub-rent the room or rooms for a period of time that is less than twelve (12) consecutive hours. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for fewer than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising more than ten (10) square feet of its total floor space or wall space, or floor and wall space combined, devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
Application fee shall mean the fee required to accompany an application for a permit to work or perform services as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment, and/or the fee required to accompany an application to obtain a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment under this chapter. The application fee shall vary depending on the permit or license being sought. This term shall not include the annual regulatory fee for such establishments as established by the city's governing body. All application fees shall be non-refundable and payable in cash or certified check in an amount established by the city's governing body. The amounts of the application fees are set forth on the fee schedule maintained by the city and available upon request from the chief of police. 
Chief of police shall mean and include the duly appointed and serving chief of police for the City of Forest Park, Georgia, or his designee, i.e., that person designated by the chief of police to act on his behalf and under his supervision in connection with this chapter. 
Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this chapter the term "children's day care facility" shall include, but not be limited to, the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
City shall mean the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Convicted shall mean and include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime or an ordinance violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Employee or adult entertainment establishment employee shall mean any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is an employee, an independent contractor, or any other kind of agent, and whether or not said person performs such services only for tips or is paid a salary, wage, or any other type of compensation by the adult entertainment establishment. The term "employee" or "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include, but is not limited to, adult entertainers, wait staff, clerks, ushers, parking attendants, security personnel, cooks and dishwashers. The term "employee" or "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall not include a person who is temporarily on the premises for the sole purpose of repair or maintenance of the premises, any building or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of any goods or merchandise to the premises. 
Georgia Crime Information Center is an operating division within the Georgia Bureau of Investigation that serves as the chief provider of criminal justice information services in Georgia by maintaining an electronic database of crime data. The "GCIC" provides access to all officials and agencies of the criminal justice system within the State of Georgia to computerized criminal history databases twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
Governing body shall mean the mayor and city council for the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
Human female or female shall mean any individual human possessing female breasts and/or female genitals, whether said individual was born with these anatomical areas or acquired them via an elective medical procedure. 
Human male or male shall mean any individual human possessing male genitals, whether said individual was born with said genitals or acquired said genitals via an elective medical procedure. 
License shall mean a license issued by the city under this chapter to a licensee that authorizes the licensee to operate, engage in, or carry on the business of an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter. The terms of these licenses is as described in § 9-12-3 below. 
Licensee shall mean the holder of an adult entertainment establishment license issued under this chapter. The licensee must be an owner of the adult entertainment establishment. 
Live adult entertainment shall mean adult entertainment performed live by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment in which the "specified anatomical areas" of the adult entertainer are displayed or depicted. 
National Crime Information Center is an electronic database of crime data that can be accessed and utilized by virtually every criminal justice agency nationwide. The National Crime Information Center ("NCIC") is operated under a shared management concept between the FBI and federal, state, local, and tribal criminal justice users. The NCIC may be searched by criminal justice professionals, including police officers, to locate missing persons, recover stolen property, identify sex offenders, identify fugitives, locate protective orders, identify wanted individuals, and utilize the national instant criminal background check system. Like the GCIC, the NCIC provides a computerized database that is accessible twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
Nude shall mean, in the case of a human female, the showing of female genitals, pubic area, anus, and the female breast with a completely exposed nipple or areola. In the case of a human male, "nude" shall mean the showing of male genitals, pubic area, and anus. An individual shall be considered nude if all of the above-mentioned anatomical areas are exposed with no covering whatsoever. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a twenty (20) percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Permit shall mean an annual permit issued by the city which authorizes a person to work or perform services as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment as those terms are defined in this chapter. Operators and employees of adult entertainment establishments, including adult entertainers, shall be required to obtain one (1) of two (2) different categories of permits available from the city: one (1) for operators and adult entertainers, and one (1) for all other employees of adult entertainment establishments. All employees of an adult entertainment establishment, including adult entertainers, as well as the operator of said adult entertainment establishment, shall apply for their permits before they can begin working or performing services for an adult entertainment establishment. 
Permit fee shall mean the annual fee that must be submitted by an operator or employee of an adult entertainment establishment, including adult entertainers, to the city before that operator or employee may acquire his or her permit and begin working or performing services for an adult entertainment establishment. All permit fees shall be non-refundable and are payable in cash or certified check in an amount determined by the city's governing body. The amount of these permit fees vary depending on an employee's position of employment with an adult entertainment establishment. There are two (2) categories of permit fees for employees of adult entertainment establishments: one (1) fee for operators and adult entertainers, and a second fee for other employees of an adult entertainment establishment. The amount of these permit fees are set forth on the fee schedule maintained by the city and available upon request from the chief of police. 
Premises or licensed premises shall mean the property or premises where an adult entertainment establishment licensed under this chapter operates, conducts, or carries on its business, and shall include the entire tract or parcel of land where such business is conducted. 
Regulatory fee shall be the annual regulatory fee to be paid by each adult entertainment establishment when it is issued an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license by the city. 
Semi-nude shall mean, in the case of a human female, showing any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola and/or displaying the pubic area, anus, buttocks, or female genitals with a covering that is less than fully opaque. In the case of a human male, "semi-nude" shall mean showing, with a covering that is less than fully opaque, the male genitals, pubic area, buttocks, and/or anus. Examples of attire that, when worn, would categorize an individual as "semi-nude" include, but are not limited to, pasties, g-strings, dental floss, and thongs. In the event an individual displays all of the above-described anatomical areas with no covering whatsoever, the individual shall be considered "nude." 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated vaginal intercourse, oral vaginal copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include human genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, and/or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola whether or not such areas are completely exposed, partially covered, or completely covered. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-3. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the corporate city limits of the City of Forest Park, Georgia any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without first procuring an annual license to do so (except as provided in section 9-12-11(b) when the chief of police or his designee fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within the ninety-day period provided for therein). In no event shall any license issued to an adult entertainment establishment under this chapter be in force or effect after midnight of December 31 of the year in which it is issued. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee (as defined above in section 9-12-2) for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in an amount established by the city's governing body. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the city within ten (10) days after the chief of police or his designee approves the application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. This annual regulatory fee is in addition to and separate from any application fee that must be submitted pursuant to section 9-12-5 below. No adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which they are issued. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the chief of police or his designee on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any applicant filing a renewal application which is received by the city after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of twenty (20) percent, and shall cease conducting business on the premises effective midnight December 31 until a renewal license is duly issued under this chapter. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held, and the applicant shall cease conducting business on the premises until a license is duly issued under this chapter. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as set forth in this chapter will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half (½) of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(c)  Except as may be allowed by virtue of the settlement agreement and/or court order, licenses and permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable, except for a license or ownership interest under the following circumstances: in case of the death of an owner or a licensee as defined herein, the license pertaining to the owner's or licensee's adult entertainment establishment shall remain in force and effect for a period of up to ninety (90) days in order to allow the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) who will inherit the ownership interest or license an opportunity to apply for and qualify to hold the interest or license under this chapter. In order to qualify to hold said interest or license, the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) shall make application to the city within the ninety-day period as if he or she were applying for a new ownership interest or license under this chapter. If a completed application is filed within the ninety-day period, then the existing license shall remain in effect for an additional period of up to ninety (90) days following the date of filing in order to allow the chief of police to grant or deny the application under this chapter. If the chief of police grants the application, or if the chief of police fails to approve or deny the same within the ninety-day period provided for in this chapter, then the beneficiary applicant(s) shall be deemed the new owner(s) of the interest or license, which shall be considered transferred without any interruption of ownership interest which may have existed from the original approval of same, said interest or license being thereafter subject to all of the terms and conditions of this chapter. If the beneficiary fails to file a completed application under this subsection within the thirty-day period, or if the application is denied (and if appealed, the denial is upheld on appeal), then the ownership interest or license shall terminate at midnight on the thirtieth day or at midnight on the day that a final judgment upholding the appeal is entered, and the adult entertainment establishment shall close its business on that day; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to allow or permit any license to remain in force and effect beyond midnight on December 31 of the year in which the death occurs, unless necessary to allow for one (1) or both of the two (2) thirty-day periods provided for in this subsection. If an appeal of a denial might remain pending on December 31 of the year in which it is filed, then in such an event, the beneficiary applicant shall file a new application for a license or approval of an ownership interest for the next succeeding calendar year under the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  All other changes in an ownership interest in an adult entertainment establishment or a license issued under this chapter must be reported in writing to the city's chief of police or his designee prior to such transfer, and the person who is intended to receive such ownership interest shall be required to make an application for a license as if he or she were applying for a new license hereunder: No licensee may change the location of the licensee's operation; any change in location shall require application for a new license under this chapter, so that such application process is completed before the relocation takes place. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-4. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. Prospective operator(s) must submit an application and obtain an employment permit pursuant to section 9-12-6(b) below. If an adult entertainment establishment is found open for business without the presence of an on-premises operator, the licensee shall be cited for a violation of this chapter, and the business shall be ordered to close until an on-premises operator is present and remains present during all operating hours. If an operator of an adult entertainment establishment loses his or her permit to operate said establishment pursuant to section 9-12-6(b)(6)(b) below, the licensee or owner(s) of an adult entertainment establishment must immediately install another licensed operator to oversee said adult entertainment establishment so that there is at least one (1) operator overseeing each establishment at any given time. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-5. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the city shall make application for a license under this chapter to the chief of police or his designee. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be the president or chief executive officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable application fee payable in cash or by certified check in an amount established by the city's governing body shall be paid to the city to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The chief of police or his designee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for a license does not itself authorize the operation of, engaging in, conducting or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(5)  The height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s); 
(6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6) months; (and in addition, the applicant and the operator(s) must agree to be photographed by the city police department prior to issuance of the license applied for); 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership shall be provided. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply to each such corporation; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and if applicable, the lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement, if any; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past ten (10) years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the GCIC and the NCIC, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the city police department; 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is made is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state should be provided, including articles of incorporation, and a trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(15)  A plat prepared by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, any other adult entertainment establishment, and any establishment licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages, beer or wine for consumption on the premises; the survey should depict the location and distance of the property use closest to the proposed premises that would disqualify the property if it were within the prohibited distance pursuant to section 9-12-6(a); 
(16)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president or chief executive officer of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the chief of police or his designee with payment of the nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by the governing body of the city, and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The city shall have ninety (90) days from the date of actual receipt of a fully completed application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s). The chief of police or his designee shall stamp the date of receipt of each application on the first page thereof and shall provide the applicant a photocopy of the stamped first page signifying the date of receipt of the application. The chief of police or his designee may search the GCIC and the NCIC to determine whether the applicant, operator(s), and owner(s) appear as part of any record maintained therein. The chief of police shall approve or deny the completed application for an adult entertainment establishment license within ninety (90) days of actual receipt of a fully completed application. If any application is received that is not fully complete for any reason, then in such event, the incomplete application shall be returned to the applicant as soon as possible following the discovery of the incompleteness, and the applicant shall be required to submit a newly completed application along with payment of an additional application fee in an amount established by the governing body of the city, and the ninety-day time period specified above shall begin over again upon the actual receipt of the fully completed application. 
The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the chief of police finds: 
(1)  The required license application fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application contains all of the information provided for in subsections (b)(1)—(16) above, and the applicant has made no material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving assault, illegal possession or use of a controlled substance, battery, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of ten (10) years preceding the date of the application. If there has been any such conviction or plea, then the application shall be denied, For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Except as may be allowed by virtue of the settlement agreement and/or court order, neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or permit revoked for cause by this city or any other municipal corporation or county located in or out of the State of Georgia within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant is in compliance with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards based on information provided by or through other city departments or Clayton County; 
(6)  The applicant, operator(s) and owners(s) are all at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(7)  Except as may be allowed by virtue of the settlement agreement and/or court order, the proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this chapter from any residential use, church, school, public park or children's daycare facility, any other adult entertainment establishment, and any other establishment licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages, beer or wine for consumption on the premises pursuant to section 9-12-6(a); 
(8)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of any law of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
The chief of police shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in this section. 
(e)  Alcoholic beverages. In the event the applicant, licensee, and/or owner(s) of an adult entertainment establishment desire(s) to sell or dispense spirituous liquors, beer, wine, and/or any other alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, said applicant, licensee, and/or owner(s) must first apply for and obtain a permit to serve alcohol on the premises as a retail consumption dealer in accordance with the provisions of Title 9, Chapter 2 of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, as may hereinafter be amended, before said sales can commence. Application and receipt of a license to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages as a retail consumption dealer shall require payment of an additional alcohol license fee pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 2 of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. The number of adult entertainment establishments that may be permitted to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption is further limited by the provisions of section 9-12-7(e) below. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-6. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. Except as may be allowed by virtue of the settlement agreement and/or court order, no adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land that is zoned residential under the city's then current zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park or children's day care facility is located; 
(3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land containing another adult entertainment establishment; 
(4)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises is located; 
(5)  In any area of the city that lies outside the adult entertainment overlay district as defined and set forth in section 8-8-62.1 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Park, Georgia, as amended. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by straight line, measurement from property line to property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any parcel with a tax ID number assigned by the county tax assessor. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. All employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. No employee employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 9-12-5(d)(3) of this chapter within the five (5) years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment Any adult entertainment establishment employee who is convicted of any such crimes while so employed shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises in the city for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The terms "licensed premises" and "convicted" are defined in section 9-12-2 of this chapter. 
(2)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as any type of employee of a licensed adult entertainment establishment, he or she shall complete and file an application with the chief of police or his designee of his or her intended employment, which application is available from the city. When submitting his or her application, the prospective employee must also submit the applicable application fee to the chief of police or his designee. Said fee amount shall be set forth on the fee schedule maintained and kept by the chief of police or his designee. The prospective employee shall also supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the GCIC and the NCIC, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the city's police department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses described in section 9-12-5(d)(3) herein (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five (5) years. The chief of police or his designee may search the GCIC and the NCIC to determine whether the prospective employee appears as part of any record maintained therein. 
The chief of police or his designee shall approve or deny the application for an annual employment permit within five (5) days of receipt. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection (b), the city shall issue. the permit approving such employment immediately upon receipt of the permit fee from the prospective employee. Upon receipt of an annual permit under this chapter, the employee may begin or continue working on the premises of the licensed adult entertainment establishment. If approval of an annual permit is denied, the chief of police or his designee shall provide the prospective adult entertainment employee the reasons for the denial and the applicant may, within ten (10) days of said denial, appeal to the city manager who shall uphold or reverse the decision within thirty (30) days of such appeal. The applicant may begin or continue working at the adult entertainment establishment during the pendency of said appeal. If the chief of police or his designee neither approves nor denies an application for an annual permit within five (5) days of the date such application was received, then on expiration of the fifth day, the applicant shall have the right to begin or continue his or her employment in the manner allowed by the permit for which application was made with the understanding that the chief of police may, at any time after said employee begins or continues his or her employment under these circumstances, deny said application, at which time the employee must cease working at the adult entertainment establishment. Furthermore, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b)(6) of this section, if at any time after an employee is issued his or her permit, it is discovered by the city police department that said employee provided false information on his or her application to acquire that permit, the chief of police may revoke said employee's permit immediately. 
(3)  Categories of permits. There shall be two (2) employee permit categories: (1) a category for operator permits and adult entertainer permits, and (2) a category for permits for all other employees of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(4)  Permit fees. The governing body of the city shall establish a separate fee for each category of permit as further described in section 9-12-2 above. Each annual employee permit fee shall be in an amount which is reasonably tied to the costs of investigating the employee's record and background. The schedule of permit fees is available upon request from the chief of police or his designee. 
(5)  Permits to be worn by employees. All permits issued under this chapter to employees shall be kept in the premise's office and will be available for inspection by any city police officer or other law enforcement officer immediately upon request. It is the responsibility of the operator and/or licensee of an adult entertainment establishment to maintain an up-to-date. list and/or book containing a copy of the employment permits and the corresponding photographs of every employee of that adult entertainment establishment. Said list and/or book must be updated by the operator and/or licensee of an adult entertainment establishment each time said establishment acquires a new employee. A complete copy of this list and/or book must be provided to the chief of police or his designee within three (3) days of its creation and within three (3) days of the date it is updated each time it is updated. Furthermore, all employees of an adult entertainment establishment must wear an abbreviated form of their employment permits at all times while in or upon the licensed premises in such a manner that the abbreviated form is readily visible to any city police officer or other law enforcement officer as follows: 
a.  Each adult entertainer must wear a wristband on the adult entertainer's wrist which clearly displays the number of the adult entertainer's employment permit and the expiration date of said employment permit thereon. Said wristband shall be provided to the adult entertainer by the licensee or operator of the adult entertainment establishment at which the adult entertainer is employed and performs. The permit number and expiration date displayed on an adult entertainer's wristband must correspond to the permit number and expiration date displayed on the corresponding adult entertainer's employment permit, which shall be kept in the office of the premises, and also to the permit information on record with the city for that adult entertainer (including the list and/or book of employee permit information and photographs supplied by the adult entertainment establishment to the chief of police or his designee). Should an adult entertainer be present on the premises wearing no wristband, wearing a wristband displaying any other employee's permit number and/or expiration date, or wearing a wristband displaying a false permit number and/or expiration date that does not correspond to any other active employment permit, such action shall constitute a violation of this chapter by said adult entertainer. 
b.  Each other employee of an adult entertainment establishment, including operators (but not including adult entertainers), must wear on his or her person at all times while on the premises an identification card which clearly displays the number of the employee's employment permit, the expiration date of the employee's employment permit, and the employee's name as it appears on the employee's employment permit. This identification card must be worn by the employee in a location that is clearly visible to any city police officer or other law enforcement officer, such as around the employee's neck or elsewhere outside of said employee's clothing. This identification card shall be provided to the employee by the licensee or operator of the adult entertainment establishment at which the employee is employed. The information displayed on the employee's identification card must correspond to the information contained on said employee's employment permit, which shall be kept in the office of the premises, and to the information on record with the city for that employee's permit (including the list and/or book of employee permit information and photographs supplied by the adult entertainment establishment to the chief of police or his designee). Should an employee be present on the premises not wearing his or her identification card, wearing another employee's identification card, or wearing an identification card that does not correspond to any other active employment permit, such action shall constitute a violation of this chapter by said employee. 
c.  Any and all employees of an adult entertainment establishment must cooperate with the request of an officer of the city's police department or any other law enforcement agency to view an employee's wristband or identification card and said officer's efforts to confirm that an employee is validly and currently permitted to work at said adult entertainment establishment. Should any person be actively employed at an adult entertainment establishment in any capacity requiring the issuance of a permit under this chapter without having applied for an employment permit from the city, or having applied for an employment permit and been denied said permit, or having let a previously issued employment permit expire without renewing or reapplying for a permit, then this action shall constitute a violation of this chapter by said individual as well as by the operator of said adult entertainment establishment. 
(6)  Revocation of permit; procedure. 
a.  Any city regulatory authority may issue a citation to any adult entertainment employee, excluding operators, for violating the provisions of subsections (b), (c), (d), or (g) of this section; section 9-12-7(c), (d), (e), or (f) of this chapter. If three (3) such citations are affirmed within a twelve-month period, or if the adult entertainment employee is convicted of, or enters a guilty plea to an offense described in section 9-12-5(d)(3) of this chapter, said employee's permit to work or perform in an adult entertainment establishment shall be revoked by the chief of police or his designee. 
b.  Any city regulatory authority may issue a citation to any operator of an adult entertainment establishment for knowing violations of the provisions discussed in subsection (a) above, or of sections 9-12-3, 9-12-4, 9-12-6(a), (b), (d), (e), or (g)—(j), 9-12-7(a), (d), or (e), 9-12-10, 9-12-13, or 9-12-14 of this chapter. In addition, any city regulatory authority may issue a citation to any operator of an adult entertainment establishment if three (3) non-operator employees of the adult entertainment establishment each have three (3) citations affirmed against them for violating any of the code provisions set forth in subsection (b)(6)(a) above within a twelve-month period. If any three (3) citations are affirmed against an operator within a twelve-month period, or if the operator is convicted of, or enters a guilty plea to, an offense described in section 9-12-5(d)(3) of this chapter, then the permit of the operator to work at said adult entertainment establishment shall be revoked by the chief of police or his designee. 
c.  Furthermore, should any employee of an adult entertainment establishment wish to appeal or challenge the revocation of his or her permit, he or she must comply with the procedure set forth in section 9-12-12. 
(7)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors working for an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this chapter relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments. As used in this chapter, the terms "employee" and "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is an employee, an independent contractor, or any other kind of agent, and whether or not said person performs such services only for tips or is paid a salary, wage, or any other type of compensation by the adult entertainment establishment. The term "employee" or "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall not include a person on the premises for the sole purpose of repair or maintenance of the premises, or any building or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of any goods or merchandise to the premises. 
(c)  Amateurs. Any person performing as an adult entertainer must have a permit, regardless of their status or performance history. 
(d)  Hours and days of operation. An adult entertainment establishment that does not feature, show, or present live adult entertainment and does not employ, feature, or allow adult entertainers to perform within its premises may only be open between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., and shall only be open on those days and hours when businesses selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption are permitted to be open under the city's ordinances or Georgia state law. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, an adult entertainment establishment that does feature, show, or present live adult entertainment and does employ, feature, or allow adult entertainers to perform within its premises may be open from 9:00 a.m. until 3:30 a.m. Monday through Saturday (meaning that the establishment may be open until 3:30 a.m. on Sunday morning), provided that if said adult entertainment establishment featuring live adult entertainment is licensed to and does sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption, all alcohol service must cease by 3:00 a.m., and in the event of a conflict between this provision and any provision of the alcohol beverage ordinance of the city, this provision as to hours of authorized alcohol service, shall control. 
(e)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this chapter at the front entrance to the interior premises of the adult entertainment establishment or within twenty (20) linear feet of the front door entering the interior premises of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Consent to jurisdiction and service. Any licensee issued a license under this chapter and any employee issued an employee permit under this chapter shall be deemed to have consented to the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, the State Court of Clayton County, Georgia, and the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia, for purposes of the enforcement of this chapter, and shall also be deemed to have consented to service of any citation or summons issued under this chapter via the United States mail with sufficient first class postage affixed and properly addressed to the licensee or employee at the address set forth on the application for such license or permit, as the case may be. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to preclude a police officer or deputy sheriff from personally serving a licensee or employee. 
(g)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean at least illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(h)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this chapter shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(i)  Retention of records. All adult entertainment establishments shall be required to: 
(1)  Retain all records pertaining to its employees for a period of five (5) years from the employees' respective dates of hire; and 
(2)  Retain all video footage taken of the premises for security, monitoring, or any other purpose for a period of ninety (90) days from the date said footage was recorded. 
All such records, whether in physical, electronic, or video format, shall be open to inspection by any city police officer for official police business during normal operating hours upon twenty-four (24) hours' notice and request from the chief of police or his designee to the operator, owner, or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. All video footage and electronic records must be maintained in a common format that is easily accessible, downloadable, and readable by a majority of commercially-available software and/or video viewing programs. In the event the adult entertainment establishment utilizes specialized video software, a copy of that software must be provided to the city police department at no cost. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-7. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or any person who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Admission of minors. No licensee, operator, and/or owner of any adult entertainment establishment, or their designees and employees, shall permit entry by any person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises thereof. It shall be the responsibility of said licensee, operator, and/or owner to ensure prospective patrons of the adult entertainment establishment have presented valid and legal identification establishing their age before they may be allowed access to the premises. Should an adult entertainment establishment sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on its premises in accordance with sections 9-12-5(e) and subsection (e) of this section, the licensee, operator(s), and/or owner(s) thereof, and their designees and employees, may not permit entry to the premises to any patron under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(c)  Contact between patrons, employees. 
(1)  While on the licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment, no adult entertainer shall, while in a state of semi-nudity or complete nudity, touch in any manner any other person. Provided however, such adult entertainer may receive incidental touching in the course of receiving a tip in a receptacle worn for such purpose. Likewise, other than placing a tip into receptacle worn for such purpose, no person shall otherwise touch any such adult entertainer while in a state of semi nudity or complete nudity; provided however, while not in public areas, entertainers or employee assistants may assist entertainers with costumes and accessories. 
(2)  While on the licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment, no adult entertainer shall be permitted to, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of any other person. Likewise, no person shall be permitted to, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of the body of any adult entertainer. 
(d)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether an employee or patron, to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  The number of adult entertainment establishments employing and/or featuring adult entertainer(s) and live adult entertainment (as defined in section 9-12-2) authorized to also sell malt beverages, wine, and/or liquor shall be limited based upon population. Population shall be determined by the U.S. decennial census. The census in effect for establishing enforcement of this section shall be the U.S. census in effect at the adoption of this chapter until such time as a new U.S. census is established. There shall be no more than one (1) adult entertainment establishment employing and/or featuring adult entertainer(s) that sells malt beverages, wine, and/or liquor per fifteen thousand (15,000) residents of the city according to the U.S. census. It is the intent of this provision to require a population of fifteen thousand (15,000) for each license issued to operate such an adult entertainment establishment. Example: (1) population = 16,000, then one (1) license may be issued; (2) population = 29,999, then one (1) license may be issued; (3) population = 30,001 then two (2) licenses may be issued. If the holder of a license to operate such an adult entertainment establishment shall go out of business or if a license is revoked and the number of such licenses in effect shall continue to exceed the limit prescribed herein, such license may not be reinstated. Any alcoholic beverage sold or dispensed at an adult entertainment establishment must be sold or dispensed on the premises for on-premises consumption only. Any holder of a license to operate a adult entertainment establishment who desires to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at said establishment for on-premises consumption must apply for an obtain an additional permit to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages as a retail consumption dealer in accordance with the provisions of Title 9, Chapter 2 of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, as well as section 9-12-5(e) above. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages at an adult entertainment establishment without having complied with the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, section 9-12-5(e), and Title 9, Chapter 2 of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any license issued pursuant to the settlement agreement shall count toward the limits imposed in this subsection. 
Otherwise, as of January 1, 2010, it shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or licensee, owner, or operator under this chapter, to sell, trade, exchange, dispense, give away, consume, or allow the consumption of, any alcoholic beverage of any kind (including, but not limited to, spirituous liquors, malt beverages and wine) in or upon the premises of any other adult entertainment establishment licensed under this chapter whether or not live entertainment is offered by said adult entertainment establishment. In case of any conflict between this subsection and any other provision in Title 9, Chapter 12 of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, this subsection shall prevail. 
(f)  In addition to the crime of "public indecency" provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8, which is applicable throughout the city and the State of Georgia, and in order to provide for more specific and clearer regulations pertaining to nudity in adult entertainment establishments in the city as expressly permitted in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8(e), it shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in any portion of an adult entertainment establishment not featuring live adult entertainment or in any other business open to the public. Adult entertainers, and only adult entertainers, may work, dance, appear, and/or perform indoors in a state of nudity or semi-nudity within adult entertainment establishments at which live adult entertainment is permitted. In case of any conflict between this subsection and any other provision in Title 9, Chapter 12 of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia, this subsection shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-8. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person knowingly or willfully violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided for in the City Charter and section 1-1-8 of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-9. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-10. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, Clayton County, and the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The fire marshal and the city building code inspector shall have the authority, and be granted unobstructed access, to regularly inspect the licensed premises of any adult entertainment establishment, including the business offices of the operator, owner, and/or licensee, kitchen, and adult entertainers' dressing rooms, if any, at any time said premises are occupied to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city and Clayton County, including this chapter of the Code of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The city police department shall have the authority, and be granted unobstructed access, to inspect the licensed premises of any adult entertainment establishment, including the business offices of the operator, owner, and/or licensee, kitchen, and adult entertainers' dressing rooms, if any, at any time said premises are occupied in order to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-11. - Denial, fine, suspension, or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. Any of the following shall be grounds for implementation of a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), suspension, or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license: 
(1)  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
(2)  A knowing violation (either individually by the licensee or through the operation of the licensed premises) of sections 9-12-3, 9-12-4, 9-12-6, 9-12-7, 9-12-10, 9-12-13, or 9-12-14 of this chapter; 
(3)  The revocation of the employment permits of three (3) operators of the adult entertainment establishment pursuant to section 9-12-6(b)(6)(b) of this chapter within a twelve-month period; 
(4)  With respect to the applicant, licensee, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 9-12-5(d)(3) above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within ninety (90) days of actual receipt of a fully completed application for a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment, the chief of police or his designee shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than ninety (90) days after actual receipt of a fully completed application. In the event that such application is held without decision for a period of more than ninety (90) days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately thereafter notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The city shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the city, through the city manager or the chief of police, of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than ninety (90) days following actual receipt of the fully completed application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the city shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within five (5) business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the chief of police denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, then within five (5) business days following such denial, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or deposited in the United States mail, with sufficient first class postage affixed, properly addressed to the applicant at the address provided for such notices on the application. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-12. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  Fine, suspension, or revocation of licenses or permits; procedure. Whenever the chief of police or his designee finds the conditions described herein are met for implementation of a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), suspension, or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license or for revocation an employment permit issued pursuant to this chapter, he or she shall notify the holder of said license or permit immediately upon the taking of said action. If requested in writing by the holder of the license or permit, the chief of police shall schedule a hearing before the city manager of the city to consider such action. In the event a hearing is requested, the chief of police shall, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing, notify the holder of the license or permit of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The holder of the license or permit shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing with or without legal counsel. The city manager shall preside over the hearing and shall make his decision within ten (10) days of the hearing and shall notify the holder of the license or permit of his decision in writing within five (5) business days of making his decision. During the pendency of the above-described appeal and hearing procedure of a suspension or revocation, the holder of the license or permit may not exercise the privileges or rights formerly granted by said license or permit. 
In the event that an employee's permit to work or a license to operate is revoked by the chief of police or his designee, the revocation is upheld by the city manager, and the city manager's decision is upheld by a court of competent jurisdiction in the event of an appeal as discussed in subsection (c) below, then in such event, an appeal cost in an amount established by the governing body of the city shall be assessed against the appellant, which must be paid before the appellant is allowed to work or perform any services again on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment in the city. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the power to decide all questions brought before him and shall have the power to uphold the revocation by the chief of police of an employee permit or any other permit issued under this chapter if he finds grounds as stated in section 9-12-6(b)(6) (employee permit), and the power to uphold the decision of the chief of police, or to determine other action as appropriate including issuance of a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), suspension, or revocation of a license, if he finds grounds as stated in section 9-12-11(a)(2) (license), or any other provision of this chapter. 
(c)  Any applicant for an adult license or employee permit, license holder, or permit holder aggrieved by any decision of the city manager, or any decision of the city, or any of its officials, employees or agents pursuant to this chapter, may seek an immediate review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia initiating a certiorari proceeding within thirty (30) days pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-13. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of ninety (90) consecutive calendar days after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said ninety (90) calendar day period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-14. - Physical layout of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Layout of adult entertainment establishments providing live adult entertainment. No adult entertainment establishment as defined in subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of the definition of an "adult entertainment establishment" contained in section 9-12-2 above shall provide any booth, room, private room or "VIP" room, cubicle or enclosed space for customers or patrons to go where adult entertainers or other employees are also permitted to go, excepting only restrooms, and no live adult entertainment shall be conducted or viewed inside any booth, room, cubicle or enclosed space or restroom. All live adult entertainment or other interaction between employees and patrons in such establishments shall only take place in an open main area, which are open to view from all other areas of the premises (as defined in section 9-12-2 above) of such adult entertainment establishments, are not blocked or partially blocked by the erection of doors or walls, and which main area must be accessible by two (2) entrances/exits into and/or out of the interior of the premises. 
(b)  Layout of other adult entertainment establishments. All adult entertainment establishments other than those defined in subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4) of the definition of "adult entertainment establishment" contained in section 9-12-2 above, are permitted to have booths, rooms, cubicles or enclosed spaces and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type device or any view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the adult entertainment establishment is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be nonabsorbent, smooth-textured, and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured, and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, or cause any bodily discharge while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 9-12-15. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of Forest Park, Georgia that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are and were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and city council of Forest Park, Georgia to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of Forest Park, Georgia that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, that each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase therein. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of Forest Park, Georgia to the greatest extent allowed by law, that no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter. In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and city council of Forest Park that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this chapter, and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 14-25, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
CHAPTER 13. - BODY PIERCING 

Sec. 9-13-1. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate those business performing body piercings in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the improper piercing of minors and to ensure that such businesses are maintained in a clean and safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 9-13-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases when used herein shall be construed as follows: 
Association of professional piercers: (APP) means an international health and safety organization setting minimal guidelines for body piercing, hygiene and safety. 
Autoclave means a machine that sterilizes instruments or materials with high pressure and heat or pressurized steam. 
Body piercing shall mean to pierce the skin by so as to form an opening in the body, tongue or ear, other than in the ear lobe, for the placement of jewelry or other object; provided, however, that the word "piercing" shall not mean a the piercing of a person's earlobe. 
Body piercing artist shall mean any person who actually performs the work of body piercing. 
Body piercing establishment shall mean any room or place where body piercing is practiced or where the business of body piercing is conducted or any part thereof. 
Body piercing operator shall mean any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any body piercing establishment, whether actually performing the work of body piercing or not. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 9-13-3. - Application to be made to police department; minimum age; fingerprinting, photographing, medical certificate required. 
Any person desiring to operate a body piercing establishment or desiring to operate as a body piercing operator or body piercing artist shall make application for a permit to the police department, on forms supplied by that department. The minimum age of each applicant shall be eighteen (18) years of age. Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken by the police department for the purpose of conducting a criminal background check. Applicants for permits shall also furnish to the detective police department two (2) photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two and one-half (2½) inches by two and three-fourths (2¾) inches. Applicants for permits shall present to the police department a medical certificate from a medical doctor certifying that the person is sound physically, mentally, has good eyesight and is not infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. If operator or artist is a member of the Association of Professional Piercers (APP) such membership documentation shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 9-13-4. - Permit issued in name of applicant; nontransferable. 
All permits granted shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefore, shall contain the address of the body piercing establishment where the applicant shall operate, and shall not be transferable. For each permit issued, there shall be an investigative fee in an amount established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 08-11, § 36, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 9-13-5. - Body piercing of certain persons prohibited. 
No body piercing operator or body piercing artist shall perform body piercing on any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) as proscribed by O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71.1 unless said minor is accompanied by the custodial parent or guardian or the prior written, notarized consent of the custodial parent or guardian is obtained. No body piercing operator or body piercing artist shall perform body piercing on any person who appears to be under either the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants, or depressants or any person of unsound mind. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 9-13-6. - Grounds for revocation of permit. 
Any person who shall conduct a body piercing establishment or engage in the business as a body piercing operator or body piercing artist without first securing a permit therefore shall be unlawful, in violation of this article and subject to prosecution under Code section 1-1-8. Persons who shall knowingly violate any of the sections of this article shall subject the permit to revocation upon appropriate notice of hearing and subject to prosecution under Code section 1-1-8. A body piercing artist's or body piercing operator's permit shall be subject to revocation upon proof that the holder of the permit has become infected with a disease, which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 9-13-6. - Location restricted. 
No permit shall issue for the operation of a body piercing establishment or to any person engaged as a body piercing operator or body piercing artist in any area which is zoned for residential use by the zoning ordinance of the city as it may now or hereafter exist. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 9-13-7. - Permit not in lieu of business license. 
The permits issued hereunder shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 9-13-8. - Minimum requirements for the operation of a body piercing establishment. 
(1)  All needles should be pre-sterilized, used on only one (1) person, in one (1) sitting, and immediately disposed of in a medical sharps container. 
(2)  All forceps, tubes, etc. are to be pre-sterilized, stored in sterile bags, and shall be used only on one (1) person, in one (1) sitting. After each use they must be autoclaved. 
(3)  All reusable, non-sterilizable implements, such as calipers, shall be nonporous and disinfected after each use with bleach solution or a commercial hard surface disinfectant liquid. 
(4)  Supplies, including corks, rubber bands, etc. shall be pre-sterilized in an autoclave or cleaned with disinfecting liquids, stored in a clean, closed container, and disposed of immediately after a single use. 
(5)  A new pair of latex gloves (sterile or non-sterile) shall be worn for every procedure. Gloves should be changed whenever the slightest chance of cross-contamination might occur. 
(6)  The rooms used for piercings shall be enclosed and used exclusively for piercings and jewelry insertion. The room(s) used for piercing, as well as the bathroom and other common areas, shall be kept scrupulously clean and disinfected frequently. All surfaces should be nonporous, to allow them to be cleaned with bleach solution or other disinfecting liquids approved by the FDA whenever cross-contamination might occur. 
(7)  All jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) shall be disinfected with a non-hazardous hard-surface disinfectant such as Madacide. All jewelry contaminated or potentially contaminated with blood borne pathogens shall be autoclaved. 
(8)  All jewelry shall be autoclaved prior to use. Only the following types of jewelry shall be used in initial piercing: 
a.  Jewelry made of surgical implant grade stainless steel 316L, 316L or LVM ASTM F-138. 
b.  Solid 14 karat or higher white or yellow gold. 
c.  Niobium (Nb). 
d.  Surgical implant grade Ti6A4V ELI. 
e.  ASTN F-136. 
f.  Solid platinum. 
g.  Dense low porosity plastic such as Tygon or PTFE. 
h.  Threaded jewelry for initial piercings must have internal tapping (no threads on posts) starting from sixteen (16) gauge. 
i.  All jewelry must be free of nicks, scratches, burrs and polishing compounds. 
j.  Ring ends should be rounded. 
k.  Threads 1.2 mm for fourteen (14) gauge or .080 for ten (10) gauge. 
l.  Ear piercing guns are not adequately sterilizable and shall not be used. 
m.  All body piercing operators shall attend a blood borne pathogens training class, such as that given by OSHA, Red Cross, or The National Safety Council. 
n.  All establishments shall have separate area for employee hand washing, containing liquid soap and paper towel dispensers. 
o.  All establishments shall have a fully functional autoclave or sterilizer. Autoclaves are to be tested monthly for spores. 
p.  All clients shall receive aftercare instructions. 
q.  No person working in or operating any body-piercing establishment shall be under the influence of alcohol, legal or illegal substances. All health, safety, and legal standards as required by state and local authorities shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Chapter 14. - Commercial Parking Lots[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017, repealed former Ch. 14, §§ 9-14-1—9-14-16, and enacted a new Ch. 14 as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-21, § 1, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 16-02, § 8, 1-19-2016. 

Sec. 9-14-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the City of Forest Park Commercial Parking Lot Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-2. - Purposes. 
The regulation of the location, size, placement and certain features of commercial parking lots is necessary to enable the public to utilize such facilities in the City of Forest Park without difficulty, confusion, or fear of one's safety, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, and to protect property and property values therein. Commercial parking lots are recognized as a development standard in keeping with other developmental standards such as uses permitted, building setbacks, minimum lot size, maximum lot coverage, minimum landscaping, etc. It is therefore the intention of the governing body for the City of Forest Park to establish regulations governing the location, size, placement, and features of commercial parking lots that will: 
(1)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, general welfare, and property values; 
(2)  Enhance the economy, business and industry of the City of Forest Park by promoting safe, reasonable and orderly commercial parking lots; 
(3)  Restrict commercial parking lots which do not provide for the safety of their patrons and their vehicles; 
(4)  Promote commercial parking lots which are compatible with their surroundings in terms of zoning, existing land use, and architectural guidelines; 
(5)  Balance the rights of enterprises to engage in business and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of commercial parking lots; 
(6)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and potential visual blight caused by commercial parking lots; and 
(7)  Ensure fair and consistent enforcement of commercial parking lot regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-3. - Compliance with chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate any commercial parking lot in the municipal limits of the city without complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-4. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall have their customary dictionary definition, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section, and article in which they occur. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense as the context may require. Words used in the future tense include the present tense as the context requires. For purposes of this chapter, the following words or terms shall be defined as follows: 
Attendant means a person on duty at any commercial parking lot employed by or an agent of the owner or operator thereof. 
Building includes the word "structure" and means any structure of every kind regardless of its similarity to a building. 
Commercial parking lot means any facility for the parking of motorized vehicles, for which service or facility the operator charges a fee. 
Commercial parking lot reservoir means an area located immediately inside the facility entrance and is to be used for the temporary storage of entering vehicles when the arrival rate exceeds the storage rate. 
Commercial parking lot operator means any person, association, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or any other business arrangement or joint venture who is the owner of or is responsible for the operation of a commercial parking lot, notwithstanding whether such operator is in fact the legal owner of record of the premises itself. 
Department means the City of Forest Park Department of Planning, Building and Zoning. 
Environmental barriers means such barricades, chains, walls, gates, wheel stops or other like structures around the perimeter of any commercial parking lot as may be required to reasonably regulate and control the ingress to and egress from any such lot and to eliminate the encroachment of any vehicles parked on a commercial parking lot onto or over adjacent properties, including sidewalks, streets, alleys, etc. 
Erected includes the words "constructed," "moved," "located," or "relocated." 
Primary establishment(s) refers to the business entity or entities whose parking lot is being shared during non-business hours, with a commercial parking lot operator for the purpose of shared-use paid parking operations. 
Self-parking means the patron parks his/her own vehicle, retains the keys to the vehicle, and pays the attendant or drop box upon exiting the commercial parking lot. 
Shared-use lot refers to the operation of a commercial parking lot by an operator on property of which a portion is otherwise required of an establishment for the purpose of parking vehicles during that establishment's business hours. 
Special events includes, but is not limited to, conventions, sporting events, concerts or any other event that generates a large volume of vehicles near the commercial parking lot at times other than normal business hours. 
Ticket means a distinctive piece of paper, which shall have printed thereon a ticket number and the full name, address, and contact number for the operator or owner of the commercial parking lot. 
Use fee means a fee paid by permit holders to operate as a commercial parking lot. 
Valet parking means the attendant parks the vehicle and retains the key to the vehicle. Payment may be rendered upon entrance to a commercial parking lot or upon regaining the keys prior to exiting a commercial parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-5. - Occupational tax certificate and commercial parking lot permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or to operate or cause to be operated, any commercial parking lot within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained: (1) an occupational tax certificate as required by Title 9, Chapter 1, section 9-1-1 et seq. and Title 3, Chapter 3, section 3-3-1 et seq. of the city's Code of Ordinances; and (2) a commercial parking lot permit as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-6. - Required application. 
Before any lot or building may be used for a commercial parking lot, and before any commercial parking lot may be expanded, the owner of the lot or building or the operator of the commercial parking lot shall obtain a permit for that use or that expansion from the department. 
(1)  An application for a permit to operate, or to cause to be operated, a commercial parking lot shall be made on a form or forms provided by the department and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The street address and the tax parcel identification number of the parcel upon which the proposed commercial parking lot is to be located; 
b.  The number of vehicular parking spaces the proposed commercial parking lot would contain and the maximum number of vehicles that could be parked in the commercial parking lot at one (1) time; 
c.  A designation as to whether the use of the proposed commercial parking lot would be solely for such purpose or whether the proposed commercial parking lot would be operated as a shared-use lot; 
d.  If the proposed commercial parking lot would be operated as a shared-use lot, the name, square footage, and business hours of the primary establishment(s); and 
e.  The name, address, and contact telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Two (2) site plans shall be attached to the application form and filed with the department. The plans shall be drawn to an engineer's scale such that the following information is readily identifiable: 
a.  The proposed location of the entrances and exits to the proposed commercial parking lot; 
b.  The widths of access streets; 
c.  The capacity and location of any commercial parking lot reservoir to be located in the proposed commercial parking lot; 
d.  Information showing the intended flow of traffic within the commercial parking lot; 
e.  Information showing the size and location of each vehicular parking space and each aisle of parking spaces of the proposed commercial parking lot; 
f.  If the proposed commercial parking lot would be a structure or contain structures, the location, width, and general design of ramps or elevators to be used inside any such structure; 
g.  If the proposed commercial parking lot would be operated as a shared-use lot, the location and the number of the vehicular parking spaces to be used during the primary establishment's business hours; 
h.  Any other information required to enable the city to make a fair and complete appraisal of the operation of the proposed parking facility; and 
i.  All landscaping features, which shall comprise a minimum of five (5) percent of the parking area. 
(3)  If the proposed commercial parking lot would contain multiple levels, the application shall include plans for such multiple levels showing: 
a.  The ramp or elevator design for each level; 
b.  The intended flow of traffic for each level; and 
c.  Information showing the size and location of each vehicular parking space and each isle of parking spaces for each level. 
(4)  A copy of (i) the duly recorded warranty deed for the parcel upon which the proposed commercial parking lot is to be located if the applicant is the title holder of such parcel; or (ii) the lease agreement or management contract for the parcel upon which the proposed commercial parking lot is to be located if the applicant is not the title holder of such parcel and any such lease agreement or management contract shall contain the current names, addresses, and phone numbers of the owner, leaseholder or property manager of said parcel. 
(5)  A certified geological survey shall be attached to the application that demonstrates the proposed lot can be safely constructed for use as commercial parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-7. - Required permit fee and use fee. 
(a)  An applicant for a commercial parking lot permit shall remit an application fee to the department. No such application shall be deemed to be complete until the full amount of such application fee has been paid. This application fee shall consist of a fixed amount as set from time-to-time by the governing body. 
(b)  The application fee shall be non-refundable if the permit is rejected by the department or due to circumstances that are not under the control of the city. If the applicant chooses to reapply for the permit, the applicant will have to pay another application fee. 
(c)  A commercial parking lot operator shall pay a quarterly use fee for each commercial parking lot that he operates within the city. Such use fee shall be in a fixed amount as set from time-to-time by the governing body to cover the costs of enforcement of this chapter, and said use fee must be paid when due in order for the continued operation of the parking facility. 
(d)  A commercial parking lot permit shall be valid until the last day of the calendar year in which it is issued. No earlier than forty (40) days prior to and no later than thirty (30) days from the expiration date, each commercial parking lot operator must renew its permit. 
(e)  Any expired commercial parking lot permit which is not renewed within three (3) months after the expiration date thereof, shall be considered void, requiring the operation of such facility to immediately cease. The operation of the commercial parking lot shall not resume until a new application is submitted to and approved by the department. 
(f)  If the quarterly use fee remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days or more after the due date thereof, the city may order the permittee of the commercial parking lot to cease operations until the unpaid use fee has been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-8. - Investigation of application; decision on application; appeal from denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application that contains all information required by section 9-14-6, the department shall perform a full and thorough investigation on the request, considering such factors as: 
(1)  The size of the proposed facility, especially in relation to the vehicular capacity of streets of ingress and egress; 
(2)  The physical arrangements for ingress and egress; 
(3)  The commercial parking lot reservoir for incoming and outgoing vehicles; 
(4)  The effect of any plan for traffic improvement; 
(5)  If the proposed commercial parking lot is to be operated as a shared-use lot, the minimum number of parking stalls required of the primary establishment during business hours; and 
(6)  Any and all other factors required by this chapter or any other provision in the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Following the examination required under subsection (a) of this section and a determination that the proposed commercial parking lot would comply with all requirements of this chapter and all requirements of any other applicable provision of the Code of Ordinances, the department shall have the authority to grant any application for a commercial parking lot permit. The decision to grant or to deny an application for a commercial parking lot permit shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days after the department receives a completed application. In the event the department denies an application for a commercial parking lot permit, it shall provide written notice of such denial to the applicant by mailing such notice, return receipt requested, to the address of the applicant as listed in the application. 
(c)  An applicant may appeal the denial of an application for a commercial parking lot permit to the governing body by filing a written appeal with the city manager within ten (10) business days after the receipt of the notice of denial. The governing body shall hold a hearing on such appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the notice of appeal and shall render a final decision on the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of that hearing. 
(d)  An appeal from any decision by the governing body under this section shall be by a petition for a writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-9. - Facility standards. 
(a)  Environmental barriers . All commercial parking lots shall contain environmental barriers in sufficient number and location as determined by the department. The permittee of such commercial parking lot shall maintain any environmental barrier located upon the property. 
(b)  Tickets . 
(1)  A ticket is to be issued upon the valet parking of any vehicle on a commercial parking lot if the attendant parks the vehicle and retains the key. This section shall not preclude the issuance of a monthly permit in lieu of a ticket. 
(2)  A ticket is to be issued for the self-parking of any vehicle on a commercial parking lot. Any such ticket shall be issued upon the entrance of the vehicle into the commercial parking lot. 
(3)  Commercial parking operators shall take digitally time and date stamped pictures of the vehicle in the parking space and the non-payment in the meter box before booting or towing a vehicle which is said to be in violation of any off street parking meter. 
(4)  A receipt is to be issued upon request. 
(c)  Attendant . This chapter shall not require the operator of a commercial parking lot to employ an attendant. However, at any facility where any such attendant is provided, the attendant must be dressed in proper and professional attire. Said attire shall be designated by the operator and shall readily identify such attendant as an employee of the operator of the commercial parking lot. 
(d)  Lighting . All areas of a paid parking facility licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are allowed on the premises. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(e)  Security . The parking lot operator shall provide and maintain appropriate security measures, such as monitored cameras, with adequate resolution and lighting, and security officers. 
(f)  Inspection of licensed premises . The fire marshal and the city building code inspector shall have the authority to regularly inspect public parking facilities to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city and Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-10. - Required paid parking notice signs. 
(a)  First time applicants for a commercial parking lot permit shall be required to pay for the fabrication of a notice sign setting forth the following: 
(1)  The telephone number of the principal office of the operator of the commercial parking lot; 
(2)  The name of such operator; and 
(3)  The street address of the parcel upon which the commercial parking lot is located. 
(b)  The notice sign shall be posted at the main entrance to the commercial parking lot in such a manner so that it is easily viewable from the driver's seat of an entering vehicle. 
(c)  The sign required under this section shall comply with the requirements of the city's sign ordinance and any other applicable requirements of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-11. - Posting of fee structure. 
An instructional sign setting forth the rates for any and all fees shall be posted upon each parcel upon which a commercial parking lot is located. Such sign shall inform each parking patron of the fee for the use of the commercial parking lot. Such sign shall be posted at the main entrance to the commercial parking lot in such a manner so it is easily viewable from the driver's seat of an entering vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-12. - Fee schedules. 
Fee schedules shall remain constant during all seasons and events. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-13. - Monthly parking facilities. 
In commercial parking lots that provide only monthly parking, the sections of this chapter pertaining to issuance of a ticket shall not apply. However, all other sections of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-14. - Commercial parking lot reservoirs. 
In a commercial parking lot where attendants, ticket dispensers or other devices are used to regulate or control entering vehicles, the commercial parking lot reservoir shall be located between the street right-of-way and the point of control. Each vehicle space in the commercial parking lot reservoir shall be twenty-two (22) feet long and ten (10) feet wide and, in addition, sufficient space shall be provided for the turning and maneuvering of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-15. - Maintenance of parking. 
Parking shall be maintained in accordance with the International Code of Congress (ICC) Property Maintenance Code, as may be amended from time-to-time. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 9-14-16. - Penalties for violation of this chapter. 
Any person who owns or operates a commercial parking lot without obtaining the required permit, who owns or operates a commercial parking lot with a void or invalid permit, or violates any other provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense and punished as provided in Title 1, Chapter 1, section 1-1-8, entitled "General Penalty" of the code of ordinances for the city. Each day's unlawful violation shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. The chief of police or his delegate shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1 (Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
CHAPTER 15 - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 9-15-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Forest Park Special Events Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates another meaning: 
Applicant means any person submitting an application for a special event permit pursuant to this chapter. 
Director means the Director of the Planning, Building and Zoning Department of the City of Forest Park, including his or her designee. In the absence of the employment by the city of a director of the planning, building and zoning department, the term shall mean the individual designed by the city to oversee enforcement of this chapter. 
Governing authority means the elected body of the City of Forest Park, comprised of the mayor and five (5) council members having the authority to adopt and to enforce this chapter. 
Parade means a type of special event consisting of a group of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five (5) or more vehicles and ten (10) or more persons, or a combination of three (3) or more vehicles and five (5) or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along a street or a sidewalk of the city. The term also includes a march or a procession. Specifically excluded from this definition is a funeral procession. 
Permit fee means the monetary charge required to be paid pursuant to this chapter for the issuance of a special event permit. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, trust, organization or any other entity of any kind. 
Producer means any individual responsible for planning, producing and conducting a special event. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel. 
Special event means any organized for-profit or non-profit activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education which (i) takes place on public property or (ii) takes place on private property but requires special public services, and which is permitted by the city under this chapter. Examples of special events include, but are not limited to: fairs, tours, grand opening celebrations, ceremonies, demonstrations, shows, exhibitions, pageants, athletic event or procession of any kind, races, parades, marches, rallies, assemblies, festivals, film production, concerts, holiday celebrations, bicycle runs, and block parties or other similar display, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park, or other public property within the municipal limits of the city that interferes with the normal flow of motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic or interferes with the use of public property by the public. 
Special event permit means a permit issued under this chapter. 
Special event venue means that area for which a special event permit has been issued. 
Street means any right-of-way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to use for the public for purposes of motor vehicular travel. The term includes an interstate highway, a state highway, or any road. 
Vendor means any person who sells or offers to sell any goods, food or beverages within a special event venue. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-3. - Special event permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, manage, aid, start or solicit attendance at any special event unless a special event permit previously has been obtained from the director for such special event. 
(b)  Any special permit issued under this chapter shall be temporary and shall not vest in the holder any permanent property rights in such permit. 
(c)  Unless specifically provided in this chapter, a special event is subject to and must comply with any and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-4. - Application for special event permit. 
(a)  Any person seeking issuance of a special event permit shall file a written application with the director. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the director. Such application, containing all information required by this chapter, shall be filed: 
(1)  Where the proposed special event would involve any activity other than film production, the application for a special event permit, containing all information required by this chapter, shall be filed: 
a.  Not less than two (2) weeks before the date on which the proposed special event is to occur if city resources are not required during such event; 
b.  Not less than thirty (30) days before the date on which the proposed special event is to occur if city resources are required to be used during such event; and 
c.  Not more than one (1) year before the date on which the proposed special event is to occur. 
(2)  Where the proposed special event would involve only film production, the application for a special event permit, containing all information required by this chapter, shall be filed at least five (5) days before, but no earlier than one (1) year before, the proposed filming is to take place. One (1) special event permit for a special event involving only film production may be issued in a quarter for any one (1) residential location. A special event permit issued for a special event involving only film production shall be no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in duration unless previously requested and approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the governing authority. 
(c)  All producers of a special event shall be properly identified on the application; provided, however, that a special event permit shall be issued only in the name of an individual. If a person other than an individual is producing the special event, a designated individual shall be named for the purposes of the special event permit and this individual shall be solely responsible for full compliance with all requirements of this chapter, all provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances, and all applicable provisions of Georgia or federal law. 
(d)  The application for a special event permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and purpose of the special event. 
(2)  The name, address, email address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the special event. 
(3)  If the special event is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by a person other than an individual, the name, address, email address and telephone number of the main office or headquarters of the person and of the authorized and responsible individuals in charge of such person. 
(4)  The name, address, email address and telephone number of the producer(s) of the special event. 
(5)  A site plan with a map or diagram showing the area to be used, the location of any equipment, vendors, game booths, stands, stages, seating and other facilities, the areas to be used for parking, the location of toilet facilities and water as necessary for the event, and any areas where alcohol will be served or sold including a description of the barriers to be used to enclose such areas. 
(6)  The proposed date, location and hours of operation of the special event. 
(7)  If a parade, identification of the proposed route it will travel, including the starting point and the termination point. 
(8)  If a parade, the approximate number of individuals, animals and vehicles which constitute the parade, including a description of the vehicles and the types of animals. 
(9)  A schedule of proposed activities to occur. 
(10)  The approximate number of spectators and participants that will attend or participate in any part of the special event. If the special event is to take place on more than one (1) day, the approximate number of spectators and participants per day. If a spectator or participant is present for only a part of the special event, that person shall be included in the approximate number; 
(11)  A statement as to whether the special event will occupy all or a portion of the widths of any street(s) proposed to be used. 
(12)  If the proposed special event is to be held in a city park or other public area, a statement as to whether the special event will occupy all or only a portion of the area; 
(13)  The location of any assembly areas for the special event; 
(14)  The time at which units of the special event will begin to assemble at any assembly area; 
(15)  A description of any public address or loudspeaker system to be used; 
(16)  A description of the items that will be offered for sale during the special event, including food, merchandise, and alcoholic beverages; 
(17)  If the special event is designed to be held by, on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file with the director a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the special event authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(18)  The estimated number of vehicles requiring parking at the special event; 
(19)  Whether any temporary outdoor structures are proposed to be built, describing them in detail and their location; 
(20)  Plans for parking and restroom facilities; 
(21)  Plans for sanitation control, including the identification of the number, type, and location of any trash receptacles to be placed at the special event venue; 
(22)  Plans for crowd and traffic control; 
(23)  Plans for fire inspection/prevention and/or fire code enforcement; 
(24)  If applicable, identification of any closures of streets or sidewalks requested; 
(25)  A certification that the applicant will be financially responsible for any fees or costs that may be imposed for the special event; 
(26)  Such other information as the director or a designated representative may deem reasonably necessary to determine that the permit meets the requirements of this article or any other applicable city ordinance. 
(e)  An application for a special event permit for a proposed special event that would involve only film production shall include the following information: 
(1)  Purpose of the filming and the type of production; 
(2)  Location manager or production manager name, address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the sponsoring entity or person in addition to the person named in subsection (a) of this section; 
(3)  Proposed date, location, and hours of operation, which in no event shall be earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 11:00 p.m. in a residential zoned location and in no event shall be earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 12:00 midnight in a commercial zoned locations; 
(4)  Proposed schedule of filming activities; 
(5)  Full disclosure of any special effect (including, but not limited to, fire, explosives, gunfire) to be used during the film production; 
(6)  Full disclosure of any nondomestic animal to be present during the film production and if there will be the consumption or sale of alcohol on film site; 
(7)  Site plan showing production location and base camp; 
(8)  Proof of permission of property owner for use of the production location and base camp; 
(9)  Proof of notification of neighbors and businesses affected by production location. 
(f)  In addition, any film production, which would occur in a residential zoned location and would involve any of the four (4) items below, will require a meeting with the special event/film permit review staff a minimum of one (1) week prior to the submission of the application: 
(1)  Outdoor filming; 
(2)  Film project that lasts three (3) or more days; 
(3)  Full and partial lane and street closures; 
(4)  Requested variances to any City of Forest Park ordinance. 
(g)  Late applications. The director of planning, building and zoning or a designated representative, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority to consider any application which is filed less than two (2) weeks before the date the special event is proposed to be held; or in the case of a film project, less than five (5) days. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-5. - Administrative review. 
(a)  Within two (2) business days of the receipt of a completed application for a special event permit, the director shall send a copy of such application and any accompanying documents to each department of the city. Each department of the city receiving a copy of such application and any accompanying documents shall review those items and shall note the resources which it will be required to perform in connection with the proposed special event, the number of personnel needed to perform such activities, the length of time to perform such services, and the estimated costs to perform such services. Within five (5) business days of its receipt of the application and any accompanying documents from the director, each department shall report to the director its findings on the required resources, including the estimated costs. 
(b)  Each department of the city receiving a copy of such application and any accompanying documents may impose in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the proposed special event, to comply with other laws and regulations, and/or ensure the safety, health and welfare of the public. Such written conditions or restrictions shall be forwarded to the director within five (5) business days of the receipt of the application and accompanying documents. In the event the application for a special event permit is granted, the director shall make any such conditions or restrictions a part of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-6. - Standard for deciding a special event permit application. 
(a)  Issuance of special event permit. The director shall issue a special event permit only when, after considering the application and other information submitted by the applicant, he determines the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate plan for crowd and traffic control, as well as security has been presented, and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty, uniformed Forest Park police officer(s) shall be utilized. If Forest Park police officer(s) are not available, then a P.O.S.T. certified police officer(s) may be utilized after they have been verified by the director and obtained by the producer. 
(2)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate plan for fire inspection/prevention and/or fire code enforcement and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty, uniformed fire personnel as approved by the Forest Park fire chief and/or his designee has been verified by the director and obtained by the producer. 
(3)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate EMS plan and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty medics who are state-certified EMT or paramedics, as approved by the Forest Park Fire Chief and/or his designee have been verified by the city and obtained by the producer. 
(4)  A special event permit may be issued only after adequate waste disposal facilities have been determined by the city and obtained by the producer. 
(5)  The sound level of the proposed special event will not violate any provision of the Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  The conduct of the proposed special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or place of occurrence. 
(7)  The conduct of the proposed special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the city. 
(8)  The concentration of individuals, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas. 
(9)  The conduct of the proposed special event will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment in route to a fire. 
(10)  The conduct of the proposed special event is not likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to promote immediate lawless activity. 
(11)  If a parade, the proposed special event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays. 
(12)  The information in the application and any accompanying documents is complete and contains all information required by section 9-15-4(d) and does not contain any false material information. 
(13)  The applicant has remitted all applicable fees and costs required by this chapter or any other provision of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Denial or revocation of a special event permit. 
(1)  The director shall deny an application for a special event permit for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The proposed special event will unnecessarily disrupt vehicular or pedestrian traffic within the city such that the potential disruption could not be practically remedied. 
b.  The proposed special event will interfere with access to fire stations or fire hydrants. 
c.  The location of the proposed special event will cause undue hardship to nearby businesses or residences. 
d.  The proposed special event will require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the city. 
e.  The information in the application and any accompanying documents fails to contain all information required by section 9-15-4(d), or contains any materially false information. 
f.  The proposed special event would interfere or conflict with a previously scheduled special event or with construction, maintenance or other city activities. 
g.  There is a documented history of problems relating to the proposed special event in the past. 
h.  There is a documented history that the applicant or promoter has not properly managed or paid all fees for a prior special event. 
i.  The proposed special event would violate section 11-1-26. 
j.  The producer fails to comply with any terms required by this chapter. 
k.  The granting of the application would violate any provision of this chapter, would violate any provision of the Code of Ordinances, or would violate any provision of Georgia or United States law. 
1.  The chief of the Forest Park Police Department, the chief of the Forest Park Fire Department, or their designees determines that the health, welfare or safety of the public would be endangered by the special event. 
(2)  At any time before the occurrence of, or during the conduct of, a special event, the director shall revoke a previously issued special event permit for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The director discovers that the application for such permit failed to contain all information required by section 9-15-4(d) or contained any materially false information. 
b.  The producer failed to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit. 
c.  The producer failed to arrange or adequately remit all required fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the city. 
d.  The existence of a disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency arising after the issuance of the special event permit that the city, in its sole discretion, determines would likely result in the special event negatively impacting the public health, safety and welfare. 
e.  The Chief of the Forest Park Police Department, the Chief of the Forest Park Fire Department, or their designees determines that the health, welfare or safety of the public would be endangered by the special event. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-7. - Time for decision on special event permit application; issuance and content of special event permits. 
(a)  the director shall render a decision on an application for a special event permit within ten (10) business days following the receipt of a completed application and any accompanying documents. If the application is granted, the director shall notify the applicant, in writing, of that decision within said ten-day period. If the application is denied, the director shall hand deliver or mail to the applicant within said ten-day period a written notice stating the reasons for such denial. The time period set forth in this section shall not commence until the applicant has provided to the director all information required by section 9-15-4(d). The date of issuance of the decision of director shall be the date of mailing or hand delivery of the decision. 
(b)  Where an application is granted, the director shall hand deliver or mail to the applicant the special event permit within three (3) business days of the city's receipt of the full amount of the initial permit fee required by section 9-15-9 and any other fees which may be required by any other applicable ordinance or regulation. 
(c)  Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, the director shall send a copy of such permit to the city manager, the Chief of the Forest Park Police Department, the Chief of the Forest Park Fire Department, the director of recreation and leisure and the director of public works. 
(d)  Each special event permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  A designation of the date(s) on which the special event is to be held. 
(2)  A designation of the starting and ending time(s) for each date on which the special event is to be held. 
(3)  The route to be traversed. 
(4)  The portions of any street or sidewalk to be traversed that may be occupied. 
(5)  The portions of any public property that may be occupied. 
(6)  Any conditions or restrictions imposed by any department of the city under section 9-15-5(c). 
(7)  Such other information as the director shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-8. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any person whose application for a special event permit is denied shall have the right to appeal such denial, in writing, to the city manager. Such appeal must be received by the city manager within ten (10) calendar days of the director's issuance of the decision. an appeal is deemed received by the city manager upon receipt, when hand delivered, and within three (3) days of mailing, if sent by mail. The city manager or his designee shall consider and render a written decision upon the appeal within ten (10) business days of receipt of a request for the same and mail his or her decision to applicant. The city manager or his designee shall review the manner in which the director evaluated the application for a special event permit pursuant to the criteria set out in this chapter. In the event the city manager or his designee approves the application, the director thereafter shall issue the special event permit pursuant to section 9-15-7. 
(b)  Any appeal of the decision of the city manager or his designee denying an application for a special event permit rendered under this section shall be taken to the superior court by a petition for a writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-9. - Permit fees. 
(a)  In the event that an application for a special event permit is granted, the director shall determine and calculate the permit fee based on all services to be provided by the government for such event. The director shall determine the aggregate amount of costs for such services by the information provided by each department under section 9-15-5(b). The initial permit fee shall be the total amount of such estimated costs. if, at the conclusion of the special event, the actual cost of government services is greater than the amount of the initial permit fee, the applicant and/or the producer shall be responsible for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within thirty (30) days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter and shall subject the applicant and/or the producer to late fees and other penalties up to and including the denial of future applications for special event permits. 
(b)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a special event permit and no later than ten (10) business days prior to such event. 
(c)  The fees required under this section shall be in addition to the nonrefundable application fee required under section 9-15-4(b). The fees required under this section also shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other applicable ordinances or regulations. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the initial permit fee stated in this section, the director shall issue the special event permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-10. - Duties of producer of a special event. 
(a)  The producer of a special event shall comply with all conditions and directions imposed in connection with the issuance of the special event permit and with all applicable local, state and federal laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The producer shall ensure that a copy of the special event permit is on-site during the entire time of the special event and shall immediately produce the special event permit at the request of any city official. 
(c)  The producer shall clean any street, any sidewalk, or any other public property that was part of the special event venue of any rubbish or debris, returning such property to its condition prior to the special event, within twenty-four (24) hours of the conclusion of the special event. If the producer fails to remove such refuse, the clean up on said public property shall be arranged by the city and the cost incurred for this service shall be charged to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-11. - Temporary closure of streets and sidewalks. 
A special event permit may provide for the city to close designated streets and/or sidewalks to allow use of such public ways for the special event during the designated days and hours of such event. However, no such closure of any street or sidewalk shall occur without the prior approval from the Chief of the Forest Park Police Department or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-12. - Hours of special events. 
A special event that occurs in a residential-zoned location shall start no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and end no later than 11:00 p.m. A special event that occurs in a commercial-zoned location shall start no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and end no later than 11:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-13. - Vendors of food and merchandise. 
(a)  The sale of food and/or merchandise by vendors shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided that each vendor has written authorization from the producer to participate in the event and provided further that each vendor shall be subject to all conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a special event permit. 
(b)  The producer shall have the sole responsibility and control of all food and merchandise vendors allowed as a component of a special event. The producer shall have the authority to designate the location in the special event venue where such vendors shall operate and to designate the activities of such vendors. 
(c)  Vendors authorized to sell food and/or merchandise under this section shall not be required to obtain a separate permit to operate during the special event. 
(d)  The vendor authorization under this section shall not exceed the date(s) and times in which the special event occurs and shall not extend beyond the location of the special event venue. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (c), food vendors authorized by this section shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations of the Clayton County Health Department and the State of Georgia as to the storage, preparation and service of food. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-14. - Vendors of alcoholic beverages. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages may be allowed as a component of a special event. No vendor shall sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic beverage at a special event without obtaining a temporary permit under section 9-2-71. No vendor shall sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic beverage at a special event without obtaining written authorization from the producer to participate in such event. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-15. - Miscellaneous provisions regarding vendors. 
(a)  Each vendor authorized by the producer shall prominently display on his or her person a badge provided by the producer. Such badge shall identify the vendor as an authorized participant in the special event and shall bear the signature of the producer or his designated agent. Such badge shall be in a form as approved by the director. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer as provided in this chapter to engage in any business within a distance of one hundred (100) yards of the special event venue from one (1) hour before the start of the special event and until one (1) hour after the end of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-16. - Insurance. 
At the city's request, the applicant and/or the producer may be required to obtain and present evidence of a surety indemnity bond or comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) personal injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage against all claims arising from special event permits issued under this chapter. If any special event poses higher risks than would be covered by such insurance, the applicant and/or the producer shall be responsible for assessing the risk of such event and obtaining additional insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-17. - Save harmless agreement. 
The applicant is required to provide a save harmless agreement in which the applicant agrees to defend, indemnify and save harmless the city, including its officers, employees and agents, from any and all claims or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the special event; excepting any claims arising solely out of the intentional acts of the city, its officers, employees and agents. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-18. - Limitations of liability. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city, including its officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which the special permit has been issued. The city, including its officers, employees and agents, shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of a street, a sidewalk, or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-19. - Other permits. 
The applicant shall obtain any other permits that may be required by other chapters of this Code of Ordinances and by other jurisdictions for the special event. 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages. Any temporary permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be in accordance with the provisions of state law and chapter 2 of title 9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Signs . Permits for the erection of any sign during the period in which the special event is to occur shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances regulating signs. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 9-15-20. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in school sponsored educational activities or athletic events, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A public event which is directly related to a recognized function of city, state or local government and which is in a major part initiated, financed and executed by the city, state, local or United States government; 
(4)  Private social gatherings which will make no use of streets other than for lawful parking; and 
(5)  Peaceful picketing in connection with labor disputes. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Title 10 - Motor Vehicles and Traffic 
Chapter 1.  General Provisions 
Chapter 2.  Regulation of Traffic 
Chapter 3.  Parking and Loading 
Chapter 4.  Enforcement 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-1-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to Chapter 6 of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Code Sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, Code Sections 40-6-1 to 40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in Code Section 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulation of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the ordinance codified in this section shall be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 91-008, 5-20-91) 
Sec. 10-1-2. - City traffic engineer; office created; general duties. 
The chief of police shall serve as the city traffic engineer until such time as the governing authority specifically otherwise designates by ordinance or resolution. It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinance and resolution of the city. 
Sec. 10-1-3. - Same; specific duties. 
The traffic engineer, in addition to his other duties, shall: 
(1)  Lend technical assistance to those engaging or desiring to engage in the business of off-street parking. 
(2)  Make studies, as necessary, of the parking or traffic problems in any section of the city and report his recommendations to the city manager and the governing authority. 
(3)  Examine all applications for permits to operate new off-street parking facilities or to expand existing facilities in the city and report his recommendations to the city manager and to the governing authority. 
(4)  Make a continuous and systematic study of traffic and parking conditions in the city with the purpose of recommending any and all changes that would help traffic flow and parking within the city. Such recommendations shall be made periodically to the city manager and the governing authority. 
(5)  Make any and all studies and give reports thereon to the city manager and the governing authority concerning the use of streets, alleys and public property insofar as the same relate to transportation, parking and use by emergency and official vehicles. 
(6)  Cooperate with the governing authorities of other governmental units endeavoring to promote more efficient use of the streets and parking facilities of the city in every manner whatsoever. 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be designated by the city manager or the governing authority. 
(Code 1959, § 20-35) 
Sec. 10-1-4. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police, by and with the approval of the city manager is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this title and other traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-44) 
Sec. 10-1-5. - Appeal from regulations, rule or order of police chief. 
Any traffic regulation, rule or order promulgated under section 10-1-4 by the chief of police or upon his authority, may be appealed by any person affected to the governing body. Said appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and addressed to the governing authority, in writing, and shall state the facts, and set forth the reasons for making the appeal. The governing body shall thereupon investigate any such appeal, and thereafter grant a hearing on the issues formed by the appeal. The action taken by the governing authority shall be final and binding upon the chief of police. 
Cross reference— Traffic division, § 4-1-2 et seq.; traffic violations bureau, § 2-5-21 et seq. 
Sec. 10-1-6. - Permits for parades and processions. 
No procession (except funerals) or parade shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  All requests for parades or processions (except funerals) must be filed two (2) weeks in advance with the police department. 
(2)  All requests must contain date of parade or procession, time to start parade or procession, place of beginning and place of ending of the parade or procession. The request must state route to be taken. Each request must state the reason or purpose for holding the parade or procession. 
(3)  All parades and processions must be escorted when possible by police escort. 
(4)  All permits for parades or processions, except funerals, must be reviewed by the chief of police and approved by the city manager. 
Sec. 10-1-7. - Funeral processions; route of procession. 
All funeral processions will take the most direct feasible route to the church and to the cemetery or place of burial. 
(Code 1959, § 20-10(c)) 
Sec. 10-1-8. - Same; right-of-way for vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided each shall identify itself by activating regular headlights, shall keep in close formation, and shall display such identifying markings or devices as directed as required by the city. 
(b)  When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. 
Sec. 10-1-9. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in section 10-1-8. 
(Code 1959, § 20-72) 
Sec. 10-1-10. - Drivers in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street or roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1959, § 20-73) 
Sec. 10-1-11. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coasters, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing the street on a crosswalk and when so coasting such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(b)  There shall be no such skating or riding on the sidewalks except under such terms and conditions as expressly allowed by the governmental authority by resolution or ordinance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds, or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to take hold of or hang on to any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of automobiles or other vehicles along and in the streets of the city, or for two (2) or more persons to join hands while skating on the sidewalk. Any persons so skating or riding shall give the right-of-way to, and no way interfere with, persons walking on the sidewalks. 
Sec. 10-1-12. - Title not to interfere with rights of owners of real property with reference thereto. 
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent the owner of real property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner, and not as matter of right, from prohibiting such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified herein, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. 
(Code 1959, § 20-28) 
Sec. 10-1-13. - Obstruction of view and use of streets by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in anywise controlling property in the city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street, sidewalk or right-of-way of the city, so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or in anywise controlling property in the city to permit shrubbery or other vegetation to grow or to accumulate to a height of more than three (3) feet within seven (7) feet of the curb or any public street, alley or right-of-way when, in the opinion of the chief of police or the mayor and council, the same shall constitute a menace or a hazard to traffic. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city to fail to remove or trim any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of the city in violation of this section after 10 days' notice from the city to do so. 
Sec. 10-1-14. - Bicycles; effect of regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this title. 
(c)  These regulations to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code 1959, § 20-163) 
Sec. 10-1-15. - Same; parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-177) 
Sec. 10-1-16. - Same; riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district, or the central traffic district. 
(b)  No person 13 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1959, § 20-178) 
Sec. 10-1-17. - Same; acrobatic or fancy riding on streets. 
No rider of any bicycle shall remove both hands from the handle bars, or feet from the pedal, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any street; nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a street participate in any race of speed or endurance in a contest with any other bicycle or vehicle, except where permitted in closely supervised activities conducted by the parks and recreation department. 
CHAPTER 2. - REGULATION OF TRAFFIC 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-2-1. - Motor vehicle colliding with object. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate the vehicle in such manner so as to collide with any object legally placed upon or adjacent to any street or highway. 
(Code 1959, § 20-79) 
Sec. 10-2-2. - Vehicle leaving street or roadway. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate same in such a manner so as to enter or leave any street or highway except at an intersection or at an alley or private drive. 
(Code 1959, § 20-80) 
Sec. 10-2-3. - Motor vehicle involved in a collision with parked vehicle. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate the vehicle in such a manner so as to collide with any vehicle which is legally parked in the city. 
Sec. 10-2-4. - Speed restrictions. 
After having conducted engineering and traffic investigations, the results of which indicate a need for reasonable and safe exceptions to the vehicle speed limits set forth in the Uniform Rules of the Road, the city traffic engineer, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain speed zones on city streets with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices. A current schedule of all speed zones shall be maintained by the traffic engineer and shall be available for public inspection in the police department and the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10-2-5. - Speed signs. 
The traffic engineer shall erect or cause to be erected throughout the city signs indicating the maximum speed limit and/or such other information as will be informative to drivers of motor vehicles as pertains to traffic control regulations at said location or in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-83) 
Sec. 10-2-6. - Maximum speed in parks and school zones. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in parks in excess of 25 miles per hour nor on streets adjoining school property during school days in excess of 25 miles per hour. 
Sec. 10-2-7. - Slowly moving vehicles. 
Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets or highways abreast, but one must follow behind the other and keep as near the right-hand curb as possible. 
Sec. 10-2-8. - Driving past men working on streets and roadways. 
The maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour when approaching or driving past men working in the street or roadway, who are city employees, public utility employees, or those granted permission of the city, provided such workmen have erected a sign reading: "Slow—Men Working" and such sign is in accordance with the specifications of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 20-87) 
Sec. 10-2-9. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 20-88) 
Sec. 10-2-10. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
After having received the results of engineering and traffic investigations which indicate a need for restricted turns at certain intersections, the mayor and council shall designate, by ordinance, those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn. Upon such designation the city traffic engineer shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
Sec. 10-2-11. - Authority to place and duty to obey turning markers. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, and signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated shall conform to this title or other law or ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
Sec. 10-2-12. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, or upon any street between intersections. Such turns may be made outside of a business district at intersections not controlled by a traffic signal. 
(Code 1959, § 20-98) 
Sec. 10-2-13. - Authority to install traffic-control devices. 
The city traffic engineer shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this title and such ordinances. He may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he shall deem necessary to regulate traffic under this title and other traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-99) 
Sec. 10-2-14. - Designation of crosswalks, safety zones, and traffic lanes. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary. He shall make proper studies of all existing crosswalks not at roadway intersections, and shall abolish those which he deems unnecessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To make lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this title and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-100) 
Sec. 10-2-15. - Type of traffic-control devices. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform generally to specifications set out in the manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state department of transportation; however, any and all signs and signals placed pursuant to this or other ordinance shall be official, and shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1959, § 20-101) 
Sec. 10-2-16. - Location and legibility of required signs. 
No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not so located and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1959, § 20-107) 
Sec. 10-2-17. - Through streets; designated. 
The governing body may by ordinance or resolution specifically designate certain streets or parts of streets as through streets. 
(Code 1959, § 20-152) 
Sec. 10-2-18. - Same; authority to erect stop signs. 
Whenever this title or any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign or yield-right-of-way sign on each and every intersection of such through street or intersection on that portion thereof described and designated as such by this title or any ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-153) 
Sec. 10-2-19. - Erection of stop signs and yield right-of-way signs at other than through street intersections. 
After having conducted engineering and traffic investigations, the results of which indicate particular hazards at certain intersections, the city traffic engineer shall report such results to the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon streets other than those designated by this title or any other ordinance of the city as through streets, and shall direct the city traffic engineer to place at such determined and designated hazardous intersections at one (1) or more entrances to any such intersection either a stop sign or yield-right-of-way sign. 
Sec. 10-2-20. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever this title or any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 20-26) 
Sec. 10-2-21. - Vehicles and employees of department of public works to have right-of-way on streets. 
All employees and vehicles of the department of public works when engaged or used in performance of the services rendered by such department, shall have the right-of-way in the use of the streets, and are hereby given permission to use any part thereof in the operation of such vehicles in cleaning up and washing the streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-25) 
Sec. 10-2-22. - Unlawful riding. 
No persons shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1959, § 20-64) 
Secs. 10-2-23—10-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - TRUCK ROUTES AND VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS 

Sec. 10-2-31. - Motor trucks or trailers prohibited from traversing certain areas during designated hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor truck or motor drawn trailer to traverse any street or part of the area of the city during periods hereinafter specifically designated by the governing body by resolution or ordinance. Whenever said streets or areas are designated, nothing in this section shall prevent any truck, when not accompanied by a trailer, from traversing any of the streets or areas solely for the purpose of making delivery or the purpose of picking up or receiving goods, wares or merchandise for transportation; but this shall not include permission for trailers to enter, park or stand in such area for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Code 1959, § 20-13) 
Sec. 10-2-32. - Truck routes; certain vehicles required to use certain streets; exceptions. 
All motor vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 36,000 pounds including the load thereon, or having an overall length in excess of 30 feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any street within the city except those authorized by ordinance and designated as truck routes except: 
(1)  When the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from such places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route. 
(2)  When a delivery or pickup is to be made at a location which is not on a designated truck route (to be set forth by the governing authority by ordinance or resolution) ingress to and egress from such location shall be made by the most direct route available between such location and nearest truck route. 
(3)  When a delivery or pickup is to be made within certain areas of the city, to be specifically designated by the governing authority by ordinance or resolution, by a truck tractor, road tractor, combination truck tractor, semi-trailer or combination road tractor-trailer, same shall be done at times and under conditions specified by the governing authority. 
(Code 1959, § 20-15) 
Sec. 10-2-33. - Same; drivers of vehicles to possess certain information when off designated routes. 
Any person driving or in charge or control of any of the restricted vehicles referred to in the preceding section when upon streets or in areas other than those specifically designated by the governing authority as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips, or other written evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street or in an area other than a designated truck route. 
(Code 1959, § 20-16) 
Sec. 10-2-34. - Same; temporary routes. 
If any designated truck route, or portion thereof, shall be for any reason out of use, the driver of any restricted vehicle shall use such temporary truck route as may be designated by the governing authority. 
(Code 1959, § 20-17) 
Sec. 10-2-35. - Limitation as to weight of vehicles. 
The governing authority shall have the right to proclaim by ordinance or resolution the maximum weight of any vehicle, including tractors and trailers which may proceed upon certain designated streets or areas of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-18) 
CHAPTER 3. - PARKING AND LOADING 
ARTICLE A. - PARKING 

Sec. 10-3-1. - Prohibition of or restrictions on parking or stopping. 
When traffic and engineering surveys indicate that stopping or parking may impede the free flow of traffic on any particular street, the city traffic engineer shall report such matter to the mayor and council, who may, by ordinance, prohibit or restrict the parking or standing of vehicles on such street or a portion of such street at all times or between certain hours. 
Sec. 10-3-2. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
When prohibited by this title or other ordinance, no person shall park a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by official signs. 
Sec. 10-3-3. - Stopping prohibited during certain hours. 
When prohibited by this title or other ordinance, no person shall stop a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by official sign. 
Sec. 10-3-4. - Parking signs required. 
When by this title or other ordinance any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. At least one (1) sign shall be erected in each block on each side of the street where parking is either prohibited or restricted. 
Sec. 10-3-5. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in such emergency such vehicles shall be moved or towed away with all due haste; or 
(3)  For displaying advertising. 
(Code 1959, § 20-117) 
Sec. 10-3-6. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  Upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, the city traffic engineer shall erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
Sec. 10-3-7. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  Upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, the city traffic engineer shall erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
Sec. 10-3-8. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
Upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, the city traffic engineer shall erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicle, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
Sec. 10-3-9. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city traffic engineer shall conduct engineering and traffic investigations to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
Sec. 10-3-10. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  When engineering and traffic investigations indicate the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic, the mayor and council may, by ordinance, determine and designate places in which the parking or stopping of vehicles is prohibited. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
Sec. 10-3-11. - Maximum time for parking of trucks. 
No person shall park or stand any truck or other freight carrying vehicles in excess of one-half (½) ton capacity upon any public street or highway for a period longer than one (1) hour at any time during the day or night unless authorized by the chief of police or his designated representative. 
Sec. 10-3-12. - Maximum width and height of vehicles without driver. 
No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight (8) feet wide or 10 feet high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 20-123(c)) 
Sec. 10-3-13. - City hall parking lot. 
No person shall park in the city hall parking lots, except those having official business with the city and only in such places therein and for such time as designated by markings placed therein. 
Sec. 10-3-14. - Public off-street parking facilities; permit required; application. 
Before any lot, building or parking garage may be used for off-street public parking, or before any existing facility may be expanded, the owner of the lot, building or parking garage or the operator of the facility must first obtain from the city manager a permit for such use. The application for such a permit shall be filed with the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The address and location of the lot or building involved; 
(2)  The capacity of the proposed facility; 
(3)  The proposed location of entrances and exits to the facility; 
(4)  The capacity and location of the reservoir space to be used for the receiving and temporary storage of incoming vehicles; 
(5)  The proposed parking plan showing the size and location of the parking stalls and the aisles to serve them; 
(6)  The location, width and general design of ramps or elevator to be used inside of structures; and 
(7)  Any other information required to enable the governing authority to make a fair and complete appraisal of the operation of the proposed parking facility. 
Sec. 10-3-15. - Same; investigation of applications for permit. 
Upon receipt of any application for a permit required by the preceding section, the city manager shall request the city traffic engineer to make a thorough and complete investigation and within 30 days report thereon to the city manager and governing authority on such factors as: 
(1)  The size of the proposed facility and the vehicular capacity of streets to be used for ingress and egress; 
(2)  The physical arrangements provided for ingress and egress; 
(3)  The reservoir space for incoming and outgoing vehicles; 
(4)  The effects, if any, of any plan for traffic improvement (such as the expressway program, or major street plan) on the flow or the pattern of traffic adjacent to the affected streets; and 
(5)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
Secs. 10-3-16—10-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 10-3-31. - Permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permits. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 20-111) 
Sec. 10-3-32. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
Upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, the city traffic engineer shall designate passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
Sec. 10-3-33. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective. 
(Code 1959, § 20-125) 
Sec. 10-3-34. - Standing in freight curb loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a truck for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect; nor stop, stand or park any other vehicle for such unloading or loading of materials. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1959, § 20-126) 
Sec. 10-3-35. - Designation of public carrier stands. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to create and abolish open taxicab stands subject, however, to approval of the mayor and council and to the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. The city traffic engineer shall represent the city in determining the location of bus stops and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, subject to final approval of the mayor and council, and every such stop, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
Sec. 10-3-36. - Parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, and except for making emergency repairs. The provisions of this section shall not apply to common carriers stopping at regular designated passing or layover locations. 
(Code 1959, § 20-128) 
Sec. 10-3-37. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1959, § 20-129) 
Sec. 10-3-38. - Length of bus stops; marking; manner of stopping. 
(a)  A no parking zone of 40 feet shall be created at all bus stops for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
(b)  Such no parking zones shall be marked by signs and, in addition, such zones in all congested areas shall have the curbs painted yellow. This proper marking of zones shall be maintained by the companies operating buses in and out of such zones. 
(c)  Buses or any vehicles parked in such zones for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers shall pull as close to the curb as possible. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit buses from loading and unloading at platforms at loading zones where they are provided for that purpose in the street. 
(Code 1959, § 20-130) 
CHAPTER 4. - ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic division of police department, § 4-1-2 et seq.; traffic violations bureau of municipal court, § 2-5-21 et seq. 

Sec. 10-4-1. - General penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this title shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
(Code 1959, § 20-223) 
Sec. 10-4-2. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time which, such violation occurred. 
(b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in sections 10-4-3 through 10-4-5 has been followed. 
(Code 1959, § 20-224) 
Sec. 10-4-3. - Notice on illegally parked vehicle. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this title or other ordinance of the city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the chief of police, for the driver to answer to the charge against him at the time and place specified in the notice. The officer shall send one (1) copy to the traffic violations bureau. 
Sec. 10-4-4. - Owner liable for parking violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street, in violation of this title or any other ordinance of the city regulating the parking of vehicles. Such person shall be equally liable with the operator for such violation. 
Sec. 10-4-5. - Failure to comply with notice attached to parked vehicle. 
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under this title or other traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a notice affixed to such vehicle, at the time and place specified, the traffic violations bureau shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five (5) days from the date of the letter, a summons of arrest will be issued. 
(Code 1959, § 20-227) 
Sec. 10-4-6. - When person charged may elect to appear at bureau or before municipal judge. 
(a)  Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be made to the traffic violations bureau shall have the option of paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the traffic violations bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing required lawful bail and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law. 
(b)  The payment of a bond to the bureau shall be deemed as acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau, upon accepting the prescribed bond shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging the payment thereof. 
Sec. 10-4-7. - When summons for arrest to be issued. 
In the event any person fails to comply with a notice given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the traffic violations bureau, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the traffic violations bureau shall forthwith secure and issue a summons for his arrest. 
(Code 1959, § 20-228) 
Sec. 10-4-8. - Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. 
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1959, § 20-232) 
Sec. 10-4-9. - Issuance of summons. 
It shall be the duty of any member of the police division, in all cases where complaint is made or information obtained of any violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city, to issue a summons, directed to the accused, requiring him to appear before the municipal court to answer such charge, which summons shall designate the time and place of trial. It shall be signed by the patrolman or officer issuing same and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at his place of residence. 
(Code 1959, § 20-233) 
Sec. 10-4-10. - Penalty for failure to appear when served with copy of charges. 
Any person who has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in the municipal court and shall fail to appear at the time and place indicated in such copy of charges shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
(Code 1959, § 20-235) 
Sec. 10-4-11. - Failure to appear as provided in summons or notice. 
Any person who fails to appear as provided in the notice or summons provided for in section 10-4-10 of this code for any traffic violation is guilty of an offense for such failure to appear regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally arrested. 
(Code 1959, § 20-236) 
Sec. 10-4-12. - When warrants for arrest to be issued. 
When it shall be made to appear to the municipal court that any person has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in such court for trial and shall fail to appear at the time and place set forth in such copy of charges, it shall be the duty of the municipal judge to forthwith issue a warrant, signed by the judge, for the arrest of such person and deliver same to the chief of police. 
Sec. 10-4-13. - Issuance of warrants. 
Any person witnessing a violation of a city ordinance by another person may appear before the municipal court and there swear out a complaint for said violation. Upon the signing under oath of said complaint by said complainant a warrant may be issued by the municipal court, signed by the municipal judge, and directed to the alleged violator to be and appear in said court to answer the charges as contained in said complaint. 
Title 11 - Offenses 
Chapter 1.  General Provisions 
Chapter 2  Nuisances 
Chapter 3  Animals 
Chapter 4.  Litter 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Municipalities are prohibited by law from enacting ordinances covering matters which have been preempted by general law and are prevented from regulating conduct which has been made a violation of any criminal law of the state. See O.C.G.A., § 36-35-6 (a(2)); Ga. Const. of 1976, Art. I, § II, ¶ VII. 
State Law reference— Abandonment of airtight containers, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-100; fireworks, O.C.G.A., § 25-10-1 et seq.; peeping toms, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-61; gambling, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-20 et seq.; prostitution, O.C.G.A., § 16-6-9 et seq.; distributing obscene materials, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-80 et seq.; criminal trespass, O.C.G.A., § 16-7-21. 

Sec. 11-1-1. - Maintaining standards of neighborhood; maintaining standards of business establishment; prohibition of keeping junk, abandoned appliances, inoperative vehicles, and other equipment on property. 
(a)  In order to eliminate unsightly, unhealthy or dangerous situations, and in order to protect property values and to enhance the beauty of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, rent, lease or be in possession of any premises, dwelling, dwelling unit or other structure, place or vacant lot wherein are kept dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery or equipment, including automobiles, which are either in a wholly or partially wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition and which are not completely enclosed within a building. 
(b)  Should the chief of police determine that any person is violating the terms of this section, the city manager or, if there be no city manager, the mayor, shall give the offending party five (5) days' notice within which to eliminate the unsightly, unhealthy, or dangerous situation. The notice shall be in writing and shall be a prerequisite to the bringing of charges against an offender. Should the person to whom the notice is directed fail to comply with the request made therein within the five-day period, a law enforcement officer of the city shall be authorized to proceed with the bringing of charges as for the violation of any city ordinance. Each day the unsightly, unhealthy, or dangerous situation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Furniture, appliances, machinery or equipment, including automobiles, as hereinabove defined, which remain on the same property for a period of thirty (30) days after either a plea or a finding of guilty shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the chief of police or his duly authorized agent or employee. After removal, the chief of police shall determine whether or not the property has any value. If he finds it to have value, it shall be disposed of as provided in section 3-1-21. If the chief of police finds the property to have no value, he shall immediately and personally see to its destruction. 
(Code 1959, § 12-6.1; Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Cross reference— Unhealthy and unsanitary conditions on property, § 5-2-3 et seq. 
Sec. 11-1-2. - Public property; injuring, defacing, etc. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any unauthorized person wilfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise, to injure, deface, destroy, tamper or interfere with any property, real or personal, or any improvements to any real property belonging to or under the supervision or control of the city, including but not limited to water meters, pipes, conduits, wires, lines, posts, lamps or other apparatus. 
(b)  It is equally unlawful to commit any of the acts hereinabove stated to any such property owned by any private company or other unit of government, to suffer injury, damage, destruction or interference, as hereinabove stated. 
(c)  Injury, damage, destruction or the attempt to tamper with a meter, or other device to measure municipal or utility services, shall be prima facie evidence of the intention of the person to whom such meter or device has been issued, to violate the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The penalty for the violation of this section, or any provision thereof, shall be as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 12-47; Ord. No. 90-005, 7-16-90; Ord. No. 00-04, § 1, 4-3-2000) 
Sec. 11-1-3. - Same; removing dirt, materials, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, disturb, or take any earth, stone or other material from any public property. 
(Code 1959, § 12-48) 
Sec. 11-1-4. - Trees, cutting or defacing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface or destroy any shade tree on public property in the city unless authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 12-50) 
Sec. 11-1-5. - Encroachments on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or permit to be erected or maintained, any encroachment or obstruction whatsoever upon, over or under the public property or ways of the city without the written permission of the governing body. The city manager is hereby authorized to issue permits for temporary encroachments or obstructions of public property or ways which encroachments or obstructions shall not exceed ninety (90) days. 
(b)  If at any time it shall appear that any person is unlawfully encroaching upon, or maintaining any unlawful obstruction in any part of a public way, it shall be the duty of any law enforcement officer to give notice to said party, ordering the removal of such encroachment or obstruction; and if such encroachment or obstruction is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of said notice, or such other reasonable time as may be designated by the governing body, it shall be the duty of the law enforcement officer to cause any such encroachment or obstruction to be summarily removed, and the cost and expense thereof shall be charged to the person maintaining the same. 
(Code 1959, § 12-16) 
Sec. 11-1-6. - Safe sidewalks and streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in, sit in, or otherwise obstruct any public passage, public place, or public way, as such is defined by the law of the state, so as to impede the normal, free and uninterrupted passage of the public, and to refuse to desist from so doing when ordered to do so by the police or other lawful authority. 
(b)  A public passage, public place or public way shall include all public passages and buildings, as well as private businesses open to the public. 
(Code 1959, § 12-16.1) 
Sec. 11-1-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 99-010, adopted June 21, 1999, repealed § 11-1-7 in its entirety. Formerly, § 11-1-7 pertained to false alarms and derived from § 12-17 of the 1959 Code. 
Sec. 11-1-8. - False reports of crimes. 
No person within the city shall make to, or file with, the police department of the city or any police officer of the city any false, misleading, or unfounded statement, or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any ordinance violation occurring within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-18) 
Sec. 11-1-9. - Children playing in streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor child to play in the streets of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the control or custody of any minor to permit, allow, or encourage such minor to play in any street in the city. 
Sec. 11-1-10. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the responsibility of the City of Forest Park to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. As a part of this responsibility, the city recognizes the need to protect our children from being victims of crimes that occur after hours as well as lessen the risk that a juvenile become a violator of the law as the result of after hours conduct. It is also the purpose of the ordinance to make parents more responsible for their children. It is believed that it is in the best interest of the citizens of Forest Park, Georgia to have a juvenile curfew ordinance. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall be construed as defined hereinbelow. 
(1)  Adult means: 
a.  A person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor; or 
b.  An emancipated minor. 
(2)  Curfew hours means: 
a.  11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day; 
b.  12:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday; and 
c.  9:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. every day for those individuals specified in subsection (c)(1). 
(3)  Emancipated Minor means: 
a.  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is married or who is not under the care, custody, and control of a parent, parents, guardian, person standing in locus parentis, or the juvenile court of competent jurisdiction; or 
b.  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) who has had the disabilities of minority removed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(5)  Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(6)  Guardian means: 
a.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
b.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
(7)  Minor means any person seventeen (17) years of age or under. 
(8)  Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation. 
(9)  Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, or step parent of another person. 
(10)  Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access that includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
(11)  Remain means: 
a.  Linger or stay; or 
b.  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or the person in control of the premises. 
(12)  Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that causes death or creates a substantial risk of, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(c)  Acts prohibited. 
(1)  Minors 14 years of age or younger. It is unlawful for any minor fourteen (14) years of age or younger, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public place, streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, establishments, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or anyplace in the city, unsupervised by an adult, parent or guardian having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(2)  Minors 15 years of age and older. It is unlawful for any minor fifteen (15) years of age or older, to loiter, idle, wander stroll or play in or upon the public place, streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, establishments, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or anyplace in the city, unsupervised by an adult, parent or guardian having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor seventeen (17) years of age or younger to knowingly or by insufficient control, to allow, such minor to violate the prohibitions set forth in paragraph (c)(1) and (c)(2) above. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to be in or upon the premises of an establishment in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(d)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or a guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  An owner, operator or employee of an establishment commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Forest Park police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(e)  Exceptions. The provisions of the City of Forest Park Curfew Ordinance [this section] shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor, or if such minor is seeking medical treatment; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from an activity, entertainment function, recreational activity or dance associated with a school. 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle of parental consent for normal travel; or 
(6)  When the minor is an emancipated minor. 
(f)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Upon conviction of violations of this section, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be subject, after having been charged with the same and found guilty in the municipal court of the city, to punishment as provided in section 1-1-8 in this Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Adjudication of violations of this ordinance by minors shall be made in accordance with Title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(g)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a City of Forest Park police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that based on any response and other circumstances that no exception is present. 
(h)  Conflict. All laws and ordinances, or parts thereof, which conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(i)  Effective date. This section shall become effective upon its approval [Oct. 7, 1996] by the city council of the City of Forest Park. 
(j)  Invalidity in Part. In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared of judged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no matter effect the other sections, subsections, sentence, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or judged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. 
(k)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the department of policy services to disseminate copies of this ordinance to places that those affected by it congregate and to explain its effect and enforcement. 
(Code 1959, § 12-9; Ord. No. 96-016, 10-7-96) 
State Law reference— Juvenile proceedings, O.C.G.A., § 15-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-1-11. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following subsections: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another; 
(2)  Any person who shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, threats or abusive conduct; 
(3)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct; 
(4)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(5)  Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in public; 
(6)  Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the current ordinances of the city or laws of this state; 
(7)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(8)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(9)  Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in said city, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(10)  Any person who shall accost or attempt to force his company upon any female or attempt to pick up any female; 
(11)  Any person who utters in the presence of another, any bawdy, lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(12)  Any person who frequents any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(13)  Any person who shall act in a dangerous manner toward others; 
(14)  Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person; 
(15)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate for the purpose of trouncing upon another; 
(16)  Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(17)  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority; 
(18)  Any person, participant, or official who is in attendance at any sporting event over which the city has any supervisory capacity, who through speech or physical conduct acts unseemly and who repeatedly annoys, offends, and imposes himself upon others in attendance; or 
(19)  Any person within the city limits who directs language to another in an abusive or demeaning manner which contains epithets relating to sexual reproduction, lineage, incest, chastity or excretion. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of "disorderly conduct" and on conviction thereof, may be found guilty of disorderly conduct. 
State Law reference— Authority of cities to punish for disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 11-1-12. - Disorderly houses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, rent or let any house, hall or room, within the corporate limits of the city, for the congregating of disorderly, noisy or riotous persons, or where disorderly, riotous or noisy persons assemble to the disturbance of the neighborhood or some part thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 12-12) 
Sec. 11-1-13. - Drunkenness in public places. 
Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public street or highway or within the curtilage of any private residence, not in the exclusive possession of the person or persons so intoxicated, or upon any fairgrounds, ballgrounds, showgrounds, park or any other place of public gathering or assembly, or private property used by the public, which said drunkenness or intoxication may be caused by the excessive use of intoxicating wines, beers, liquors or drugs, and has manifest itself by boisterous or disorderly conduct, or by indecent condition, or acts, or by vulgar profane or unbecoming language, or loud and violent discourse of the person or persons so intoxicated or drunken; shall be guilty of public drunkenness. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to punish public drunkenness, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 11-1-13.1. - Regulation of the sale, purchase and distribution of alcoholic beverages by and to persons under twenty-one years of age. 
(a)  No person knowingly, directly, or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverages to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase, or knowingly possess, any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(d)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for, or on behalf, of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(e)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(f)  The exceptions contained in O.C.G.A. section 3-3-23 (b), (c) and (d) of the laws of the State of Georgia are hereby incorporated by reference, and shall serve as exemptions for any person charged under subsections 1(a) through (e) of this section. 
(g)  (1)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  This subsection shall not prohibit persons over eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drug stores, from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(h)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person convicted of violating any prohibition contained in subsections (a), (c), (d) and (e) of this section shall, upon the first conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as set forth in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park. 
(2)  Any person convicted of violating subsection (b) of this section shall, upon the first conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by not more than thirty (30) days' imprisonment, or a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or both. However, upon a second or subsequent conviction, said person shall be punished as provided for violation of any ordinance of the Code of the City of Forest Park as set forth in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Forest Park. 
(Ord. No. 86-020, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 11-1-14. - Loitering. 
(a)  Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, walking about aimlessly, or sitting on cars, trucks, or other vehicles, and shall include the colloquial expression "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the city public property or private property used by the public in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(3)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(4)  Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place; or 
(5)  Be at a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances which would warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. 
(6)  Near business establishments. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to congregate or loiter on any private property which is adjacent to or used by any business or commercial establishment in the city for the use of said business establishment or its customers for parking of vehicles or other uses incidental to the operation of said business. 
(7)  Congregating on sidewalks or streets. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to obstruct the sidewalks or streets of the city, or sidewalks or drives within private property which is open to the public, by standing, sitting, or laying in crowds. 
(b)  Relocating from one (1) position to another and regrouping or generally "hanging around" shall be "prima facie" evidence of intent to continue an unlawful act under this section and shall constitute a new offense after having been dispersed or cited for an offense under these provisions. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of loitering if said person refuses to leave the premises or place after being asked to leave by the owner of the premises, the authorized agent of the owner, or a law enforcement officer. 
(d)  Among the circumstances, which may be considered in determining, whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify him or herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 11-1-15. - Loitering for illegal sexual purposes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public, parking lots of hotels and motels, in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are: that person is a known prostitute, pimp, sodomist, masturbator for hire or panderer and repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops, or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, or waving of arms or any bodily gesture for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords that person the opportunity to explain his conduct. 
(b)  For the purpose of subsection (a), a "known prostitute, pimp, sodomist, panderer or masturbator for hire" is a person who, previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, had been convicted of a violation of a sexual related law of any city or law of any state defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. 
(c)  For the purpose of subsection (a), "any person" shall also include panderers or solicitors of sexual acts, commonly referred to as "johns" or "trick.," who loiter in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of participating in, procuring, purchasing or soliciting any sexual act for hire made illegal by state law. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are: that person, while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, repeatedly beckons to, attempts to stop, engages or attempts to engage in conversation with any person by hailing, waving arms or any bodily gesture for the purpose of inducing, enticing, 
soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinances proscribing loitering and related acts for purposes of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire, O.C.G.A., § 16-6-24. 
Sec. 11-1-16. - Fortunetelling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on within the corporate limits of the city, the business of telling fortunes or carrying on the trade, business or profession of phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other business of like kind or nature in which the future of any person is foretold or attempted to be foretold. Excepted from the provisions of this section are those persons practicing astrology and who are members of the Astrological Association of Georgia, Inc. and who have procured a business license in accordance with the applicable paragraph of title 9, chapter 1 of this code. 
(Code 1959, § 12-20) 
Sec. 11-1-17. - Open wells and excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person to permit any open well or hazardous excavation to remain or exist on the property under the control of such owner, occupant or person. 
(Code 1959, § 12-30) 
Sec. 11-1-18. - Police officers; resisting; obstructing; following. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer, any member of the police department, or any other person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with, obstruct or hinder him in the discharge of this duty. 
(b)  No person shall follow any police officer, while in charge of any prisoner, after such person has been commanded to desist such following, or after any crowd has been commanded to disperse. 
(Code 1959, § 12-38) 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A., § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 11-1-19. - Same; impersonating. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office, like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the city, unless such person is an official officer of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-39) 
State Law reference— Impersonating public officer or employee, O.C.G.A., § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 11-1-20. - Police radios; intercepting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intercept radio calls of the police department for any unlawful purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 12-41) 
Sec. 11-1-21. - Prisoners, escapes. 
No person within the city shall do any act set forth in this section in connection with the escape of prisoners: 
(1)  Assisting in the escape of prisoners. No person shall make available to, present, or place within the reach of, any person confined under authority of the city, any intoxicating or malt liquors, or any tool, implement, or other thing calculated to aid in the escape of such person so confined or any other person confined under authority of the city or confined by police officers of the city. 
(2)  Aiding escapees. No person shall assist or aid, or attempt to assist or aid any person in the custody of or confined under the authority of the city, to escape from jail, place of confinement, or custody. 
(3)  Escape from jail. No person while a prisoner in the city jail, or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or otherwise in custody of and confined by the city or police officer of the city, shall escape or attempt to escape or to assist others to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement. 
(Code 1959, § 12-43) 
Sec. 11-1-22. - Knives, razors and ice picks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or in any public place in the city any of the following implements unless same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three (3) inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and/or knives which do not close and any type knife with the blade open. 
(4)  Any razor or razor blade. 
(5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Code 1959, § 12-52) 
Sec. 11-1-23. - Discharging firearms in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the corporate limits of the city except in defense of person. This section shall not apply to authorized officers of the law in their official capacity, nor to the discharge of firearms at licensed or municipally operated pistol ranges or at ceremonial functions for which a permit for the discharge of firearms has been obtained. 
Sec. 11-1-24. - Slingshots; bows and arrows; air rifles, exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge or shoot any slingshot, air rifle, or guns discharged by forcing of air, gas pressure or any other manner, or bow and arrow, or any similar device that hurls or propels any object in the corporate limits of the city, except that archery instruction and practice may be conducted in closely supervised groups when approved by the director of parks and recreation. 
Sec. 11-1-25. - Possession of marijuana unlawful; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one (1) ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person guilty of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
(c)  No person alleged to have violated subsection (a) above shall be allowed to elect to be treated as an ordinance violator other than on the first such occasion of such violation. 
(Code 1959, § 12-55) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts over certain marijuana possession cases, O.C.G.A., § 36-32-6. 
Sec. 11-1-26. - Loud and unnecessary noises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or any other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with more volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(8)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of a vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(9)  Construction or repairing of building. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three (3) days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(10)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, court or church, while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of, or ringing bells or use of other noise making devices by peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale, except parades, etc., authorized by proper authorities. 
(13)  Metal, rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks, or in any way disturbs the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(14)  Railroads, operation thereof. The causing, permitting or continuing any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a railroad, or cars thereon. 
(15)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of the operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 1959, Secs. 11-1, 11-2) 
Cross reference— Additional provisions concerning noisy animals, § 11-3-25. 
Sec. 11-1-27. - Sound trucks and sound-amplifying devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated in the city any sound-amplifying devices or equipment for any purpose whatever, whether the same be stationary or operated from a vehicle unless a permit has been obtained from the city manager on recommendation of the chief of police to do so; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to make any loud and raucous noise to the disturbance of the peace. Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this section who abuses his discretion and causes or permits loud and raucous noises shall subject the permit to immediate revocation. 
(b)  The words "sound-amplifying equipment" as used in this section shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of any sound. 
Sec. 11-1-28. - Abandoned property; removal and storage. 
Any motor vehicle or other object abandoned on the streets or on other public property within the corporate limits of the city (hereinafter referred to as abandoned property) may be removed by, or at the direction of, the chief of police and placed in storage, in order to preserve the safety of travel on the streets and the unobstructed use of public property. 
(Code 1959, § 12-1) 
Sec. 11-1-29. - Same; disposition when uncalled for. 
Abandoned property which remains uncalled for 60 days or longer after removal and storage shall be sold at public outcry as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1969, § 12-2) 
Sec. 11-1-30. - Same; advertisement of sale. 
After the expiration of sixty (60) days after removal and storage the chief of police shall advertise one (1) time, at the expense of the city, in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertisements are published, notice of the sale of such abandoned property. The notice shall describe same and give such information as will put the owner or other persons having knowledge thereof in possession of the facts, stating that the abandoned property will be exposed for sale at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash, on a specified date and hour, not less than ten (10) days after advertisement, at the place where same is located. 
(Code 1959, § 12-3) 
Sec. 11-1-31. - Same; sale. 
On the date and hour specified in the advertisement, the chief of police or some police officer authorized by him shall, at the place where the abandoned property is located, expose same to sale at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the finance director, to be deposited in the general funds of the city in payment for the removal, storage and advertisement of the abandoned property. 
(Code 1959, § 12-4) 
Sec. 11-1-32. - Same; records and reports. 
The chief of police shall submit to the governing body a written report of each such sale, including a description of the abandoned property sold corresponding to the advertisement, the date of removal from the streets or other public property, the date and time of the sale, the name and address of the purchaser, and the sale price. A copy of the advertisement shall be attached to such report. Each such report shall be read in the first meeting of the governing body held after the day of sale and shall thereafter be kept in a permanent file for such reports by the city clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 12-5) 
Sec. 11-1-33. - Same; purchase by city. 
If the city manager shall at any time desire to purchase for the city, for lawful municipal purposes, any abandoned property exposed for sale as herein provided, he may authorize any officer or employee of the city other than the officer conducting the sale to bid for the city at such sale. Such authorization shall specify the property to be bid for and the maximum amount which may be bid by such officer or employee. 
(Code 1959, § 12-6) 
Sec. 11-1-34. - Cleaning or repairing vehicles on public property. 
No person shall wash, clean, repair or perform any work on any vehicle or equipment on any street, in any park or on any other public property; provided that drivers may make minor emergency repairs, such as changing of flat tires, in order to remove such a vehicle from public property. 
Sec. 11-1-35. - Regulation of smoking and tobacco use in city facilities. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  City facility means any building, office complex, office center, courthouse, civic center, auditorium, jail, terminal, or other enclosed structure, not including motor vehicles, owned or otherwise under the exclusive control of the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(2)  City vehicle means any automobile, truck, van, or other vehicle designed primarily for on-the-road use which is owned or otherwise under the exclusive control of the city. 
(3)  Smoking means the burning of any tobacco product in a cigarette, cigar, or pipe of any kind. 
(4)  Tobacco product means any kind of tobacco, whether loose leaf, processed, or rolled, intended, packaged, or sold for the purpose of chewing, dipping, or smoking. 
(b)  Purpose. This section is enacted for the purpose of preserving and protecting the public health, safety and welfare by reducing individual exposure to first-and secondhand tobacco smoke, by reducing the possibility of fire in city facilities and by providing a generally more healthful and sanitary environment for working and for conducting public business. 
(c)  Restrictions. No person shall smoke or otherwise use any tobacco product while in any city facility. After consultation with the appropriate department head(s), the city manager may establish reasonable work rule restrictions governing smoking and the use of tobacco products in nonenclosed or outdoor employee work areas and upon the grounds of city facilities frequented by members of the general public. The city manager shall cause the erection and installation of signs necessary and appropriate to promote the purposes of this article. 
(d)  City vehicles. No smoking or other use of tobacco products shall be permitted in any city vehicle. 
(e)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer in the city. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine to be set by the city's municipal court judge presiding at the time. 
(Ord. No. 96-018, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 08-11, § 37, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 11-1-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-06, adopted Mar. 1, 2010, repealed § 11-1-36, which pertained to false alarms and derived from Ord. No. 99-010, § 1, adopted June 21, 1999; Ord. No. 08-11, §§ 38, 39, adopted Mar. 17, 2008. 
Sec. 11-1-37. - Findings; public purpose. 
The governing body of the City of Forest Park is aware of the following evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of nudity on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the mayor and city council for the City of Forest Park, Georgia (hereinafter the "governing body"): 
(a)  Findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, Ga., 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010), Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, Fla., 490 F.3d 860, 873-74 (11th Cir. 2007), and City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 290-91, 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000) and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Rome, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; Ellicottville, New York; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Centralia, Washington; Whittier, California; Denver, Colorado; Dallas, Texas and environs; Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas; Jewett, New York; El Paso, Texas; Palm Beach, Florida; Oconee County, Georgia; City of Lilburn, Georgia; City of Roswell, Georgia; City of Sandy Springs, Georgia; City of Carrollton, Georgia; Manatee County, Florida; St. Paul, Minnesota; Troup County, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas, and numerous other studies, articles, and court decisions, all of which have been presented to the mayor and city council in bound form and/or on diskette and incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park; and 
(b)  Certain affidavits and other written evidence of criminal activity, improper conduct, and other adverse secondary effects in adult entertainment establishments wherein public nudity was allowed, operated in the City of Forest Park during the past ten (10) years which has been produced to the mayor and city council through litigation involving the adult clubs, and copies of which have been presented to the mayor and city council and incorporated into the record of proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park; and 
(c)  A presentation and accompanying report given to the mayor and city council by Dr. Richard McCleary of the University of California at Irvine detailing the criminal activities and other adverse secondary effects of public nudity in adult entertainment establishments, explaining the criminological theories supporting ties between public nudity, alcohol consumption, and criminal activity, and documenting evidence of the adverse secondary criminological effects of adult entertainment establishments which allow public nudity, incorporated into the record of proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park; and 
(d)  A presentation and accompanying report given to the mayor and city council by Ms. Connie Cooper detailing the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments, which often allow public nudity, in the areas of planning and development and property values, incorporated into the record of proceedings before the governing body of the City of Forest Park; and 
(e)  A presentation and report given to the mayor and city council by private investigator Guy Watkins of BCI, Inc. detailing the findings and observations of private investigators who recently visited adult entertainment establishments which allowed public nudity in the nearby City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, finding evidence of criminal activity, including crimes of assault and prostitution, which has been incorporated into the record of proceedings of the City of Forest Park; and 
(f)  The transcript of proceedings before the city council of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia of December 20, 2007 and December 27, 2007 which documents extensive evidence of adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments in which public nudity was allowed, a copy of which has been presented to the mayor and city council, and incorporated into the record of proceedings of the City of Forest Park; and 
(g)  The following special reports relating to the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments, often allowing public nudity, on real property values: September 2004 Survey of Appraisers, Forth Worth and Dallas, Texas; May 2008, Survey of Appraisers, Palm Beach County, Florida; and June 2008 Survey of Texas Appraisers, Texas City Attorneys Association; and 
(h)  Certain documents and information consisting of thirty-nine (39) pages relating to the guilty plea and plea agreement in the criminal prosecution case of former Fulton County Police Lieutenant Mark Timothy Lance; 
(i)  A report by BCI private investigators relating to adult cabarets in Sandy Springs, Georgia; 
(j)  Certain documents and declarations under penalty of perjury, filed in the case of Jack Galardi et al v. City of Forest Park et al., Civil Action File No. 1:09-CV-00965-RWS, United States District Court, Northern District of Georgia, consisting of the declarations of Guy Watkins, various BCI investigators, Richard McCleary, Ph.D., Dwayne Hobbs, and Mark Harris, and the criminal indictment of Judge Jack T. Camp; 
(k)  Other evidence presented at various hearings and meetings of the mayor and city council relating to adverse secondary effects of adult entertainments that allow public nudity, which has been recorded and incorporated into the record of proceedings of the City of Forest Park, including past meetings of the governing body. 
Based upon all of this evidence, the City of Forest Park Governing Body finds: 
(1)  Allowing nudity in public places can result in ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities leading to a deleterious effect on the community as a whole. Public nudity can cause an increase in criminal behavior in the vicinity of the same, including but not limited to disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use, assaults and batteries, and corruption of public officials. 
(2)  Allowing nudity in public areas of the city may result in an exacerbation of urban blight, lower property values, lowering of community values, decreased general health, morals, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the city, and concerns for those under the age of eighteen (18) years of age. 
(3)  The findings noted in paragraphs number (1) and (2) above raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(4)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities as described above, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Forest Park, Georgia; and based on the documentary and oral evidence presented at the public hearings before the mayor and city council (hereinafter "the governing body") held prior to the adoption of this section and in particular on July 21, 2009 as well as the public hearing held before the governing body on March 9, 2010, and other public hearings before the governing body; and based on the evidence and statements of persons who have appeared before members of the governing body on other occasions, and on other documentary evidence submitted to the governing body, the governing body for the City of Forest Park, Georgia takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to public nudity, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the specific finding of the governing body that public nudity under certain circumstances begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. 
Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities allowing public nudity are criminal activity, depression of property values, acceleration of community blight, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, lowered health, safety, welfare, and morals of citizens, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove referenced. The governing body finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the City of Forest Park, Georgia, as well unless public nudity is prohibited. 
The governing body therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the city, the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent the adverse impacts of public nudity by regulating and prohibiting public nudity within the city as provided in this section. Therefore, the governing body of the city finds that the regulation and prohibition of public nudity as provided herein will promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions. The governing body further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To all of these ends, this section is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 5-16-2011) 
Sec. 11-1-38. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Nudity shall mean the showing or exhibition of the human male or female genitalia, anal region, pubic area, or cleft of the buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and/or areola; or the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance or simulates male or female genitalia, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the appearance of nipples and/or areola. 
(2)  Public place includes but is not limited to indoor and outdoor spaces, buildings, and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including but not limited to stores, shopping malls, modes of transportation whether moving or stationary, including cars, trucks, automobiles, buses, and trains, and other similar places where the state or extent of one's clothing might reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public, and places of entertainment, including but not limited to bars, restaurants, clubs, cabarets, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls whether limited to specific members or not, and whether restricted to adults or not, and whether restricted to patrons invited to attend or otherwise, and whether or not an admission charge is levied, and all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally engage in any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  Exposure of the sexual organs or genitalia; or 
(2)  Appearance in a state of nudity. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(c)  Exceptions and exemptions. The prohibition contained in subsection (b) above shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under the age of ten (10) years; 
(2)  The breastfeeding of a baby; 
(3)  The live performance of legitimate plays, operas, or ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums, or educational institutions. 
(d)  Any person who violates subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-8 of the Codes of Ordinances for the City of Forest Park. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 22, § 1, 6-6-2011; Ord. No. 11-45, §§ 1, 2, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 12-30, §§ 1—3, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 13-24, §§ 1, 2, 12-16-2013) 
CHAPTER 2. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisance abatement powers of city, City Charter, § 1.03(1). 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A., Title 41. 

Sec. 11-2-1. - Definition. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
Sec. 11-2-2. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court to determine existence of nuisance and order its abatement, O.C.G.A., § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 11-2-3. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court after a 10 day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
Sec. 11-2-4. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
Sec. 11-2-5. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
Sec. 11-2-6. - Offense; penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Failure to abate nuisance after order to do so is a state crime, O.C.G.A., § 41-1-6. 
CHAPTER 3. - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11-3-1. - Livestock or fowl at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner for any livestock or domestic fowl, or any person having such livestock or fowl in his custody, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets or on the property of another person, without permission of the owner of that property, or of the person in possession of that property. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any livestock or domestic fowl, or anyone having such livestock or fowl in his possession or custody, to insure that it is enclosed by way of a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by chain or leash or in some other physical manner or under control by a competent person so that it cannot wander off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian. 
(c)  Any livestock or fowl found at large or unlawfully on the property of another in violation of this section shall be impounded by the city. 
Sec. 11-3-2. - Impoundment of livestock or fowl at large. 
If any animal or fowl impounded as provided in section 11-3-1 shall not be claimed and redeemed by the owner, or keeper thereof, within four (4) days after impounding, the chief of police shall advertise the same for sale by posting three (3) written or printed notices of such sale, one (1) at the gate or door of the pound and two (2) at any other conspicuous place within the city, for not less than three (3) consecutive days previous to such sale. On the day named for such sale, unless the animal shall be redeemed, the chief of police shall sell the animal at public auction, to the highest bidder, and shall pay over the proceeds to the city clerk. The owner or person charged with the care of any animal so impounded, may redeem such animal prior to the sale upon payment of such charges as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and compliance with such regulations governing redemption as are established by the city. 
Sec. 11-3-3. - Mistreatment of animals; cruelty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either by commission or omission, to: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill, needlessly carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat any animal. 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal under his control with proper food and veterinary care. 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal under his care with access to shelter consisting of not less than three (3) walls and a roof adequate to protect it from all types of weather twenty-four (24) hours daily. 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal under his control with access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times. 
(5)  Abandon any animal. 
(6)  Intentionally poison any animal. 
(7)  Allow or promote any fight between animals or to allow or permit any such fight in or upon any premises in such person's possession or under such person's control. 
(8)  Allow an animal under his control to be kept in unsanitary conditions. 
(9)  Keep or confine an animal under his control in other than a humane manner. 
(10)  To transport an animal in any moving vehicle without the vehicle being enclosed or the animal confined so that it may not jump or fall out or be injured in any manner. 
(Code 1959, § 4-5; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 4-15-2002) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 11-3-4. - Poisoning animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any substance within reach of any domestic animals which is poisonous or harmful to the animal. 
Sec. 11-3-5. - Birds, wild fowl or squirrels; injuring, molesting or killing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to trap, hunt, kill, shoot, or attempt to shoot, wound, injure, abuse or molest any bird, wild fowl or squirrel, or to rob bird nests; provided, however, if squirrels, starlings, English sparrows or any other kind of birds or wild fowl are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to the health or property of the citizens of the city in the opinion of the city, it shall be so declared by the city. Then such squirrels or birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the city. 
Sec. 11-3-6. - Manner of keeping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, or to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(b)  Should a complaint arise from the causes referred to above the person involved will be properly notified and given adequate time to either dispose of the animal or fowl or eliminate the cause of the complaint. 
(Code 1959, § 4-8) 
Cross reference— Loud and unnecessary noises generally, § 11-1-26. 
Sec. 11-3-7. - Vicious dogs or other animals, keeping. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain or harbor within the limits of the city a manifestly vicious dog or other animal unless the same is securely, but humanely, confined or restrained in such manner as to prevent such dog or other animal from attacking or biting a person or another animal. It shall be prima facie evidence of viciousness if a dog or other animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites persons or animals not on the owner's premises. 
(Code 1959, § 4-9) 
Sec. 11-3-8. - Pens, coops or enclosures within 100 feet of house or building; limitation on number of animal or fowl. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen, coop or enclosure for animals or fowl, or to permit any animal or fowl to be kept, maintained, or grazed within one hundred (100) feet of the nearest portion of any building that is in any way used by a person, other than a building occupied by the owner of any such animals or fowl. Notwithstanding any compliance with these distance regulations, no person shall keep or maintain on one (1) lot more than two (2) animals or more than two (2) fowl. This subsection shall not apply to the keeping or maintaining of dogs or cats as household pets. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any of the following duly licensed, lawfully operating businesses: pet boarding operators, kennels, veterinary facilities, animal hospitals, or stables. 
(Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, adopted Mar. 20, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Sec. 11-3-9. - Keeping of swine of any type or breed prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pen, confine, or keep swine of any type or breed within the city limits. 
(Code 1959, § 4-11; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 4-15-2002) 
Sec. 11-3-10. - Dead animals; duty of owner to remove from public ways. 
The owner of dead animals upon the public streets and ways shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so the city shall remove and dispose of such carcass, and charge the cost of such removal and disposition to the owner of the carcass, if known. 
(Code 1959, § 4-12) 
Sec. 11-3-11. - Same; removal from private property. 
When any dead animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the same immediately at his own cost. Upon failure to do so within a reasonable time the city shall remove same, the cost to be collected from the offending party. 
(Code 1959, § 4-13) 
Sec. 11-3-12. - Riding horses, mules and ponies on public and private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or cause to be ridden any horse, mule or pony on any property in the city, whether public or private, which destroys or damages grass, trees, shrubs or flowers belonging to any other person or to the city. 
(Code 1959, § 4-13.1) 
Secs. 11-3-13—11-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - DOGS AND CATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Vicious dogs, § 11-3-7. 

Sec. 11-3-21. - Running at large prohibited; leash required. 
Any person owning or having custody of a dog or cat within the city shall be required to confine such dog or cat on the premises of the owner of the animal, or on the premises of some responsible person authorized by the owner. Dogs and cats shall not be permitted to run at large on any streets, alleys, or any other place in the city other than the premises of the guardian or owner of the dog or cat while in the presence of the guardian, owner or other competent person authorized by the owner, except on a leash not more than six (6) feet long and in the care of a competent person. 
Sec. 11-3-22. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while on property. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having any animal in his possession or custody, to insure that it is enclosed by way of a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by chain or leash or in some other physical manner so that it cannot wander off of the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian except as hereinafter provided, it being the intent of this section that all animals be prevented from leaving while unattended, the real property limits of their owners, possessors, or custodians thereof. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 11-3-23. - Impounding certain dogs and cats, redemption. 
All dogs and cats at large on the city streets, alleys, or places other than the premises of the owners or keepers, or unrestrained on the owner's premises shall be impounded and kept for such period as established by the county pound, after which if not claimed by the owners or keepers, they shall be put to death in a humane manner or made available for adoption. Owners or keepers of dogs and cats seeking to claim those animals from the pound shall be required to pay the bill for the keep and care of the animals during confinement, and shall also be made to comply with the provisions of this article as to inoculation and registration before the dog or cat may be released. 
Sec. 11-3-24. - Rabies inoculation and tag required. 
(a)  All dogs and cats over three (3) months of age within the city limits shall be vaccinated against rabies once each year by a licensed veterinarian who will issue to the owner a durable metal tag and a certificate of vaccination approved by the state department of human resources. Tags must be attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and be worn at all times. Tags are not transferable from one (1) dog or cat to another dog or cat. 
(b)  A dog or cat less than three (3) months of age shall not be required to be vaccinated as is otherwise required by subsection (a) of this section, but the dog or cat shall be confined to its owner's premises. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having charge of any dog or cat brought into the city limits from outside the city to have the dog or cat vaccinated and to obtain a vaccination certificate and metal tag within fourteen (14) days from the date of entry; however, when the owner or person having charge of such a dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the health officer that the dog or cat has been vaccinated within the past twelve (12) months with a quality and quantity of vaccine prescribed by this chapter by a person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine, the dog or cat shall not be required to be vaccinated again until twelve (12) months from the date of the most recent vaccination. 
(d)  The animal control unit may adopt such other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 4-15-2002) 
Sec. 11-3-25. - Nuisances prohibited and defined. 
No person shall allow a dog over which he has custody or control to bark, howl, whine, or emit any noises whatsoever in a continuous manner for a period of one (1) hour or longer so as to disturb any occupant of any adjoining or adjacent property within hearing distance of such property. 
Cross reference— Noise restrictions generally, § 11-1-26 (b(4)). 
Sec. 11-3-26. - Violations, duty to report and give testimony in court. 
Any person who has personal knowledge of the violation of all or any portion of the foregoing provisions of this article shall notify the police department and shall also make known his willingness to appear and give testimony concerning any such violation in the municipal court of the city upon being summoned thereto at the time and place specified in such summons. 
(Code 1959, § 4-16) 
Sec. 11-3-27. - Biting dogs and cats. 
At the discretion of the animal control officer, or police officer, all dogs and cats known to have bitten a person shall be confined to the Clayton County Animal Control facility, or veterinarian's hospital, or the owners premises for a period of ten (10) days. All expenses incurred for boarding of the animal for this period of time shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. 
Sec. 11-3-28. - Removal of canine and feline fecal matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring, or having care, charge, control, or custody of any dog or cat to not remove any feces left by that dog or cat on any sidewalk, gutter, street, ground, lot, or other public area. Dog and cat waste shall be immediately removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine to be set by the city's municipal court judge presiding at that time. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have the charge, control, or use of a guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 08-11, § 40, 3-17-2008) 
Secs. 11-3-29—11-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Historical note— Unless otherwise indicated the provisions of this article are derived from Ord. No. 89-008, adopted 4-17-89. 
Editor's note— The provisions of this chapter were renumbered by the codifier to correspond to the numbering scheme of the code. 

Sec. 11-3-31. - Construction. 
This article is enacted relative to O.C.G.A. sections 4-8-23 through 4-8-28 and shall be subject to the definitions and construction as set forth therein. Specifically, O.C.G.A. section 4-8-21 and each subparagraph thereof is adopted as if included herein. 
Sec. 11-3-31.1. - Additional definitions. 
In addition to the definitions provided for in O.C.G.A. sections 4-8-20 through 4-8-29, entitled "Dangerous Dogs Control Law," which have already been incorporated herein by reference, and pursuant to the authority and permission granted to local governments under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29 to "provide for more restrictive control of dogs," the following additional definitions are adopted. 
a.  Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; and 
b.  Potentially dangerous dog shall also mean and include any dog that has been reported to the city's dog control officer on two (2) or more occasions as having advanced upon or moved toward a human being in an aggressive manner so as to place said human being in reasonable apprehension of being attacked by said dog had the dog not been restrained or confined so as to prevent such an attack, including but not limited to, rushing at a human being while snarling, growling, baring teeth, snapping, biting, or barking in an aggressive manner. 
c.  Proper enclosure shall mean an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of a height of not less than six (6) feet, but in any event of sufficient height to prevent the dog's escape from over the fence. Additionally, such fence shall have the bottom of the fence constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide for protection from the elements for the dog. No such enclosure shall be located in the front or side yard of a residence. 
(Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 11-3-32. - Appointment of dog control officer and animal control board. 
The dog control officer shall be appointed by the governing body of the City of Forest Park. The animal control board as constituted by Clayton County shall serve as the animal control board for the City of Forest Park. 
Sec. 11-3-33. - Investigation; classification; notice of hearing; and registration. 
(a)  The dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs and dangerous dog owners within the municipal limits of the city. 
(b)  When a dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog, the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner in writing, by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. 
(c)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that that owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control board. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the applicable agency and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the agency. 
(d)  When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (b) of this Code section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The board shall notify the dog owner in writing, by certified mail, of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. 
(e)  Within 10 days after the date of the hearing, the board shall notify the dog owner in writing, by certified mail, of its determination of the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
Sec. 11-3-34. - Violation without registration. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the City of Forest Park a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code section. 
(b)  Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this Code section for dangerous dogs, the dog control officer of the City of Forest Park shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer, or the dog control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a dangerous dog. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this Code section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the dog control officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $15,000 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(e)  The dog control officer of the City of Forest Park is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 11-3-35. - Registration fee. 
In addition to all other regular dog license fees, the owner of any dog described herein shall be required to pay an additional registration fee in an amount to be established by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance, for the registration required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 41, 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 11-3-36. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside an enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under restraint of a responsible person. 
Sec. 11-3-37. - Confiscation. 
(a)  Dangerous dogs shall be immediately confiscated as provided by O.C.G.A. section 4-8-27(a). 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be subject to confiscation as provided in O.C.G.A. section 4-8-27(b). 
(c)  Any dog thus confiscated may be redeemed by the owner as provided by O.C.G.A. section 4-8-27(c), and provided further that all fees imposed have been paid. 
CHAPTER 4. - LITTER 

Sec. 11-4-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Litter Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 1, 5-18-98) 
Sec. 11-4-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this part, the term: 
(1)  City means the City of Forest Park, Georgia. 
(2)  Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
(3)  Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof, any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area owned by any public or private entity; and all residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 1, 5-18-98) 
Sec. 11-4-3. - Littering public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(c)  Any person who violates subsections (a) or (b) upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of section 1-1-8 of this Code; 
(2)  The violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(d)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 3-30-2004) 
Sec. 11-4-4. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of O.C.G.A. § 11-4-3, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this part. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of O.C.G.A. § 11-4-3 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this part. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 1, 5-18-98) 
Sec. 11-4-5. - Enforcement of this part. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, building inspectors, code enforcement officers and other appropriate officials of the city are authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this part. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 1, 5-18-98) 
Sec. 11-4-6. - Receptacles to be provided, notice to public. 
All public authorities, agencies or departments having supervision of properties of the city are authorized, empowered, and instructed to establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where the property is frequented by the public. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 1, 5-18-98) 
Sec. 11-4-7. - Reward for information. 
A monetary reward for information resulting in a conviction of a person of violating this chapter, may be established by the governing body of the city from time to time, in their sound discretion. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 1, 5-18-98) 
Sec. 11-4-8. - Penalty. 
Penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished upon conviction, as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-001, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 11-4-9. - Amount of award; standards. 
Pursuant to section 11-4-7 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Park, Georgia, the mayor and council may grant a reward of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to any person providing to the city information resulting in a conviction of a person of violating this chapter. The mayor and council shall base the amount of the reward on the amount of litter involved and on the potential adverse effects of said litter on the aesthetics of the city or the health, welfare or safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-005, § 1, 3-1-99) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 99-005, adopted March 1, 1999, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 11-4-8. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 11-4-9, at the discretion of the editor. 
Title 12 - Technology Services 
Chapter 1.  Department of Technology Services 
CHAPTER 1. - DEPARTMENT OF TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 

Sec. 12-1-1. - Department established; purpose; director. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department of technology services for the purpose of planning and managing the informational systems and data communications equipment utilized by the city. 
(b)  The department of technology services shall be composed of a director who shall oversee said department and such other office and employees as are from time to time deemed necessary by the mayor and council. The director of the department of technology services shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of such appointment by the governing body in accordance with section 3.14 of the charter of the city. The director shall report to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 12-1-2. - Duties and responsibilities of the director and department; establishment of rules and regulations. 
(a)  Under the direct supervision of the city manager and in cooperation with all affected department directors, the director of technology services shall be responsible for the planning and management of the information systems and data communications equipment utilized by departments, officials, employees and agents of the city. These responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Overseeing the development of the city-wide information and technology strategy; 
(2)  Coordinating, with the consent of affected department directors or their designees, all telephony, voice, data, and communications equipment used by and between all departments, officials, employees and agents of the city; 
(3)  Overseeing and maintaining network security of the city's informational systems and data communications equipment; 
(4)  Overseeing network and server administration; 
(5)  Overseeing application system administration; and 
(6)  Providing end-user support to the various departments, officials, employees and agents of the city. 
(b)  The director of the department of technology services shall, in cooperation with all affected department directors, establish such rules and regulations as shall from time to time become necessary to the performance and the duties of the department of technology services pursuant to this chapter. The director shall recommend to the city manager, after consultation with and the consent of the affected department directors, for submission to and approval by the governing body any change which he deems desirable in the provisions of this chapter, other provisions of the Code of Ordinances or resolutions of the city affecting the department of technology services. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 2, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 12-1-3. - Assignment of additional duties. 
In addition the duties as provided in section 12-1-2, the department of technology services shall perform any and all other duties which may be assigned to it by the city manager, in writing or otherwise, and the department shall have all power and authority necessary to carry out such additional assigned duties. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 3-20-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 

 

 
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE 

 

 