CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SENOIA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published 1995 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted August 7, 1995 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SENOIA, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Lester H. Mann, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert Hannah 
Bobbie Blandburg 
Charles M. Wells, Jr. 
Kathy Goodell 
City Council 
____________ 
James R. Fortune, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Betty J. Cookman 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SENOIA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Robert K. Belisle 
Mayor 
____________ 
Larry Owens 
Jeffrey Fisher 
Bobby Graham 
Maurice Grover 
City Council 
____________ 
Andrew J. Whalen, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Debby Volk 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Betty J. Cookman, City Clerk, and Mr. James R. Fortune, Jr., City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Senoia, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Senoia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Senoia, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 3, 1995, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance shall be subject to the maximum punishment specified by general law, including the maximums specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B) and (a)(2)(C). Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 3, 1995, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Passed and Adopted by the city council this 7th day of August, 1995. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Senoia, Georgia, held on the 7th day of August, 1995. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local government, O.C.G.A. tit. 36. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, City of Senoia, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Senoia" followed. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is referred to without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Senoia, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the person having that privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise that privilege or to discharge the duty. 
Council or city council. The words "council" or "city council" shall mean the council of the City of Senoia. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Coweta. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of those persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Limits or corporation. The words "limits" or "corporation" shall mean the corporate limits (legal boundary) of the city. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Municipality. Wherever the word "municipality" appears in this Code, it shall mean the City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person or thing. A word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons and things. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. "Property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. "Public place" shall mean any place including, but not limited to, buildings or conveyances to which the public has or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement. 
Real property. "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall; may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
Special event means an outdoor event that is required to work with more than one city department to ensure that public health, safety, and welfare of the community is maintained. Outdoor events may include, but are not limited to, a fair, show, market, parade, run/walk, festival, carnival, or similar entertainment event or celebration, which is to be held in whole or in part upon public property and affect ordinary or normal use of a public right-of-way(s), or if held wholly upon private property, will nevertheless affect or impact the ordinary or normal use of a public right-of-way(s). 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tenant or occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, that building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Title of officer, employee, department, board, commission, agency. Whenever the title of an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Senoia" were added. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written, in writing. "Written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1-2; Ord. No. 18-11 , § 1, 1-7-2019) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes generally, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code and other headings within such sections are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of those sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality or other invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Except when a different specific penalty appears in this Code or other ordinance provision, the municipal court of the city shall be authorized to impose any fine or punishment, for a violation of this Code or other ordinance provision, up to the maximums specified by general law, including the maximums specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B) and (a)(2)(C). 
(b)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or Code. 
(c)  Every day during which a violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. Chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make such additions and amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - History notes and reference matter. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses at the ends of sections are for information only and are not a part of the Code. Citations to the 1980 Code ("Code 1980") and to later ordinances indicate only the source, and the text may or may not be changed by this Code. Cross references, state law references and other reference matter not in parentheses are for information only and are not a part of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner except by ordinance or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-5. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1-7) 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46. 
Sec. 1-10. - Miscellaneous actions and ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city to any person, firm or corporation. 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(5)  Any annual appropriation of the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes. 
(7)  Any zoning ordinance of the city or amendments thereto. 
All such actions, ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; elections, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 42; personnel, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Constitution reference— Home rule for municipalities, art. IX, § II, para. II. 
State Law reference— The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City clerk. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required. 
(2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents. 
(3)  Receive all money due the city, including taxes, licenses and fees, and pay out the same only upon orders of the mayor and council. 
(4)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - City attorney. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts. 
(3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Departments established. 
The following departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Code enforcement department. 
(2)  Department of city clerk. 
(3)  Police department. 
(4)  Street/maintenance department. 
(5)  Water department. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4-3) 
Sec. 2-4. - Records retention plan. 
(a)  "Retention schedules for local government records", as promulgated by the archives, records and information management section, Georgia Secretary of State, effective April 1, 2005, as from time to time amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the minimum retention schedules for public records of the city. For purposes of this section, definitions found at O.C.G.A. § 50-18-91 are hereby incorporated by reference. Municipal court records shall be maintained in accordance with those standards promulgated, from time to time, by the state administrative office of courts. 
Notwithstanding an applicable records retention schedule to the contrary, records relevant to an actual or potential investigation, administrative proceeding, or lawsuit, shall be preserved until the city attorney or other legal representative of the city determines the records are no longer needed. This exception supersedes any previously or subsequently established retention schedule for those records. 
(b)  The city administrator and each department head under the city administrator will be responsible for overseeing implementation, maintenance, security and compliance with record retention requirements. The responsibility imposed by this section includes training and education of employees in the creation, storage, indexing or archival of public records, records management and retention, compliance with open records laws, and production and disclosure of records in litigation. 
(c)  The city clerk is hereby appointed and designated as the records management officer for the city. It shall be the duty of the records management officer to promulgate policies and procedures governing public records management ("records management program") and the training, supervision and discipline of officers and employees for violations of such policies and procedures. Such policies and procedures shall include electronically stored information in addition to records created or maintained in tangible format. The records management officer may designate, in writing, such assistant or deputy officers as required to perform the duties of his office. 
(d)  Title to any public record created or required to be filed or recorded with the city or any department or agency thereof shall be vested in the city and no individual officer or employee shall acquire any property rights therein. Any records designated as "confidential" or "privileged" by law shall be so treated in their creation, maintenance, storage, dissemination, and disposal. Access to such records shall be restricted in the manner provided by law and disclosure thereof shall be made available only to authorized individuals. Unauthorized disclosure or the granting of access to any restricted public record of the city, except in strict accordance with this article and any records management program adopted pursuant thereto, shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action against city officers and employees responsible for such action, including removal from office or dismissal from employment. 
(e)  The destruction of public records shall occur only through the application of the appropriate retention schedule and after satisfying any administrative approvals necessary to authorize destruction. Alienation, alteration, theft or unauthorized destruction of public records of the city by any person or persons in a manner not authorized by an applicable records management program or retention schedule is prohibited, and may result in such person's criminal prosecution and/or removal from public office or dismissal from public employment. 
( Ord. No. 06-12, §§ 1—5, 11-27-2006 ) 
Secs. 2-5—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Compensation. 
(a)  The mayor shall be compensated for the services to the city in the amount of $6,000.00 per year, which shall be payable either in equal monthly installments or at the end of the fiscal year at the option of the mayor. 
(b)  Each councilmember shall be compensated for the services to the city in the amount of $1,200.00 per year, which shall be payable either in equal monthly installments or at the end of the fiscal year at the option of each individual councilmember. 
(c)  The mayor and each councilmember shall notify the city clerk in writing of their choice of compensation payment terms. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-1; Ord. of 9-5-95; Ord. of 3-16-98) 
Secs. 2-27—2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-36. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated by the mayor and council, on the first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. and the third Wednesday of each month at 9:30 a.m. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-11; Ord. of 3-4-96) 
Sec. 2-37. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-38. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Approval of minutes of last meeting. 
(3)  Appearances-business from floor. 
(4)  Administrative-fiscal matters. 
(5)  Approval of invoices not for administrative purposes and in excess of $500.00. 
(6)  Reports from department heads. 
(7)  Old business. 
(8)  New business. 
(9)  Adjourn. 
(b)  If the mayor and council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-13; Ord. of 3-4-96) 
Sec. 2-39. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedure of the mayor and council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-14) 
Sec. 2-40. - Previous questions. 
The previous question may be called at any time by a majority of the councilmembers present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any councilmember. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-15) 
Sec. 2-41. - Motions having precedence. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows: 
(1)  To lay on the table. 
(2)  To postpone to a time certain. 
(3)  To postpone indefinitely. 
(4)  To refer to a committee. 
(5)  To amend. 
(6)  To strike out or insert. 
(7)  To divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-16) 
Sec. 2-42. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1-17) 
Secs. 2-43—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-66. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 2-67. - Annual budget; appropriations. 
(a)  General budget policies. The budget process provides the primary mechanism by which key decisions are made regarding the levels and types of services to be provided within estimated resources. State law provides the budget requirements for the state local governments. This section provides an outline of the city's application of those laws. 
(1)  Scope. This applies to all budgeted funds, which are the responsibility, under the management of the city and the office of the city manager. 
(2)  Financing current costs. Current costs shall be financed with current revenues, including the use of authorized fund balances. The city shall avoid balancing current expenditure's through the use of future year's resources. The city shall strive to avoid short-term borrowing or accessing reserves to meet cash flow requirements. However, the city may enter into short-term borrowing or accessing reserves should a critical need arise. 
(3)  Budget objectives by type of fund. The following budget objectives are established for the different funds the city uses: 
a.  General fund. The annual budget for the general fund shall provide for general government operations of the city and maintain working capital necessary for the city's financial health and stability. 
b.  Special revenue fund. The city adopts annual budgets for each special revenue fund that demonstrates that any legally revenue sources are used consistent with applicable laws and/or regulations. (Confiscated asset fund) 
c.  Capital projects fund(s). The city adopts project budgets for each of its capital project funds. These adopted appropriations do not lapse at the end of the fiscal year; rather they remain in effect until project completion. 
d.  Debt service. The city adopts annual budgets for its debt service. Any remaining balance from prior years plus current year's projected revenues shall be sufficient to meet all annual debt service requirements. 
e.  Enterprise funds. The city will adopt budgets for enterprise funds in order to monitor revenue and control expenses. The city will use a business approach when budgeting enterprise funds. Enterprise funds shall be self-supporting. 
(b)  Operating budget. The operating budget shall be prepared on an annual basis and include the general fund, enterprise fund(s) and special revenue fund(s). Prior year budget appropriations and prior year actual data will be provided as reference data. Two-year projections of expenditures should be considered to the extent available. At a minimum, the city shall adopt annual balanced budgets for the general fund, special revenue fund and enterprise funds. 
(1)  Departmental appropriations. The budget shall be developed based upon "line-item" expenditures within each department and fund. This type of budget focuses on categories of expenditures such as personal services, contractual services, supplies, equipment, etc. within each department and fund. At a minimum, each department's appropriation in each fund shall be detailed within the budget document. 
(2)  Budget preparation categories. Each department shall submit budget request separately for: 
a.  Current services. A current services budget is defined as that level of funding which is necessary to provide the same level of service for the upcoming year that is currently being provided. 
b.  Expanded services. An expanded services budget includes funding requests associated with new services, additional personnel or new capital projects/equipment. 
(3)  Balanced budget. The budget shall be balanced for each budgeted fund. Total anticipated revenues plus that portion fund balance in excess of authorized reserves that is designated as a budget-funding source shall equal total estimated expenditures for each fund. 
(4)  Budget stabilization resources. The city shall establish a fund balance reserve in all operating funds for working capital. The purpose of the working capital is to cover the cost of expenditures caused by unforeseen emergencies, cover shortfall caused by revenue declines, fund capital projects approved by the mayor and council and to eliminate short-term borrowing for cash flow purposes. The goal of this reserve shall be maintained at no less than two months of operating and debt expenditures. 
(5)  Appropriation lapses at year end. All operating budget appropriations (including encumbered appropriations) shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year. Purchases encumbered in the current year, but not received until the following year, must be charged against a department's subsequent year appropriation. 
(6)  Budget control reports. The city shall maintain a system of budgetary control reports to assure adherence to the budget. The city clerk will prepare and distribute to departments, timely monthly financial reports comparing actual revenues, and outstanding encumbrances and expenditures with budgeted amounts. 
(7)  Budget schedule. The annual budget and an appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. The following budget preparation and presentation steps shall be taken: 
a.  Not less than six months (180 days) prior to the new fiscal year, departments shall receive all necessary budget worksheets. 
b.  Not less than four months (120 days) prior to the new fiscal year, departments shall submit budget requests to the city manager. 
c.  Mayor and council shall set a date for a workshop to discuss with the city manager and departments and make recommendations on the budget requests. 
d.  At least two regularly scheduled meeting prior to the end of the fiscal year, the mayor shall call a public hearing to present the budget. 
e.  Following the public hearing, the mayor and council shall have two reads of the budget ordinance. Following the second read, the budget shall be approved. 
(8)  Amendments. The budget is a dynamic rather than static plan, which requires adjustments as circumstances change. Amendments shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(d)(1). The mayor and council must approve all increases in total departmental appropriations, increases in the personal services budget and any other line items previously approved in the budget. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5-2; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, 12-16-13 ) 
Sec. 2-68. - Purchasing and procurement. 
(a)  Purchase requisitions. No goods shall be purchased and no services shall be procured by any officer, employee or elected or appointed official of the city prior to the proper execution of an official Senoia, Georgia purchase requisition form, a copy of which is attached to and made part of this Ordinance as Exhibit A. 
(1)  Purchase requisitions to be submitted to city clerk. All purchase requisition forms shall be properly filled out and submitted to the city clerk for processing. If the good or service, or any combination of goods and/or services, identified on the purchase requisition form is expected to cost in excess of $250.00, but not more than $1,000.00, then documentation (e.g., written quotes, bids, estimates) must be submitted to the clerk along with the purchase requisition form. 
(2)  City clerk to process purchase requisitions. The city clerk shall accept purchase requisition forms during the normal business hours of Senoia City Hall and process them promptly and in accordance with subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
The clerk shall examine the city's approved budgets and determine the appropriate category of expenditures from which to draw the funds requested on the purchase requisition form. If the funds contained or remaining in that category are not sufficient to cover the amount of funds requested on the purchase requisition form, then the city clerk shall not authorize or otherwise allow the further processing of said form. 
Should the clerk receive a purchase requisition form for a good or service, or any combination of goods and/or services, that is expected to cost in excess of $1,000.00, and the clerk determines that such good or service or combination thereof constitutes a planned expenditure in the city's budget, then the clerk shall present the purchase requisition form at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, for the council's approval or denial. In no instance shall the clerk authorize or otherwise allow the processing of a purchase requisition form that requests in excess of $1,000.00 for an item that does not constitute a planned expenditure in the city's budget. Any and all such requests must be made directly to the city council by the requesting party at a regularly scheduled or properly called special meeting of said council. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the city clerk. The city clerk shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities relating to the purchasing of goods, procuring of services and processing of purchase requisition forms: 
(1)  To keep the city council fully and regularly advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city and maintain accurate records reflecting the city's financial affairs; 
(2)  To process purchase requisition forms in accordance with the terms of subsection (a) of this section; 
(3)  To inspect, coordinate and represent the city in the purchase of goods and procurement of services within limitations and under such additional rules and regulations as may be imposed by the city council, provided that the city clerk is authorized to approve purchases and contracts for the city in amounts not exceeding $1,000.00; 
(4)  To prepare advertisements for bids and compiling bids for contracts and purchases subject to competitive bidding; 
(5)  To maintain an inventory and maintenance schedule for city property and to maintain an accurate tracking of the revenues and expenditures, by category of revenues and expenditures, for the city's government operations; 
(6)  To co-sign with the mayor, all checks drawn on the city's bank accounts, and to ensure the proper processing of purchase requisition forms prior to signing said checks; and 
(7)  To perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be delegated by the city council; 
(c)  Powers of the city council. The city council reserves unto itself exclusive jurisdiction in the following: 
(1)  To levy taxes; 
(2)  To make appropriations; 
(3)  To fix the rates of all charges and fees; 
(4)  To authorize the incurring of indebtedness; 
(5)  To authorize contracts and purchases exceeding $1,000.00 in value; 
(6)  To determine the priority and authorization for capital improvements; 
(7)  To call elections for the voting of bonds or other indebtedness as provided by general law; 
(8)  To hire, supervise and oversee, and dismiss the city clerk and any other regular or contract employee of the city government; and 
(9)  To exercise all powers and authorities vested by law in the city council unless specifically delegated by the council to someone else. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5-3; Ord. of 4-6-98, § 2—4) 
Secs. 2-69—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CODE OF ETHICS FOR CITY OFFICALS 

Sec. 2-81. - Preamble. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1, any person in government service should: 
(1)  Put loyalty to the highest moral principle and to country above loyalty to persons, party or government department. 
(2)  Uphold the Constitution, laws and legal regulations of the United States, the State of Georgia and all governments therein and never be a party to their evasion. 
(3)  Give a full day's labor for a full day's pay and give to the performance of his duties his earnest and best thought. 
(4)  Seek to find and employ more efficient and economical ways of getting tasks accomplished. 
(5)  Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not, and never accept, for himself or his family, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of his governmental duties. 
(6)  Make no private promises of any kind binding upon the duties of office, since a government employee has no private word which can be binding on public duty. 
(7)  Engage in no business with the government, either directly or indirectly, which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of his governmental duties. 
(8)  Never use any information coming to him confidentially in the performance of governmental duties as a means for making private profit. 
(9)  Expose corruption wherever discovered. 
(10)  Uphold their principles, ever conscious that public office is a public trust. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-82. - Ethics for government service. 
The mayor and council of the city establishes the following "Code of Ethics" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3: 
(1)  The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. 
(2)  All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only; and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them. GA Const. Art.1, Sec. 2, Paragraph 1. 
(3)  The people of this state have the inherent right of regulating their internal government. Government is instituted for the protection, security and benefit of the people; and at all times they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good may require it. GA Const. Art. 1, Sec. 2, Paragraph 2. 
(4)  The people have a right to expect that public officials will conduct themselves in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government they represent. 
(5)  Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly: 
a.  Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law; and 
b.  Avoid conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-83. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted. 
(b)  This Code has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts and actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interests in manners that affect the city; and 
(4)  To service as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by it terms. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports of regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-84. - Scope of persons covered. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the mayor and council of the City of Senoia, planning and zoning commission, the downtown development authority, the Senoia Area Library Board of Trustees, and the historical preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-85. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
City official means the mayor, members of the city council, city administrator, city clerk, and all appointed officers having discretionary authority to receive and expend public funds. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the board of may and council or other city boards or commissioner, as well as discussions or deliberations of the board of mayor an council, board or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Member means an elected member of the mayor and council, or an appointed member, director, or commissioner of the planning and zoning commission, the historic preservation commission, or the downtown development authority. 
Member of the family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of a local government official or the spouse-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law of a local government official. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, whom would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a commission member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the city official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means a material interest, either directly or through a member of the family, in another person or entity in which: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the board of mayor and council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-86. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No member shall use his position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No member, in any matter before the mayor and council, board or commission in which he has a financial or relational interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No member shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the mayor and council or any board or commission. 
(d)  No member shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift reward or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office, except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No member shall enter into any contract with the city, except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any member who has a proprietary interest in an entity doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the mayor and council and the city clerk. 
(f)  Public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment for compensation if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a matter which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the mayor and council, or board or commission on which he serves, or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-87. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city official shall not order any goods, services, or otherwise obligate the credit of the city without prior official authorization for such an obligation. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-88. - Travel expenses. 
A city official shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention or conference without refunding to pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-89. - Conflict of interest. 
A city official shall not participate in a vote or decision on a matter in which the official or official has a material financial interest; in addition, a city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit corporation may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the corporation. Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision after disclosing the interest. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-90. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall file as a candidate in any city election, without taking an unpaid leave of absence until the election is finally decided. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaigns in election of mayor or any member of the city council for the city during any period of time for which he is expected to perform work of receive compensation from the city. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessment, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during his hours of duty, service, or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express opinions on political subjects to candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-91. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person having a grievance against a person subject to this article for an alleged ethics violation shall file a sworn complaint, in writing, with the city clerk, setting forth in reasonable detail the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation. The complainant shall support the complaint with affidavits and/or documentary evidence, if available. Respondent shall be immediately informed of the alleged violation, by the city clerk who shall transmit to respondent a copy of the complaint; respondent and shall have 30 days to file, in writing, a sworn response to the alleged violation, submitting any affidavits and/or documentary evidence in support. 
(b)  To determine the validity of a complaint filed against an elected official, the members of the mayor and council other than the official(s) named in the complaint shall appoint an ethics board within 30 days of the filing of the complaint. Such board shall elect one of its members as the chairman and set an initial hearing to be held not later than 15 days after the response is filed. The purpose of this hearing is solely to determine whether the complaint is meritorious, and not vexatious or imposed solely for the purpose of harassment. The board shall determine the merit of a complaint by examining the following criteria: 
(1)  The timing of the ethics complaint with respect to when the facts supporting the alleged violation became known or should have become known to the complainant, when the ethics complaint was filed, and the date of any pending election in which the respondent is a candidate or is involved with a candidacy, if any; 
(2)  The nature and type of publicity surrounding the filing of the ethics complaint, and the degree of participation by the complainant in publicizing the fact that an ethics complaint was filed; 
(3)  The existence and nature of any relationship between the respondent and the complainant before the ethics complaint was filed; 
(4)  If respondent is presently a candidate for election to office, the existence and nature of any relationship between the complainant and any candidate or group opposing the respondent; 
(5)  The information contained in the respondent's filing. 
(6)  Other evidence of the complainant's motives in filing the complaint. 
If the ethics board determines the complaint to be meritorius, the ethics board shall hold a separate hearing within 30 days from the closure of the frivolity review. The board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(c)  To determine the validity of the complaint against a city appointed officer, employee, or appointed member of a board or committee (other than an authority or commission in which the terms of members are fixed by law, or who are subject to other codes of ethics or laws imposing ethical standards), the mayor and council shall examine the validity of the complaint based upon the above criteria. If the complaint is found to be meritorious, the mayor and council shall appoint an ethics board, who shall hold a hearing within 30 days of their appointment. 
(d)  Once a complaint against a person covered by this article is filed with the city clerk, the complainant shall be compelled to submit to an examination, under oath, by the ethics board. The complainant may appear with or without counsel, at their own expense. No complaint shall be withdrawn by the complainant, after filing; provided however, the ethics board may dismiss a complaint at any point it determines the complaint to be frivolous, without completing an investigation of its substantive merits. A complaint brought solely to attain political advantage shall be deemed frivolous. 
(e)  No action may be taken on a complaint filed more than 180 days from the time that the violation is alleged to have occurred or a person could have known, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the facts giving rise to a complaint, unless a person, by fraud or other device, prevents discovery of the violation. Where the allegations are the subject of a personnel proceeding or where the complainant is required to exhaust his or her administrative remedies prior to filing a complaint, the statute of limitations shall be tolled until the termination of said personnel proceeding or the exhaustion of administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 5-17-2013) 
Sec. 2-92. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics: 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any substantial interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and council members shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of ten individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city administrator shall maintain a listing of these ten qualified citizens. Should a complaint to be filed, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such filing, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies, equipment and legal support services as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. The city attorney shall initially respond to legal support issues, but may then designate such other legal counsel as the opinion of the city attorney may be appropriate in consideration of potential conflicts and in keeping with the code of professional responsibility. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 30 days after the receipt of complaint; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section: 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article. 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints: 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority and make recommendation for appropriate action by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-93. - Member rights. 
At any hearing held by the ethics board, the member who is the subject of inquiry shall have right to: 
(1)  Written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing; 
(2)  Be represented by counsel, at their own expense; 
(3)  To hear and examine the evidence and witnesses; 
(4)  Present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-94. - Exemptions. 
This Code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-95. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-96. - Penalties. 
Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by the mayor and council, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member. 
(2)  A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00 to be imposed by the mayor and council of the city board, commission or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(3)  Request for resignation by the mayor and council of the city, board, commission or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(4)  Removal from office by a majority vote of mayor and council as specified in section 5.16. of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-97. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member adversely affected by the action of the mayor and council of the city may obtain judicial review of such decision by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Coweta County within 30 days after the decision of the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Provided however, no action of the board of ethics or the mayor and council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, 5-21-2007) 
Secs. 2-98—2-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-119. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-120. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
Sec. 2-121. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Senoia. 
Covered account means (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-122. - Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer. 
(3)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: After diligence review of the past three years history, no incidents of identity theft have been reported involving city covered accounts. 
(4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. Written applications for opening new covered accounts or restoring an existing account are filed in the vault, with access limited to only those employees involved in these processes. 
(6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's bank account, or other method of payment; 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-123. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide authorized personnel with personal identifying information, including but not limited to a valid government issued driver's license or identification card. Upon confirmation by visual inspection of the identification, the identification card shall be returned and no personal identifying information, as defined herein, shall be written on any form. 
(2)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-124. - Access to covered account information. 
(1)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city administrator or his designee on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city administrator and the password changed immediately. 
(4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-125. - Credit card payments. 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-126. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-127. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the mayor: 
a.  Contact the customer; 
b.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
i.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
ii.  Close the account; 
c.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
d.  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
e.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
f.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the mayor: 
a.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
b.  Deny the application for the new account; 
c.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
d.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-128. - Disposal of personal identifying information in covered accounts. 
(a)  In accordance with applicable laws and ordinances pertaining to retention and disposal of public records, it shall be the goal of the city to take reasonable measures to prevent unauthorized access to and use of consumer report information and any personal identifying information, medical information, and financial information contained in covered accounts while such information is needed and maintained by the city, and to properly dispose of such information within a reasonable time after a covered account becomes inactive or the purpose for attaining such information has been extinguished. 
(b)  Measures shall be implemented to burn, pulverize or shred all documents containing such information so that the information cannot be read or reconstructed, including the erasure or destruction of electronic media on which such information was stored. 
(c)  Whenever the city elects to transfer such documents, files or data, regardless of the medium in which stored, to an independent destruction contractor for ultimate disposition, due diligence shall be exercised in the selection and retention of the contractor, including: 
1.  Reviewing and evaluating the company's information security policies and procedures; 
2.  Obtaining information about the company from several reliable references; and conducting a background investigation on the contractor, including a compliance audit of similar contracts with other entities. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-129. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the Identity Theft Prevention Program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-130. - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city administrator is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city administrator to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the city administrator at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the Identity Theft Prevention Program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-131. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Secs. 2-132—2-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 2-142. - Short title. 
Treatment of Address Discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-143. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-144. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
City means City of Senoia. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-145. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-146. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
b.  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-147. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, adopted September 21, 2015 repealed ch. 6, arts. I—VII, §§ 6-1—6-3, 6-10—6-35, 6-50—6-60, 6-70—6-81, 6-90—6-94, 6-98—6-112, 6-120, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 6 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, adopted April 20, 2015 . 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 74. 
State Constitution reference— Use of proceeds of state alcoholic beverage tax, art. III, § IX, para. VI. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose of provisions. 
This chapter is enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the city to promote the health and general welfare of its citizens; to regulate and control the licensing and sale by the package and by the drink of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits; to establish reasonable regulations and ascertainable standards for licensees which will ensure the public peace; to protect schools, churches, and residential areas from the negative secondary effects attributable to establishments that sell malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits; and to ensure that only qualified persons obtain licenses for the sale, manufacture or distribution of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Bar means any premises at which a retailer licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A., tit. 3 or this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages derives 75 percent of more total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Bed and breakfast means a structure, located within a single-family residential zoning district, that is operated by the owner or lessee thereof, who occupies the premises as their principal dwelling, as a place of overnight sleeping accommodations for hire, which traditionally includes provision of the breakfast meal in the cost of the sleeping room. 
Bouncer means an individual primarily performing duties related to verifying age of admittance, security, maintaining order, or safety, or a combination thereof, in a bar. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Craft malt beverages , as defined by the Brewers Association, Boulder, Colorado (the trade organization for the craft beer/microbrewing industry), are malt beverages produced by a small, independent brewer who follows traditional brewing processes using select, sometimes non-traditional, ingredients to produce a distinctive product. Craft brewers produce very limited annual quantities, much less than traditional breweries which produce millions of barrels per year. 
Disciplinary action means any citation or arrest arising out of a violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, an employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of the licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines, and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, paragraph (2), subparagraph (D), or to the public for consumption off the premises, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, paragraph (2), subparagraph (D), shall not be used. 
Growler means a bottle, container or vessel made of glass, ceramic, or similar durable material, with a capacity of at least a capacity of at least 32 ounces (1 qt.) and not exceeding 64 ounces (2 qt.) that is designed for and especially intended to be filled with a craft malt beverage from a keg by a licensee, or employee of a licensee, holding a retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer license to sell malt beverages issued pursuant to this chapter, but not holding a license to sell distilled spirits, by the drink or package. 
Hotel means any building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where a minimum of 50 sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, and food is actually served and consumed in a restaurant as defined in this section, having an adequate and sanitary kitchen; said sleeping accommodations and restaurant being conducted on the same premises. Hotels may grant franchises for the operation of a restaurant and lounge on their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. Lounges may be located separately from restaurant facilities in hotels provided there is a commonality of ownership of the restaurant and lounge. 
Lounge means a separate room adjacent to and under common ownership with a restaurant, hotel, or located in a private club in which wine, malt beverages and distilled spirits may be sold by the drink and consumed on the premises. Except in the case of a private club or hotel, as herein defined, a lounge shall be licensed under this chapter only if operated in common with and as a part of a restaurant, as defined herein. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Off-site farm winery tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. The off-site farm winery tasting room license classification created by this chapter is limited to farm wineries, or an affiliate, licensed by the state. 
An off-site farm winery tasting room, upon licensure and payment of the appropriate license fees, shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary (including sections 6-20, 6-21, 6-70, 6-90, and 6-91), be authorized: 
(1)  To offer wine samples and to make retail sales of its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery, both for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises and 
(2)  To make sales of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wines not produced by a farm winery for consumption on the premises, provided that any alcoholic beverage sold pursuant to this subsection (2) shall be purchased by the winery from a licensed wholesaler at wholesale prices. 
An off-site farm winery tasting room shall also be authorized to operate as a bona-fide dining establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where at least one regular meal per day is served at least three days per week, excluding periods for holidays, vacations, and renovation. 
For the purposes of this chapter, upon application, a certain location may be designated by the mayor and council as a special entertainment district pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. Such designation is made solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in an off-site farm winery tasting room. 
On-premise consumption dealer means any person who sells, at retail only to consumers and not for resale, distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Package dealer means any person engaged in selling, at retail only to consumers and not for resale, any wine or malt beverages in unbroken packages. 
Person means and includes any individual, partnership, corporation or association. 
Powdered alcohol means a powdered or crystalline substance that contains any amount of alcohol for direct use or reconstitution. 
Premises when used in conjunction with package sales, means the floor space on and from which the package sale of alcoholic beverages is conducted; when used in conjunction with an eating establishment, hotel, or private club means that floor space on and from which the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is conducted. Premises may include outdoor serving or dining areas, except when located on public property. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Regular prepared meal means a meal which is prepared on the premises according to the order of the customer given to a server at the table, booth, or bar where the customer is seated and served by the server at said table, booth, or bar. 
Restaurant or eating establishment means a bona-fide eating establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where at least one regular prepared meal per day is served at least three days per week, excluding periods for holidays, vacations, and renovation, and where the principal business is the serving of prepared meals which, excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages, account for at least 50 percent of the total annual gross sales of the business. For purposes of this chapter only, the term "restaurant" shall also include a dinner theatre where at least one prepared meal is served to patrons in conjunction with the production of mainstream theatrical or musical events, in a structure or building located within a commercial zoning district having capacity for seating at tables at least 100 persons and meeting all state and local requirements as a place of public assembly. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol, by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wholesaler means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to package dealers, or to on-premise consumption dealers. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance with chapter. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, or distribute, any alcoholic beverages at wholesale, by the package, or for consumption on the premises within the city without first having complied with the provisions of this chapter. No person shall keep, possess, or store at such person's place of business within this city any alcoholic beverages for which said person does not hold a valid and current state and city license to sell such alcoholic beverages. No person shall manufacture, use, offer for use, purchase, offer to purchase, sell, offer to sell, or possess powdered alcohol. Any person violating this section shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and upon conviction sentenced to a fine, not to exceed $1,000.00, or upon failure to pay the fine, to confinement for six months. In addition thereto, notice of such violation shall be given the state revenue commissioner, as require by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 6-4—6-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-10. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the manufacture, sale, transfer or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city without first having obtained a license therefore from the city and be in possession of a valid state license, provided that wholesalers and distributors (possessing a valid state license) maintaining no fixed place of business, warehouse or other facility in the city may make sales and deliveries to licensed package dealers and on-premise consumption dealers without obtaining a city license. 
(b)  No person licensed for the sale of a particular class of alcoholic beverages may sell other classes of alcoholic beverages without obtaining the required license therefor. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-11. - Qualifications of applicants. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any applicant who is not a citizen or resident legal alien of the United States. 
(b)  Corporations shall apply for a license in the name of the corporation, and the license shall be issued to the corporation. Partnerships shall apply for a license in the name of one of the partners, and the license shall be issued in the name of the applicant. In the case of corporate applicants whose stock is closely-held and not publicly traded, the majority stockholder(s) must meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. Where the applicant is a corporation whose stock is publicly traded, an officer of such corporation, or in lieu of an officer, an agent involved in the active management of the local business establishment to be licensed, shall meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. If the applicant is a partner in a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners at the time of application, and at all times during which the license is in effect. 
(c)  In addition to meeting all qualifications for a license under State law, all applicants for licenses, whether original or renewal, must attach to their applications evidence of their good character. In addition to meeting state qualification standards, no license, whether original or renewal, shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation organized for pecuniary gain if any individual having an interest either as owner, partner or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse shall have been convicted of or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, to, once, within five years immediately prior to filing, or twice, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application, of any felony or of any violation of any law or administrative regulation regulating the sale, manufacture or distribution of alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics. Where the application, whether original or renewal, is for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption, conviction of an offense or the taking of the plea of guilty or nolo contendere once, within five years immediately prior to filing, or twice, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application, to any sex offense shall also disqualify the applicant for license under this section. No license, whether original or renewal, shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation where an individual having an interest as owner, partner or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted of or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, once within five years immediately prior to the filing of said application, or twice within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application of the offense of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. The restrictions of this paragraph as to stockholders shall apply only to stockholders of privately owned corporations and to stockholders of publicly owned corporations who hold in excess of ten percent of outstanding stock. 
(d)  On-premises consumption licenses shall be issued only to applicants who meet the definition of a hotel, restaurant, or private club. 
(e)  Applicants for renewal licenses must meet all qualifications of applicants for original licenses. Loss of qualifications during the term of a license shall be grounds for revocation or for denial of renewal. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-12. - Classification of licenses. 
Licenses under this chapter are classified as follows: 
(1)  Wholesale: malt beverages/wine; 
(2)  Wholesale: distilled spirits; 
(3)  Brewpub: A brewpub license shall only issue to an eating establishment in conjunction with a retail consumption dealers license for malt beverages, which in addition to craft beer manufactured on the premises shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages; such license may issue to the eating establishment in conjunction with a retail consumption dealers license for distilled spirits, wine, or combination thereof; provided, however, a brewpub licensee shall not sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises, including the sale of growlers; 
(4)  On-premise consumption: malt beverages; 
(5)  On premise consumption: wine; 
(6)  On premise consumption: distilled spirits; 
(7)  Retail package: malt beverages/wine; 
(8)  Private clubs: malt beverages/wine; 
(9)  Private clubs: distilled spirits; 
(10)  Ancillary license: alcohol beverage caterer; 
(11)  Ancillary license: malt beverage and wine tastings. 
(12)  Off-site farm winery tasting room. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-13. - Application submission; basic information. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall make written application to the city manager on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall answer all questions on the application, under oath, and shall supply all information and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data or documents as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Each application shall state the name and address of each applicant, the place where the proposed business is to be located; the type license applied for, whether for malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits, and whether for wholesale, package sale or on-premise consumption. The application shall also contain a beginning balance sheet showing the proposed original capitalization of the business and its source. If an applicant is a corporation, the application shall state the names of all officers and stockholders of the corporation and the percentage ownership of each. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names of all partners therein, whether general or limited. All applications shall include the names of all persons that have or will have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the business for which the license is sought. Each application shall also contain such additional information as the city manager prescribes, shall be verified as true by the applicant before filing and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $1,500.00 to cover the cost of investigating the applicant and processing the application. If granted, the application fee shall apply against the license fee. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-14. - Same; accompanying information; review of application. 
(a)  In order to demonstrate the location meets all distance prohibitions imposed by State law, each application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be accompanied by a scale drawing of the premises for the proposed business, showing its location with respect to all streets within 600 feet in every direction. Such drawing shall also depict the distance from the premises to each church building, school building, educational building, school ground, college campus, governmentally owned and operated alcohol treatment center and housing authority property. All such distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  Licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only shall not be subject to regulation as to distances from churches, schools, and colleges, but shall meet state distance requirements from governmentally owned and operated alcohol treatment centers and housing authority property. 
(c)  In reviewing an application, the city manager may utilize the chief of police and other city officials with respect to matters within their areas of expertise. All applicants shall furnish such additional data, information and records as may be requested of them by the city manager, chief of police or other city officer such as would be useful in determining whether to approve or reject such application. Copies of all Form ATT-I 7, Personnel Statements, filed with the state shall be submitted with the application. By filing an application, the applicant agrees to produce for oral interrogation any person who is to have a beneficial interest in the business for which the license is sought or who is to be employed by such business. The failure to provide requested data, information and records or to make those persons specified available for interrogation within a reasonable time shall be grounds for denial of an application. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-15. - Ownership of premises. 
Unless the applicant will own the premises from which the business will be conducted, the application shall also disclose the name of every person owning a beneficial interest in the premises and shall state the amount of rental to be paid, the manner in which the rental is to be determined, and to whom and at what intervals the rent is to be paid. The applicant shall also attach a copy of the proposed lease with the verified statement of the applicant that such lease contains the entire agreement between the parties. No license shall be issued to an applicant who leases premises under a variable rent system whereby the landlord shares in the profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-16. - Limitations on number of licenses held. 
(a)  No person shall have an interest in more than two alcoholic beverage licenses, within the city, regardless of the degree of such interest. 
(b)  (1)  For purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to have a beneficial interest in a license when he or she: 
a.  Holds a license to sell either by the package or for on-premise consumption. 
b.  Has any ownership interest, whether legal, equitable or other, in or control over a package or on-premise consumption license. 
(2)  Under the de minimis concept, a person who owns less than five percent of the shares of a corporation which has more than 35 shareholders or whose stock is publicly traded shall not, on the fact of stock ownership alone, be deemed to have a beneficial interest in a license held by a corporation. 
(3)  With regard to this section, a person will not be deemed to have an interest in more than one alcoholic beverage business when separate distilled spirits, malt beverage and wine licenses are held by the same licensee at the same business premises conducted as a single operation. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section is intended to prohibit the child of the holder of an alcoholic beverage license from also owning such a license if such child is emancipated and holds no business or financial interest or vested interest in the parent's business operation. 
(d)  No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any alcoholic beverage license unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished to the city at the time of making application for the license. It shall be the continuing duty of an alcoholic beverage licensee to report to the city manager, in writing, within ten days, any change in any interest in such licensee's business. Failure to report such change in interest shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-17. - Sale, distribution and other dealing in alcoholic beverages within the city by officials and employees; exemptions. 
(a)  No member of the mayor and council shall hold any interest, directly or indirectly, in any establishment licensed by the city to sell, distribute, or otherwise deal in alcoholic beverages. Any member holding or having a beneficial interest in any alcohol license issued by the city at the time of that person's election or appointment to office shall divest himself or herself thereof within 60 days. For purposes of this section, a member shall be deemed to have or hold a beneficial interest if the license is issued in the name of the person's spouse, child, parent or sibling, or in a partnership or corporation in which such person owns more than ten percent controlling interest. 
(b)  No officer or employee of the city, whose official duties involve issuance and regulation of alcoholic beverage licenses or the enforcement of alcoholic beverage laws, shall hold any interest, direct or indirect, in any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city or in any establishment licensed by the city to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. The city manager, upon advice and consent of the mayor and council, may exempt officers and employees of the city from the provisions of this section, upon written finding that such officer or employee's involvement, direct or beneficial, in any business licensed by the city to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages would pose no conflict of interest or interference with the performance by the officer or employee of his or her official duties for the city. 
(c)  No officer or employee of the city shall be permitted to engage in employment with any person, firm or corporation licensed by the city to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages. The city manager may, in writing, exempt those officers or employees from the prohibition of this section, upon finding that such employment would pose no conflict of interest or interference with the performance by the officer or employee of his or her official duties for the city; provided, however, no certified police officer shall be permitted employment by any establishment that deals in alcoholic beverages without first obtaining the written consent of the chief of police. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-18. - Standard for new license at existing location. 
An application for a new license for an existing licensed location shall be subject to all the requirements for the granting of an original application for a new license. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-19. - Location restrictions; wholesalers' and manufacturers' licenses. 
No manufacturer's or wholesalers' license shall be issued except for premises located within a zoning classification permitting warehousing and/or light manufacturing and meeting all requirements of the city zoning and developmental ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-20. - Location restrictions: package sales. 
(a)  Except for those licensees who operate a bed and breakfast, or as a specialty wine shop under this chapter, package sales of malt beverages and/or wine shall only be conducted in conjunction with the business operation of a supermarket, convenience store, general merchandise department store, or drugstore, meeting the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Licenses for the package sale of malt beverages and/or wine will be issued only for premises located within a commercial zoning classification under the city zoning ordinance. 
(c)  All premises at which the package sale of alcoholic beverages is authorized shall meet all requirements of the city's zoning and developmental ordinances, as well as minimum building, fire and life safety codes. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, "supermarket" shall mean a grocery retailer carrying a full selection of food and grocery items, including fresh produce and meats, and having a minimum wholesale inventory of $50,000.00 in food and grocery items, exclusive of malt beverage, wine, and tobacco products. A "convenience store" shall mean a retail store carrying a limited selection of canned, packaged or prepared food and grocery items and at which gasoline is regularly available for sale (provided that no service or mechanical work is performed on motor vehicles), and provided further, that the minimum wholesale value of the inventory of food and grocery items maintained on the premises for sale to the public is no less than $25,000.00, exclusive of malt beverages, wine, and tobacco products. A "drugstore" shall mean a retail store at which prescription drugs and medications are dispensed under the control of a State-licensed pharmacist, and which sells at retail various personal health-related items and drugs for which prescriptions are not required. A "general merchandise department store" shall mean a retail store with floor space open to the public in excess of 25,000 square feet and an inventory with minimum wholesale value of not less than $100,000.00, exclusive of malt beverages, wine, and tobacco products. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, specialty "wine shop" shall mean a store exclusively for the retail sale of package wine and no other alcoholic beverages. Wine shop can also provide specialty items, including food, and other related merchandise. Said store shall be located in the General Commercial (GC) zoning district and meet all other requirements of the ordinance unless otherwise specified, maintain an exclusive Employer Identification Number from the Internal Revenue Service and an occupational tax certificate from the city. A wine shop established in accordance with this section may: 
(1)  Sell and serve only wine by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Sell only wine by the package. 
(3)  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a wine shop from serving food provided it meets all of the requirements for restaurants in the General Code of Ordinances and is properly permitted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-21. - Location restrictions; on-premise consumption; package sales. 
(a)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall only be issued in conjunction with an eating establishment, hotel, or private club on premises located within a commercial zoning classification and meeting all requirements of the city zoning and developmental ordinances; provided, however, a bed and breakfast, licensed for operation in a residential zoning district, shall be eligible for a license for the on-premises consumption of beer and wine only by its registered guests and invitees. The license shall identify those portions of the premises where alcoholic beverages may be sold and consumed. 
(b)  An on-premise consumption dealer shall not sell distilled spirits in packages for carry out purposes at any time. 
(c)  An on-premise consumption dealer may sell beer or wine by the package for carryout purposes only: (i) on any day and at any time when the sale of package beer or wine for carryout purposes is otherwise not prohibited by law; and (ii) at any licensed location which is not within distances to grounds or buildings where the sale of alcoholic beverages for carry out purposes is otherwise prohibited by law. No additional license is required for an on-premise consumption dealer to engage in package sales under this section. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 6-18-2018 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, adopted June 18, 2018 , amended § 6-21 to read as set out herein. Previously § 6-21 was titled "Location restrictions; on-premise consumption." 
Sec. 6-22. - Indebtedness to city. 
No license shall be issued to any applicant if any person holding a beneficial interest in the business to be licensed owes any delinquent taxes or assessments to the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-23. - Investigation of application; issuance. 
Every application filed pursuant to this chapter shall be thoroughly investigated by the chief of police, who shall make a formal written report and recommendation to the city manager. The city manager shall review the chiefs report and make such further investigation as he or she deems appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-24. - Considerations for granting of licenses. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to issue or refuse to issue a license to any applicant. In determining whether or not any application shall be granted and a license issued, the city manager shall consider all mandated standards of this chapter and the following information in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has ever violated any federal, state, county or municipal law, ordinance or administrative regulation regarding alcoholic beverages, their possession, sale, manufacture, distribution, handling, or dealing therein; 
(2)  The manner in which the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has conducted any business within the city as to the necessity for excessive police intervention; 
(3)  The reasonably anticipated effect on the immediately surrounding neighborhood for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, noise and/or light pollution; 
(4)  Whether the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has ever had any alcoholic beverage or business license suspended or revoked by any state or any political subdivision thereof, or whether any alcoholic beverage business with which the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has been associated has been cited for a violation of the laws or regulations of any state or any local ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, and the outcome of such proceedings. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-25. - Grant of application; notice of denial. 
(a)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses meeting this chapter shall be granted by the city manager for a period expiring on the last day of December of the current calendar year, unless some specific cause regarding location, traffic or environmental conditions or the specific causes set out in section 6-24 justifies a refusal. In the event of denial for location, traffic or environmental conditions, the applicant shall be entitled to file a new application of like kind for a different location without the loss of any part of the application fee. The city manager's review of an application shall be completed within 45 days of submission of a completed application, including all documents sought during the course of the investigation of the application. In the event the city requests additional documents during the application review period, the 45 day review period shall be stayed until production of the additional documents is completed. 
(b)  In the event the city manager denies an application for a license, the applicant shall be provided notice in writing of the denial, and a listing of the reason(s) therefor. The applicant shall have the right to appeal that denial, in writing, no more than ten days following receipt of the denial notice. A hearing shall be held before the mayor and council in not less than 30 days from the date of the written notice of appeal. Within ten days from the date of the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor and council shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision and the reason(s) therefor. Aggrieved applicants, whose application is denied by the city manager and affirmed by the mayor and council, may petition the superior court of the county for writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-26. - False information in application. 
Any material omission from, or untrue or misleading information in, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, or for the revocation of a license previously granted. Any failure to notify the city manager of the change in any relationship as specified in section 6-16(d) within ten days after such change is made shall likewise constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-27. - License fees. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a license fee, payable at the time of issuance of the license and each annual renewal license, as follows: 

 
* When a brewpub license is issued in conjunction with an on-premises consumption: malt beverages license, the combined fee will be $1,500.00. 
(b)  The license fees imposed by this section are regulatory fees intended to offset the city's cost in administering and enforcing this chapter. In addition thereto, licensees are subject to payment of an occupational tax in accordance with chapter 18. 
(c)  When license is issued on or after July 1 license fee is prorated by one-half. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-28. - Payment of license fee; renewal. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses are annual licenses that run from January 1 to December 31 of each year. Holders of existing licenses may apply to the city manager for renewal for the next calendar year between October 1 and November 1 of the current year by filing a renewal application in proper form, submitting required information for an updated criminal history, and tendering the required fee. Renewal license fees for the following year are due by December 15 and shall be past due if not paid by that date. After December 15, there shall be imposed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license, which license fee and penalty must be paid, in full, before a renewal license is issued. Persons failing to obtain a valid renewal license by January 1 shall be prohibited from engaging in the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-29. - Privilege nature of license. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall constitute a grant of privilege to carry on or conduct a business covered by such license during the term of the license, subject to the terms and conditions imposed by the City Charter, this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city and the Constitution, laws and regulations of the state and United States of America applicable thereto. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall have printed on the face the following words: 
"THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE CONDITIONAL ON THE HOLDER MEETING ALL STANDARDS FOR SUCH LICENSE AND OPERATING REGULATIONS APPLICABLE THERETO SET OUT IN CITY ORDINANCES AND GEORGIA LAW. FAILURE TO MEET SUCH STANDARDS OR TO COMPLY WITH SUCH OPERATING REGULATIONS SHALL SUBJECT THE HOLDER TO THE LICENSE BEING REVOKED FOLLOWING NOTICE AND HEARING." 
(c)  All licenses shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-30. - Transferability of licenses. 
(a)  [ Transferability of licenses. ] Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Death. In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest therein, the same may, with the approval of the city manager and subject to the terms of this chapter, be transferred to the personal representative of the deceased person, or to the devisees or heirs at law of the deceased person, if such devisees or heirs meet the qualifications contained in this chapter. The license of a deceased person shall be held by his personal representative only for the time necessary to complete administration of his estate and to dispose of the license or interest therein. One transfer may be made by the personal representative of a deceased license holder to a person meeting the qualifications of this chapter. 
(c)  Partnerships. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a partner in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his interest to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal, however, shall not serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless such new owner shall apply for a license and comply with all provisions of this chapter, and then only upon the approval of the city manager. 
(d)  Increased capitalization. A partnership or corporation holding a license may take on additional partners or shareholders, as the case may be, where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanded facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it further appears that the other partners or shareholders will not receive any of the additional capital investment. Such additional partner or new stockholder must apply for a license and meet all requirements of a licensee, including approval by the city manager, before he shall be permitted to acquire such interest. 
(e)  Transfer of locations. Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no new license fee, but the new premises must meet all location requirements as for a new license. Fees relating to construction permits and inspections for the new location shall be imposed. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-31. - Suspension and revocation; grounds and procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 6-33 and 6-34, no license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued pursuant to this chapter shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing, upon not less than three days prior written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his or her employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws; 
(2)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his or her employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the business is licensed for on-premise consumption; 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; 
(4)  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor, any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented; 
(5)  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this chapter as a condition or qualification for holding a license; 
(6)  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance, or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, narcotics, or disorderly conduct, including any sexual offense, under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premise consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violation was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(c)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by statutory overnight delivery. If by statutory overnight delivery, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its street address as it appears in the records of the city. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of street address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by statutory overnight delivery of any notice required by this chapter, the service is deemed complete at the time of deposit with the statutory overnight provider. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted by the mayor and council. Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney or his or her designee shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross-examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(e)  The mayor and council shall make its final determination within ten days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the mayor and council's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to penalty, if any. Such penalty may include one or more of the following: revocation of the license; suspension of the license for no more than 12 months; imposition of a probationary period not to exceed 12 months, and/or a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000.00. Where a probationary period is imposed which exceeds the term of the current license, the mayor and council may provide provisional conditions for a renewal license. 
(f)  The mayor and council's decision shall be personally served upon the licensee or mailed by first class mail to the licensee's attorney and city attorney within ten days of the close of the hearing. 
(g)  The mayor and council may impose a fine, not to exceed $1,000.00, for each violation of this chapter and may condition reinstatement or renewal of the license on the licensee posting a performance bond, in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00. A second or subsequent violation, which occurs within three years from the date of the first violation may constitute grounds for suspension, revocation, and/or non-renewal of the license. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report to the commissioner of revenue, in the format designated by the commissioner and in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated for that purpose, any disciplinary action as defined in this chapter and O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1 against a licensee, the licensee's employee, or person holding a financial interest in the license. Such report shall be made promptly after issuance of a citation or arrest and in no case more than 45 days thereafter. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-32. - No refunds following suspension or revocation. 
In the event a license issued hereunder is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the application or license fees previously remitted. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-33. - Emergency suspension; violation involving licensed business. 
(a)  The city manager has authority to suspend a license for a short-term period not to exceed ten days. The city manager's decision shall be in writing, with the term of the suspension and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee as provided in section 6-31(c). 
(b)  A short-term suspension by the city manager must be for an emergency cause. "Emergency cause" for the short-term suspension of a license shall consist of a third or subsequent violation by the same licensee or the licensee's employees or agents on the same premises within a two year period of any state or federal laws, administrative regulations of the state or city ordinances regulating such business holding a license, including those prohibiting gambling, regulating the sale, manufacture, distribution, handling, dealing in, and possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in an unlawful manner, and the manufacture, sale, or distribution of any controlled substance which puts the city and the health and safety of its citizens at such risk that an immediate suspension is necessary until a hearing as provided for in section 6-31 can be held. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-34. - Emergency suspension; all alcoholic beverage licenses. 
The mayor and council is authorized to suspend the sale of alcoholic beverages under all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter during any state of emergency declared by the governor, any local emergency as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 or for any other serious situation in which the mayor and council deems such emergency suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor and council determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council, at which time the suspension shall cease unless the same is extended by affirmative action of the mayor and council. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-35. - Acceptance and consideration of application after refection and/or revocation. 
When any license to engage in package sales of alcoholic beverages is denied by the city manager, or a license is revoked for cause, no new application shall be accepted from the same applicant for a license within 24 months from the time of such rejection or revocation. Submission of a new application at the same premises by another applicant which application shows the applicant previously rejected or revoked as a holder of an interest in the desired license shall be cause for rejection of the new application. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-36—6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS FOR ALL ESTABLISHMENTS AND OTHER PROPERTY OPEN TO PUBLIC 

Sec. 6-50. - New buildings; expiration of license for failure to commence or operate business. 
(a)  Where a building in which a licensee proposes to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of application for such license, not in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city manager and show a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and applicable ordinances of the city. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this chapter and applicable ordinances of the city. If the building is not completed during the year in which the licensee fee was paid, such fee shall apply to the year in which the building is completed and the business commences. 
(b)  All holders of licenses hereunder must open for business within six months after issuance of said license; failure to do so shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of such license unless an extension of the time is granted by the city manager before the expiration of the six-month period for good cause shown. No refund of the license fee shall be made in the event of such forfeiture. 
(c)  Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business authorized in the license, but who shall thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in said license for six months, shall thereupon forfeit such license, which license shall be automatically cancelled without the necessity of any further action of the city unless an extension of time is granted by the city manager before the expiration of the six-month period for good cause shown. No refund of license fee shall be made in the event of such forfeiture. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-51. - Inspection authority of city. 
The city reserves the right to inspect all premises from which alcoholic beverages are licensed to be sold, and related areas, at all reasonable times. Refusal to consent to inspection, upon reasonable demand, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-52. - Reserved 
Sec. 6-53. - Employees. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit any person under the age of 18 within his employment to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages; provided, however, this provision shall not prohibit employees under the age of 18 who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, general merchandise department stores, or drugstores from handling or carrying sealed packages of alcoholic beverages either within the licensed premises or to customers' vehicles when parked adjacent thereto as a part of employment responsibilities so long as such employees under age 18 do not sell any alcoholic beverage. No person under the age 21 shall work as a "bouncer" in a "bar" as such term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit any person to sell, dispense, serve or take orders for alcoholic beverages while that person is currently serving a sentence, including probation or parole, based upon a conviction in any state or federal court or the United States or in any foreign country for any felony, or any misdemeanor ordinance violation relating to the manufacture, sale, use or distribution of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or controlled substances, gambling, sexual offenses, or crimes of moral turpitude. No licensee shall employ within its business for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages any person convicted within five years immediately prior to the application for employment of any felony or within two years immediately prior to the application for employment of any misdemeanor or ordinance violation relating to the manufacture, sale, use or distribution of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or controlled substances, gambling, sexual offenses, or a crime of moral turpitude. This provision shall not prohibit employees who have been convicted or have a criminal history, when employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores, from handling or carrying alcoholic beverages either within the licensed premises or to customers' vehicles when parked adjacent thereto as a part of employment responsibilities. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ascertain that all employees are eligible for employment under this chapter. The city reserves the right to obtain fingerprints from and conduct a criminal history check of any licensee's employees at any time. Upon request by the city, the licensee shall cause the employee to appear at the city police department and shall pay the requisite fee in the amount of $25.00. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to train all employees whose duties shall include the sale, dispensing, serving or taking of orders for alcoholic beverages in the requirements of this chapter, applicable state laws and regulations, and the licensee's policies. Each licensee shall establish written policies, a copy of which shall be posted within the licensed premises, governing the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages in accordance with state law and this chapter. Licensees shall impose meaningful disciplinary sanctions for employees who fail to meet the standards of law as violations by employees may constitute grounds for revocation, suspension or denial of a license under this chapter. The degree of training, supervision and discipline of employees by the licensee may be considered by the hearing officer in determining action on any license. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-54. - Days and hours of operation. 
(a)  No retail package dealer of malt beverages or wine licensed to make package sales shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any packaged malt beverages or wine at any time not expressly authorized by state law. Sales are permitted on Mondays through Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. Sales are permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Sales are permitted on election days; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during the hours the polls are open. 
(b)  No on-premises consumption licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages at any time when sales are prohibited by state law. Sales are permitted on election days; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during the hours the polls are open. 
(c)  No licensee for on-premises consumption shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, or between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays; provided, however, in any licensed eating establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment and in any licensed hotel which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on premises on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subpart (b) above, in any year in which December 31st (New Year's Eve) falls on a Sunday, every establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including bars, shall be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(e)  A distillery, a brewery, and a domestic farm winery tasting room located within a special entertainment district within the city, shall be authorized to sell its product on the same days and within the same hours as a retail package dealer. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ; Ord. No. 18-03 , § 1, 6-18-2018) 
Editor's note— An amendment to § 6-54 relating to Sunday sales was approved by the voters at an election held on Nov. 6, 2018. 
Sec. 6-55. - Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under twenty-one years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, drink, sell or possess alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) shall not apply to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, at a religious ceremony, or when the parent or guardian of the person under age 21 gives the alcoholic beverage to such person when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian while such parent or guardian is present. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person seeking to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages from a licensee within the city to furnish, upon request, proper identification showing that the person is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this section, "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a physical description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or any identification card authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-5-100. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or licensed alcoholic beverage caterer, or any agent, officer or employee thereof, to fail to check the proper identification of any patron when selling or otherwise furnishing or providing any alcoholic beverage, which failure results in an alcoholic beverage being sold or served to an underage person, or to have in such underage person's possession while on the licensee's premises or at a catered event, any alcoholic beverage. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-56. - Open containers. 
(a)  As used in this section, "open container" means any container, containing alcoholic beverages, which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage within the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle. Sealed containers of alcoholic beverages may lawfully be transported in any part of a vehicle. Resealed containers shall be placed in a locked glove box, locked trunk or locked storage container for transport. 
(c)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while walking, standing or otherwise occupying any public street, road, or highway, sidewalk adjacent thereto, public parking lot, park or other publicly owned properties of the city; provided that where the mayor and council has, by resolution, approved a public building, location, facility, or event as one where alcoholic beverages may be consumed, including any limitation as to date(s) and hours, this section shall not apply to the otherwise lawful possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages at the location or for the event so designated. 
(d)  No person shall possess an open container of or consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any retail package dealer, including parking lots adjacent thereto. 
(e)  No person shall enter or leave the premises of any dealer licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption with an open container of any alcoholic beverage; provided, however, any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine, per patron, for consumption off the premises if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with such meal on the restaurant's premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be recorked or securely sealed by the licensee or its employees and placed in a bag or other container, with a dated receipt for the wine and meal attached to the bag or container. If the licensee charges a recorking fee, such fee shall not exceed $3.00 per bottle of wine. If transported in a motor vehicle, the bag or container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle. 
(f)  The prohibition of subsections (c) and (e) shall not apply within the boundaries of any special entertainment district within the city on the days and within the hours such district is deemed to be in effect. A special entertainment district, the boundaries of which shall be designated as an overlay on the official zoning map by amendment of the zoning regulations of the city by the mayor and council, in which the days and hours of operation of the district shall be designated, is intended to encourage economic development and provide additional incentive to establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises, including but not limited to restaurants and eating establishments, to locate within the district boundaries. Patrons purchasing an alcoholic beverage from a licensed consumption retailer within the district are permitted to move between establishments with open containers, provided, however, all alcoholic beverages shall be in plastic cups, no greater than 16 ounces, uniquely marked with the city logo. No person shall possess within the district or bring any alcoholic beverages into the district that was purchased outside the district. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ; Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 7-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-57. - Brown-bagging. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter: 
(1)  "Brown-bagging" means the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business lawfully operating with the city, but not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, or the taking of any alcoholic beverage into premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages during such times the sale or consumption of such beverages is prohibited by law; provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designed for private residential occupancy for consumption by the residents and invited guests thereof shall not fall within this definition. 
(2)  "Brown-bagging" shall include the following prohibited acts: 
a.  Any person who brown-bags; 
b.  Any person participating in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brown-bagged; 
c.  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises lawfully operating in the city, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown-bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy. 
d.  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs. 
(b)  Brown-bagging is prohibited within the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-58. - Temporary permits for non-profit civic organizations. 
The mayor and council, upon application by a bona fide nonprofit civic organization, may authorize such organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises of the event for a period not to exceed one calendar day, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-9-2, regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue, and such conditions as the mayor and council may reasonably impose, including limitations on the time for selling such beverages. No more than six such permits shall be issued to the same organization in any one calendar year. Permits issued under this section shall be valid only for the date, time(s) and place specified. Organizations permitted under this section shall be subject to all state and local laws and regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-59. - Purchases to be made only from licensed wholesalers. 
Package dealers in alcoholic beverages and on-premise consumption dealers shall not buy nor accept deliveries from any person other than a wholesaler, dealer or distributor licensed by the Georgia Department of Revenue. A brewpub licensee may manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of malt beverages in a calendar year solely for retail sale in its eating establishment; notwithstanding the foregoing, a brewpub licensee may sell up to a maximum of 5,000 barrels annually of such malt beverages to licensed wholesale dealers, provided, however, under no circumstances, shall a brewpub licensee sell directly to any person holding a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the purpose of resale. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-60. - Storage of alcoholic beverages at retail. 
All package dealers and on-premise consumption dealers and off-site farm winery tasting rooms shall store all alcoholic beverages on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the city. Except for licensed brewpubs, any alcoholic beverages found in any licensee's stock which was not sold or distributed by a wholesaler licensed in accordance with laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. No licensee shall keep, possess or store at such licensee's place of business any alcoholic beverage for which such licensee does not hold a valid and current state and local license to sell such alcoholic beverage. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 6-61—6-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PACKAGE DEALERS 

Sec. 6-70. - Merchandise restrictions. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 6-20(b), no package dealer shall operate such business in connection with any other business or establishment. 
(b)  Beverages containing no alcohol may be dispensed through the use of vending machines, but no beverage alcohol shall be dispensed through such vending machines. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-71. - Merchandise and sales restrictions. 
(a)  Where packaged malt beverage or wine sales are licensed, no licensee shall sell or offer to sell any firearms, ammunition, or weapons of any character. 
(b)  During those hours and on those days when alcoholic beverages are not permitted to be sold, it shall be the duty of the licensee to remove all alcoholic beverages from its shelves or otherwise secure the inventory in such manner as to notify customers that these products are not available for sale at that time. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-72. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises. 
Except as authorized by this chapter, no package dealer shall make or allow to be made any deliveries of alcoholic beverages beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-73. - Name of licensee to be displayed. 
All premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall have printed on the front window thereof, in uniform letters not less than four nor more than eight inches in height, the name of the licensee in uniform letters, and a telephone number at which the licensee can be contacted by police during times when the establishment is closed. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-74. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
Each package dealer of alcoholic beverages shall conspicuously display within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale or, in lieu thereof, shall place the price of each item on the container or on the shelf where the container is exhibited for sale. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-75. - Portable signs prohibited. 
No licensee for the package sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted to utilize a lighted portable sign outside the building. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-76. - Cob-operated devices on premises. 
No package dealer in alcoholic beverages shall permit any slot machines, juke boxes, pinball machines, video games, or coin-operated machines operated for amusement purposes on its premises. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-77. - Premises to have glass front. 
With the exception of off-site farm winery tasting rooms, each establishment licensed for the package sale of alcoholic beverages shall have an open glass front and shall be well lighted for clear vision from the outside. No signs or advertising shall be posted on the glass which will obstruct the view. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-78. - Purchase delivered in paper bag or wrapped. 
All alcoholic beverages, except prepackaged beer, purchased in a package store must be put in a paper or plastic bag or otherwise wrapped in an opaque cover before delivery to the purchaser. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-79. - Sale of certain containers unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any malt beverage in any single container, single can or single glass bottle which shall be smaller than 32 ounces in size. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 6-80. - Growlers. 
A licensee (who does not sell or offer for sale distilled spirits, either by the drink or by the package), other than a brewpub, may offer craft malt beverages for sale, either for consumption on-premises or by the package, in a specialized vessel called a "growler" for off-premises consumption. All craft malt beverages shall be purchased by the licensee in kegs from a licensed wholesaler for resale in growlers. Growlers shall be filled from tapped kegs, by the licensee or an employee of the licensed facility, upon the customer's order, and may not be pre-filled or available in a cooler for later sale or delivery. All growlers shall be sanitized by the licensee or its employees and securely sealed, on premises, with a tamper-proof plastic cap. The licensee shall comply with all federal, state and local packaging and labeling laws regarding alcoholic beverages. Samples, not to exceed one ounce, are restricted to craft malt beverages dispensed from a tapped keg to be sold in growler form. No single customer shall be served more than four samples in a 24-hour period. No samples of bottled or packaged malt beverages shall be allowed. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-81. - Prohibition on nudity; live adult entertainment. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon the premises of any establishment licensed to sell, serve, dispense or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on such premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) or where such person(s) perform(s) acts of or acts which stimulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2); provided, however, that nothing contained in subsection (2) shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theatre which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 6-82—6-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ON-PREMISE CONSUMPTION 

Sec. 6-90. - Sales by package prohibited. 
With the exception of an off-site farm winery tasting room, no alcoholic beverages may be sold by the package from premises licensed for on-premises consumption of distilled spirits; provided that this provision shall not prohibit the serving of a single can or bottle of malt beverage or wine to any patron for consumption on the premises where such sale is otherwise lawful. On-premise consumption dealers, other than brewpub licensees, who are also licensed to sell malt beverages, wine, or malt beverages and wine by the package for consumption off the premises, may sell beer or wine by the package for carryout purposes: 
(1)  On any day or at any time when the package sale of beer or wine is not otherwise prohibited by law, and 
(2)  At any location which is not within distances to grounds or buildings where the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package is otherwise prohibited by law. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a restaurant that holds an on-premises consumption license for wine may allow a patron to remove a partially consumed bottle of wine which was: 
(1)  Purchased, and partially consumed in conjunction with a meal purchased from the licensee and consumed on the premises; 
(2)  Securely resealed with tamper resistant tape by the licensee; and 
(3)  Placed in a bag or container that is secured in such a manner that it would be visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, along with an affixed, dated receipt indicating the terms of purchase. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-91. - Other mercantile businesses prohibited. 
An on-premise consumption licensee shall not operate such business in connection with any other establishment, except a bed and breakfast, specialty wine shop, eating establishment, hotel, or private club as defined in this chapter; provided, however, that licenses for consumption of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises may be issued to the same licensee. Promotional products, such as logo'ed shirts, hats, glasses, cups, and similar items may be offered for sale or given free of charge for advertising purposes. When not operated in connection with an eating establishment, food and snacks may be offered to customers without charge. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-92. - Premises to be well lighted. 
The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premises consumption shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the buildings and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. Also, the lounge and restaurant area, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served, and all passageways for customers shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those in the premises. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-93. - Disturbances, obscenities on premises. 
No licensee shall permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity or public indecency on its premises. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-94. - In-room sales in hotels. 
Licenses obtained by hotels shall include the right to serve alcoholic beverages by the drink to registered guests in the lounge or restaurant area, as well as to deliver alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to registered guests' rooms when such beverages have been ordered by such guests and/or to provide a cabinet or other facility in a hotel guest's room which contains alcoholic beverages for which licensed, and which is provided upon written request of the guest, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused and unopened portion. All alcoholic beverages sold or distributed under this section shall be obtained by the hotel directly from a licensed wholesaler or distributor and shall be stored on the premises of the hotel until sold or served. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 6-95—6-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANCILLARY LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-98. - Alcohol caterers; event permit for catered functions. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer" means any person, other than a private club licensee, who holds a valid license from the state and any county or municipality in this state wherein the caterer's place of business is located which authorizes the licensee to sell off-premises, by the drink on the premises where sold or delivered, wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits. 
(2)  "Authorized catered function" means a function held at a location within the city for which an event permit has been issued in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Any person who holds a valid license from the county or municipality wherein his place of business is located, which authorizes the licensee to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine by the package or by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply to the city manager for a license to distribute distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine by the drink off-premises within the city at authorized catered functions for which an event permit has been issued. Applications shall be supported by evidence of required licenses in good standing and tender of the annual licensing fee. 
(c)  Any person licensed by the city as an alcoholic beverage caterer may apply to the city manager for an event permit to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine, by the drink off-premises within the city at authorized catered functions. Applications shall be supported by tender of the event permit fee. 
(d)  The event permit application shall include the name of the caterer, together with his license number; the date, time and duration of the event; the name and address of the event host or sponsor, and, if different, the address of the location where the event will be held. The application shall be signed by the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer and the event host or sponsor. If the event host or sponsor is not the owner of the property at which the event will be held, then the owner of the property, or the owner's authorized agent, shall sign the application consenting to the distribution of alcoholic beverages at that location. Each event permit shall require payment of a $25.00 fee; provided, however, if the caterer does not maintain a place of business within the city, in addition to the above fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax upon the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city for such event. At all times during which an authorized catered function is taking place, or alcoholic beverages are being transported within the city, the licensee shall maintain the original off-premises license and event permit in the vehicles used for transporting the alcoholic beverages. No event permit shall be issued for more than three consecutive days and a full permit fee shall be assessed for each day of the event. 
(e)  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall provide such personnel as needed to handle all beverage alcohol served or dispensed at the catered event. This shall include bartending, dispensing, serving, providing, or famishing of alcoholic beverages. Employees of a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be 21 years of age or older in order to handle beverage alcohol at such catered event. Only when the sale of beverage alcohol is authorized on Sunday by state law and local ordinance shall the sale of alcohol be allowed on Sunday by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(1)  Any person violating any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-114 regulating off-premises consumption sales by licensed alcoholic beverage caterers shall be tried, upon citation returnable to the municipal court, for a violation of this chapter, and, if convicted, punished in the manner hereinafter provided. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-99. - Ancillary malt beverage and wine tasting license; event regulations. 
(a)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, shall be eligible for an ancillary license to provide samples and conduct tastings in conjunction with education and appreciation classes of malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  The holder of a package wine license, with or without a package malt beverage license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, shall be eligible for an ancillary license to provide samples and conduct tastings in conjunction with education and appreciation classes of wines offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(c)  Wine samples shall be available only at the customer's request and shall be limited to no more than two ounces per sample, not to exceed a maximum of eight ounces within a consecutive two-hour period, not to exceed once per day. Malt beverage samples shall be available only at the customer's request and shall be limited to no more than four ounces per sample, not to exceed a maximum of 16 ounces within a consecutive two-hour period, not to exceed once per day. Malt beverage and wine sampling is to be conducted during regular business hours only. 
(d)  Tastings may be held in conjunction with beer and/or wine education and appreciation classes conducted outside of normal business hours or during normal business hours if the event is held in a separate tasting room. Tastings shall be limited to no more than two ounces of each beer or wine, and no patron shall exceed a maximum of six beer or wine products within a consecutive three-hour period, not to exceed once per day. No licensee shall conduct more than one tasting event per day, with a maximum two per calendar month. Malt beverage and wine tastings may be paired with food items. 
(e)  In the event that the tasting is to benefit a charity, the name of the charity and fee shall be prominently posted at the event. Licensees shall maintain records of receipts from donors and evidence the net proceeds were paid to the designated charity. Beer or wine shall only be dispensed or poured by the licensee or its employees and no open containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-100. - Taxes imposed. 
In addition to the license fees required in this chapter and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, all licensees hereunder shall pay to the city the taxes imposed in this article. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-101. - Package sales; amount and payment of the tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed an excise tax on alcoholic beverages in the following amounts: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of 12 ounces; 
(3)  On the first sale or use of wine, a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  The excise taxes provided in subsection (a) shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. 
(c)  Each wholesaler responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the city itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages, by location, by size and type of container, sold during the preceding month in the city. 
(d)  The wholesale dealer shall remit the tax imposed herein to the city on the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed. 
(e)  Licensees shall purchase alcoholic beverages only from wholesalers or distributors licensed by the state. All sales must be to the establishment designated on the license. No transfers, borrowing or internal sales or transfers from one licensed retailer to another shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-102. - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises. 
(a)  There is imposed a sales tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, which tax shall be three percent of the charge to the public, members or guests for the beverages. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage, nor to wines for which an excise tax has already been paid under section 6-101. each retail consumption licensee shall collect, report and remit the tax in the manner described in sections 6-103 through 6-105. 
(b)  Licensees shall purchase alcoholic beverages only from wholesalers or distributors licensed by the state. All sales must be to the establishment designated on the license. No transfers, borrowing or internal sales or transfers from one licensed retailer to another shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-103. - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises; itemized billing by licensee; liability for payment of tax. 
Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages sewed shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in like manner, however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-104. - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises; collection of tax by licensee 
Every licensee or its agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city clerk to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-105. - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises; tax payment and collection procedures. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent hereunder shall be due and payable to the city on or before the tenth day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth herein. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the tenth day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as the city clerk may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the city clerk. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Georgia Laws 1951, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-106. - Determinations of deficiencies or in absence of return; overpayments; delinquency and fraud. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the city clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or that may be made of the amount due for one or more than one calendar month. 
(b)  Estimate of gross receipts in absence of return. If any licensee fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments, for a period or periods, against underpayments, for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 3-109. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Promptly after making his or her determination, the city clerk shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notices in section 6-32. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-107. - Delinquent tax collection; duty of assignees to withhold taxes; liability; offsetting of erroneous collections. 
(a)  Action for tax; time therefor. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of the state, or of the United States, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, costs of collection and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that he has been paid, or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the necessary amount from the purchase price as heretofore required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by it to the extent of the purchase price valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the city clerk shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall begin at the time the licensee sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the licensee becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-108. - Tax credit penalty or interest paid more than once or illegally collected. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset as provided in section 6-106(c). If the licensee determines that it has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, it will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on amounts then due and payable from the licensee by whom it was paid or its administrators or executors. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-109. - Failure to pay tax; penalties and interest. 
(a)  Delinquent penalty. Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed to the city, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required, shall pay a civil penalty of 15 percent of the tax, or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection (b). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the tenth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to gross negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent prescribed by subsection (a). 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this chapter or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent prescribed by subsection (a). 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-110. - Administration and enforcement authority; recordkeeping; confidentiality of reports. 
(a)  Authority of the city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the mayor and council, not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from licensee: form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall keep all invoices relating to each purchase of alcoholic beverages and such other records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of sales, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(e)  Wholesaler records. Every distributor, wholesale dealer and manufacturer required to make reports under this article shall keep accurate and complete records of all sales of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine to any package dealer or on-premise consumption dealer and of all reports made to the city for a period of four years from the time the tax to which they relate becomes due or the date the tax is paid, whichever is later, which records shall be made available for inspection by the city clerk or the city manager at all reasonable times and places. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-111. - Examination of records; audits. 
The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. In the event a city audit discloses a deficiency of more than three percent over what has been returned and remitted, the licensee shall reimburse the city for all costs of the audit, including but not limited to, accountant's fees and out of pocket expenses, the value of time expended by city employees in the investigation, including reasonable cost of overhead, and all attorney's fees and costs of collection if action must be instituted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-112. - Unlawful retail sales. 
No person shall sell at retail by the package or for consumption on the premises within the city any alcoholic beverage on which the taxes imposed by this chapter have not been paid. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 6-113—6-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES 

Sec. 6-120. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of or entering a plea of guilty or nob contendere to the offense of failing to pay the tax due, either in whole or in part, shall, upon conviction thereof, be assessed a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such offense. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of the amount due remains unpaid. Any person found guilty of or entering a plea to violating any other provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation of the rule or regulation attempted to be circumvented and, upon conviction, subject to the penalties set forth above. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-2015 ) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-02, adopted November 6, 2017 , replaced ch. 10, arts. I, II, §§ 10-1—10-5, 10-26—10-33, in its entirety. Former ch. 10, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1980, §§ 3-3-6, 3-3-7, 9-3-2, 9-3-3, 9-3-11, 9-3-12; Ord. of 6-6-94, §§ 1—6 and Ord. of 10-15-97. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; prohibited noises, § 30-26; health and sanitation, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 74. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal animal control as home rule power, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(3). 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - [Definitions.] 
(a)  As used in this article, the term: 
Animal care facility means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organization. 
Animal rescue organization means any not for profit organization which has tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. 
Breeder shall mean a person who maintains dogs or cats for the purpose of breeding and selling offspring. 
Broker shall mean a person who transfers dogs or cats at wholesale for resale by another. 
Cat means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus. 
Dogs means a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris. 
Kennel any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of five dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litter of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes; provided, however, nothing herein shall apply to structures designed and used for the containment of pigeons. 
Pet shop means a retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined. 
Tethering shall mean the act of fastening or restraining a dog outside of the presence of its owner or caregiver by a mechanism appropriate to the circumstances and set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-2. - Fowl or livestock running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any domestic fowl or livestock to allow that domestic fowl or livestock to run at large within the city. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-3. - Sanitation of housing, enclosures. 
Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-4. - Humane treatment required. 
(a)  No person having an animal in his possession or control shall fail to provide the animal with sufficient food, water, shelter and adequate protection from the elements. Veterinary care shall be provided when needed to prevent suffering to the animal, and the animal shall be treated with humane care at all times. 
(b)  No person shall beat, ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit combat between animals. 
(c)  No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that such substance shall be liable to be eaten by any domesticated animal. It shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat and insect poisons. 
(d)  Any animal control officer, or other officer empowered to act by law, may impound any animal found to be cruelly treated. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-5. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willingly abandon any domestic animal within the limits of the city. Any person who does abandon, or knowingly or willingly permits such abandonment or aids in the abandonment of any domestic animal within the limits of the city shall be in violation of this section and punished as provided in section 1-5. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Secs. 10-6—10-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-26. - Interference with government property. 
No person shall remove, tamper with, damage, or destroy any cage or device, nor release any animal that is trapped in any trap that is placed to trap any animal that is running at large in violation of the city ordinance. Said person that violates this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-27. - Restrictions on the sale of animals. 
(a)  A pet shop may not sell, exchange, barter, offer for sale, auction, or otherwise deliver or transfer a dog or cat. Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet shop from providing space and appropriate care for cats and dogs owned by an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, and maintained at the pet shop for purpose of adopting those animals to the public. 
(b)  A pet shop shall not offer for adoption a dog or cat that is younger than eight weeks old. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-28. - Record keeping and disclosures. 
A pet shop that offers space the adoption of dogs, or cats shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of each such animal, a sign listing the name of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization which the pet shop acquired each dog or cat. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-29. - Penalties. 
Each dog or cat sold, exchanged, bartered, offered for sale, auctioned, delivered, or transferred in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense of up to $500.00 per violation. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS 

Sec. 10-30. - Running at large and restrictions on tethering. 
(a)  Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of a dog shall keep the dog exclusively upon his own premises except that the dog may be off the premises if it is under the effective control of a person. The dog shall be construed to be under the effective control of a person if the dog is: 
(1)  Confined within a vehicle, fencing or other adequate enclosure where the dog has no access to passerbys; or 
(2)  Is attached to a leash not over six feet in length and held by a person of sufficient strength to restrain the dog. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), a dog shall be deemed not to be under effective control of a person in the following situations: 
(1)  When a female dog in pre-estrees, estrees, or post-estrees (in heat or in season) comes into contact with a male dog except for planned breeding; or 
(2)  The dog inflicts injury to a person or inflicts damage to the property of someone other than its owner, custodian or possessor. 
(c)  An owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog shall not tether the dog unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Proper length. The length of the tether shall allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to food, water, and shelter. No tether shall be less than ten feet in length. The length of tether shall not allow the dog to cross the property line on which it is tethered. 
(2)  Proper weight. The weight of the tether shall not unreasonably inhibit the free movement of the dog within the area allowed by the length of the tether. A tether should not weigh more than one-eighth of a dog's body weight. 
(3)  Proper material. The dog shall not be tethered by choke, chain, pinch, slip, halter, or prong type collar, or by any means other than with a properly fitted buckle-type collar or harness that provides enough room between the collar or harness and the dog's throat to allow normal breathing and swallowing. 
(4)  Proper fit. The tether shall be properly fitted to the collar or harness. The tether shall not be attached to the dog in an area reasonably likely to cause injury or pain to the dog because of the entanglement or in an area likely to cause injury or pain to the dog because of surrounding structures or objections. The dog shall not be tethered in a manner that results, or could reasonably result, in the dog becoming frequently entangled on the restraint or another object. The tether shall allow the dog to sit, lie down, and stand comfortably without the restraint becoming taut and allow the dog a reasonable range of movement. 
(5)  Free from injury, pain and interference. A tether shall not cause injury or pain to the dog because of the material of which it is made or because of the size or weight of the tether. If there are multiple dogs tethered, each dog shall be on a separate tether and not secured to the same fixed point. A dog shall not be tethered if it is ill, suffering from a debilitating disease, injured, in distress, in the advanced stages of pregnancy, or under six months of age. 
(6)  Reasonable duration. A dog that is restrained outside by a tether may not be restrained for an unreasonable duration-of-time. Factors used to determine the reasonableness of the duration of time shall include, compliance with all other tethering restrictions pursuant to this section, physical condition of the dog, behavior exhibited by the dog and weather conditions. 
(7)  Proper sanitation, adequate water and shelter. A dog shall not be restrained outside by tether in the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which: the actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit; a heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or jurisdiction; or a hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction by the National Weather Service. The shelter shall provide adequate protection from all elements such as rain, wind, heat and cold. A dog shall not be tethered in a manner that results in the dog being left in unsafe or unsanitary conditions or that forces the dog to stand, sit, or lie down in its own excrement or urine or in an otherwise unsafe or unsanitary space. A tethered dog shall have access to clean water and necessary shelter that is safe and protective while tethered. The shelter and water vessel shall be constructed or attached in such a way that the dog cannot knock over the shelter or water vessel. 
(8)  Limited exemptions to tethering restrictions. Tethering restrictions do not apply to a dog that is: 
a.  Tethered while it is receiving medical care or treatment under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or is being groomed; 
b.  Participating temporarily in an exhibition, show, contest, or other event in which the skill, breeding, or stamina of the dog is judged or examined; 
c.  Being cared for temporarily after having been picked up as a stray or as part of a rescue operation; 
d.  Being transported inside the main cabin of a motor vehicle or temporarily restrained or tied after being unloaded from inside the main cabin of a motor vehicle; or 
e.  Being trained or used by a federal, state, or local law enforcement agency or military or national guard unit. 
(9)  Penalty for first offense. A first offense in violation of subsection (c) shall result in a correction warning being issued requiring the offense to be corrected by the person who owns, keeps, or controls the dog within five business days after the date of the warning being issued in lieu of a fine or punishment provided by law unless the offense poses an imminent risk to the health or safety of the dog or the public or the dog has been injured or is suffering as a result of the offense, or the dog is likely to incur injury or suffer if the offense is not corrected. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-31. - Excessive barking. 
It shall constitute a public nuisance and be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dog to permit a dog, by loud persistent or habitual barking, to disturb any person. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-32. - Wearing of collars and tags required; impoundment of dogs at large. 
(a)  Every dog in the city will be required to wear a collar or harness, made of durable material, at all times. Attached to this collar must be a tag indicating the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The date the dog was inoculated against rabies. 
(b)  If a dog is found running at large not wearing the above-described identification it will be presumed to be a stray dog and shall be transported to the county pound after three days. 
(c)  A dog wearing identification and found running at large will be confined at a place deemed appropriate by the police department or animal control officer, a citation will be issued to the owner, and a fee will be charged to the dog owner for care of the dog. The fee shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council and shall be kept current and maintained in the office of the city clerk. If the dog is not claimed by the owner within 24 hours of documented and verifiable notice of confinement, the dog will be transported to the county pound. Dogs confined under this section will be held no longer than three days in the city before being transported to the county pound. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-33. - Duty of animal control officer, police. 
It shall be the duty of every police officer and the animal control officer to apprehend, take into custody and confine any dog running at large, or deemed to not be under the effective control of a person. These dogs shall be confined as described in section 10-28. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-34. - Inoculation against rabies required. 
It shall be the duty of every person who owns or harbors any dog in the city to have the dog inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian and to obtain a certificate from the veterinarian setting out the fact of vaccination, the date administered and the date of expiration. This certificate shall be retained by the owner or harborer of the inoculated dog and made available for inspection upon verbal request by any officer of the police department or the animal control officer at any time. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-35. - Rabies quarantine. 
(a)  Any dog which has bitten or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion or puncture of the skin, or a dog which, in the opinion of a police officer, animal control officer or veterinarian, appears to be afflicted with rabies, shall be confined by the police department or animal control officer for a period of not fewer than ten days or until such time that a determination is made that the dog does or does not have rabies. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for the dog's boarding at a rate set from time to time by the mayor and council and kept current and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting that his dog has rabies to fail to immediately inform the police department or animal control officer. Upon such notification, the police department or animal control officer shall immediately take possession of the dog according to subsection (a). If the dog is determined to be suffering from rabies, it shall be destroyed forthwith and handled according to the regulations of the state department of human resources. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-36. - Vicious or diseased dogs. 
(a)  Any dog that has attacked and bitten a person or other animal without provocation or has attempted to bite a person or other animal without provocation shall be deemed a vicious dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for the presence of any vicious or diseased dog on the streets or public places of the city or allow the dog to run on the premises of another, at any time; unless and in addition to the other requirements of this article the dog shall be securely muzzled to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-37. - Issuance of summons. 
A city officer, at his discretion, may elect not to impound a dog or other animal found in violation of any section of this article, but to issue or cause to be issued a summons directed to the owner or possessor of the dog to appear before the municipal court on a certain day to stand trial for the violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 10-38. - Severability. 
If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction or if the provisions of any part of this chapter as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council to provide for separable and divisible parts and does hereby adopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
( Ord. No. 17-02, 11-6-2017 ) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; food service rules and regulations, ch. 36; health and sanitation, ch. 38; signs, ch. 52; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 74. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide technical codes, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(12). 
State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. tit. 8; adoption and administration of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. tit. 25; bonds for public contractors, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq.; unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; nonresident contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-01, adopted Apr. 19, 2010, deleted the former Art. I, §§ 14-1—14-3 and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to construction standards and derived from Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 3-18-2002. 

Sec. 14-1. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)  Adoption; enumeration. There is hereby adopted within the City of Senoia the state minimum standard codes enumerated in subdivision (9)(B)(i)(IX)—(XIII) of § 8-2-20 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, to-wit: 
(1)  International Property Maintenance Code; and 
(2)  International Existing Building Code. 
(b)  Codes which are to be enforced by building official. The rules, regulations, codes, or standards heretofore adopted, together with those state minimum standard codes enumerated in subdivision (9)(B)(i)(I)—(VIII) of § 8-2-20 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, to-wit: 
(1)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code (International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(2)  Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code (International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Georgia State Amendments); 
(3)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code (International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(4)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(5)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code (International Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(6)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code (International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(7)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code (National Electrical Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(8)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code (International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Supplements and Amendments); 
Which codes have statewide application and do not require adoption by local ordinance, shall be enforced by the building official or his designee(s) in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. 
The edition of such codes as currently adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs shall be used and enforced, except where a subsequently published edition of any such code has been adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, with approval of its board, or such code has been amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23. 
(c)  Availability of codes; public inspection and copying. Copies of the current edition of all applicable codes shall be maintained in the city manager or his designated representative's office at city hall for public inspection during regular business hours. Inasmuch as the international standardized codes referenced herein constitute copyrighted material, copies cannot be sold or distributed by the city building and code enforcement division, but may be purchased directly by contacting International Building Code Congress (formerly SBCCI), 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, AL 35213, or by telephoning (205) 591-1853. Copies of the Georgia Amendments to the standardized codes may be obtained, without charge, on the department of community affairs' website at www.dca.state.ga.us/planning/codes. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-2. - Duties and responsibilities of building official. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of building official. The building official, and his designated representatives, shall have and exercise the following duties and responsibilities in the enforcement of state minimum standard codes: 
(1)  To interpret, enforce, and administer the state minimum standard codes within the City of Senoia in accordance with the provisions and procedural requirements of this article; 
(2)  To inspect all existing buildings and structures as required by such codes and to permit and inspect new construction and the renovation, alteration, modification and repairs to existing structures to assure compliance with applicable state minimum code standards; 
(3)  With consent of the city administrator, under the budgetary and personnel regulations of said city, to employ inspectors and other personnel necessary for the proper enforcement of such codes and to provide for the authority, functions, and duties of such inspectors; 
(4)  To bring enforcement actions, prosecute complaints and citations in the appropriate court and to appeal those decisions adverse to the best interest of the city; 
(5)  To study and make recommendations to the city administrator relating to the administration and enforcement of state minimum standard codes; and 
(6)  To perform all other duties and functions imposed upon the chief administrative officer, by whatever name or title referred, in the state minimum standard codes. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority contained in the O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors shall be applicable in the city. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the building official, set forth in this section, may, by private or intergovernmental contract approved by the mayor and council, be exercised and performed by an independent contractor or by the building official of any county or other municipal corporation of this state. When such contract has been entered and spread upon the official minutes of the council, the acts of such contractor shall be deemed the acts of the city building official as if fully performed directly by the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-3. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the City of Senoia in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of said city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-01, adopted Apr. 19, 2010, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 14-4—14-7, §§ 14-10—14-12, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to permit procedures and enforcement and derived from Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 3-18-2002. 

Sec. 14-4. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish any building or structure within the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for such building or structure from the building official. Separate permits are required for grading, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and low-voltage. 
(b)  Fees. Permit fees shall be established in accordance with a schedule approved by the mayor and council, as may be revised from time to time. 
(c)  Term. Permits shall generally be good for six months from date of issuance; provided, that if the work is not completed within the initial permit term, but has been diligently pursued, the permit may be extended, without additional charge, for successive three-month terms, so long as the work continues to be diligently prosecuted. 
(d)  Revocation for suspension or abandonment. If work authorized by a permit is suspended or abandoned, after the initial term, for a period of 30 days, without good cause shown to the building official, the permit may be revoked upon written notification to the permit holder. Revocations of permits for abandonment are not appealable to the mayor and council. 
(e)  State licensing required. No person shall engage in electrical, plumbing, mechanical, low-voltage, or utility contracting on any work within the city unless licensed by the State of Georgia. Where a state license is required, every applicant for a permit shall furnish proof, at time of application, that he or the person contracted to do the work holds a valid state license in good standing. Failure to meet this requirement may be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-5. - Written documentation; payment of fee required for issuance. 
Prior to issuance of any permit, in addition to the information requested on the permit application, the building official may require tests, plans and specifications, plats, and other written documentation from engineers, architects, surveyors, and other professionals to assure that full compliance with all permitting requirements of the state minimum standard codes and applicable laws have been met. No permits shall issue on any project where the structure to be built or improved thereon is a "special hazard structure" or the use to be conducted therein is a "special hazard use", without first obtaining the approval of building plans by the state fire marshal's office. Where a project is subject to permitting under the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Law, no permit shall issue for any land-disturbance activity unless approved plans are received from the district soil conservation office and all required stabilization facilities are in place, and ready for inspection. All buildings and structures intended for human occupancy shall have a safe source of drinking water and sanitary disposal; no permit shall issue for any building or structure which does not have access to public water and sewer unless plans for a well and/or septic tank have been approved by the county health department. All permits shall be conditioned upon the application and supporting data, which is deemed incorporated into and made a material part or term of the permission granted. No permit shall issue until all requisite fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-6. - Cessation of work. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, system or component therein, that is being done contrary to the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or in violation of any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given in writing, directed to the owner of the property and to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency situation exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-7. - Revocation of permit for false statement or misrepresentation. 
The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this article in the event he finds there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. The building official may also revoke a permit upon determining that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of the building or structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of state minimum standard codes; provided, the work was stopped in accordance with section 14-6 of this article and the permittee has not met the conditions for resuming the work after a reasonable period for compliance has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-8. - Inspections; right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or whenever the building official has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises within the city any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises, unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official, or his designee(s), may enter such building, structure, or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this article; provided, if such building, structure, or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry from the building's owner or occupant. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official may apply to the judge of the city municipal court for an administrative search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-9. - Service of orders, rulings, etc.; appeals. 
All decisions, orders and rulings of the building official shall be in writing and served upon the applicant, permit holder, owner of property affected or his agent, and, if applicable, persons in possession or occupancy of affected premises. Where such decisions cannot be personally served, service shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's last known address as shown on official government records. Any party aggrieved by a decision, order or ruling of the building official may appeal such decision to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal, within 30 days, with the city clerk; provided, however, in any case where the building official has issued an order for the repair, closing or vacating of a building or structure on grounds it is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous so as to constitute a public nuisance, no appeal shall be taken and the aggrieved party will be summoned to appear for hearing before the municipal court. A written ruling by the mayor and council shall be deemed final, subject to review by the superior court for errors of law by petition for writ of certiorari, filed within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-10. - Variances. 
In those limited cases where the state minimum standard codes allow a local variance based upon hardship, the mayor and council may, upon finding that strict enforcement of the state minimum standard codes would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of such codes and the public interest, grant a variance, subject to finding, in writing, all of the following: 
(a)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or system involved and which are not applicable to others similarly situated; 
(b)  That the special condition and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(c)  That granting a variance will not confer on the applicant any special privileges that are denied by the codes to other buildings, structures, or service systems; 
(d)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system; and 
(e)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of such codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Applications for variance shall be advertised not less than 15 days prior to conducting an evidentiary hearing before the mayor and council. Such hearing shall be informally conducted, with the applicant having the burden of proof. Each decision of the mayor and council shall recite the factual findings underlying its decision and the reasons for such decision. In granting a variance, the mayor and council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the codes, including a reasonable time limit in which the variance is required to be commenced or completed, or both. A copy of the mayor and council's written decision shall immediately be filed in its minutes of the hearing at which the variance was considered and a copy promptly served upon all affected parties. Decisions of the mayor and council shall be final, subject to applicable remedies afforded by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-11. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate any provision of the state minimum standard codes, or the permissive codes and construction standards adopted by this article, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished any building, structure, or system therein in violation of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of this city. Upon trial, if convicted, such violation shall carry a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of this article is committed or continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Violations of this article are hereby further declared to be public nuisances, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare; and, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, are subject to abatement or injunction in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 14-12. - Definition of terms. 
For purposes of interpretation of the state minimum standard codes, the definitions of terms found in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 shall control over the definitions of the same or similar terms as found in such codes or this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 14-13—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8, O.C.G.A., as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25, O.C.G.A.; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8, O.C.G.A., after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means a act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Municipality means the City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50 year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the city administrator, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 2(§ 100), 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 14-32. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the City of Senoia, Georgia, or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or to use property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 2(§ 200), 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 14-33. - Complaint In Rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation or disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(4)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; and 
(5)  Uncleanliness. 
If the property is located within the historic district or has been classified as a historic property, the public officer shall give written notice to the city's historic preservation commission and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. Such notice to the commission shall be given at least 45 days prior to the public officer issuing his written report. 
(b)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the city attorney shall file a Complaint In Rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. A Notice of Lis Pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Coweta County at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43, O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors, without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, within the time period set forth in the order, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (f) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Coweta County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48, O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(h)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(i)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(j)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 2(§ 300), 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 14-34. - Powers of city administrator or his designee. 
In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city administrator or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys. 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 2(§ 400), 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 14-35. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Complaints shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by article to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 4 of Title 48; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this Code section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 2(§ 500), 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 14-36. - Prior ordinances relating to repair, closing, or demolition of unfit buildings or structures. 
Ordinances and code sections of the City Code of Senoia, Georgia, relating to the subject matter of this article and in effect prior to December 1, 2003, being the effective date of this article, shall continue in force and effect for actions commenced thereunder and have the same force and effect after said date as this article. All new actions commenced on or after December 1, 2003 shall be brought pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 2(§ 600), 12-1-2003) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. tit. 10; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. tit. 43; disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, operating businesses or practicing professions, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq.; persons selling agricultural products and implements, jugs and flowerpots, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; exemptions from municipal taxes and license fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 et seq.; specific, business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 18-26. - When required. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in this state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for the business, trade, profession or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or his deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-36) 
Sec. 18-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period. 
(1)  Gross receipts shall include, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred. 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness. 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services. 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered. 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or divided income. 
(2)  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax. 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts. 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. 1563(a)(2). 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent. 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary worksite which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization; but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize at least 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires a state license regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession and occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-37) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-28. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $35.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows: 
(1)  Plumbing subcontractor: $30.00 per location. 
(2)  HVAC subcontractor: $30.00 per location. 
(3)  Electrical subcontractor: $30.00 per location. 
(4)  Sewer installation: $30.00 per location. 
(5)  Roof installation: $30.00 per location. 
(6)  Pawnshops: $120.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-38) 
Sec. 18-29. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Levy; criteria. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city clerk's office. See section 18-63 for the businesses classified by profitability ratios. 

 
(c)  Restrictions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business' gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(5)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(6)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the taxing jurisdiction. 
(7)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in this state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 (see section 18-27) which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in this state. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-39) 
Sec. 18-30. - Paying tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-40) 
Sec. 18-31. - Line of business identified on registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-41) 
Sec. 18-32. - Multiple locations considered separate businesses. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-42) 
Sec. 18-33. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 18-29. 
(2)  A fee of $200.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by November 30 of each year. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-43) 
Sec. 18-34. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-44) 
Sec. 18-35. - Purpose, scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-45) 
Sec. 18-36. - When tax due and payable; transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten-percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-5. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the chief of police may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-46) 
Sec. 18-37. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with locations inside and outside city. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-47) 
Sec. 18-38. - Exemption for business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-48) 
Sec. 18-39. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; display of state registration. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-49) 
Sec. 18-40. - Evidence of permits, bonds, other qualifications required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-50) 
Sec. 18-41. - Liability of officers, agents; registration required. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained the registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-51) 
Sec. 18-42. - Registration requirements. 
(a)  Each registration under this article shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this article before March 1 of each year. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing the business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained the registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-5. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article; and may be collected by the remedies provided in this article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-52) 
Sec. 18-43. - Subpoena and arresting powers of city officials. 
The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 and succeeding years thereafter. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-54) 
Sec. 18-44. - Businesses not covered by article provisions. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-55) 
Sec. 18-45. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited or exempted by law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-56) 
Sec. 18-46. - Filing of return; determination of gross receipts. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article shall be levied in accordance with the gross receipt brackets contained in section 18-62. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to the occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before March 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the revenue collection officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of the business for the entire preceding calendar year, to be used as an estimate of the gross receipts for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in the return. The return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the amount of gross receipts for such part year as the full year bears to such part. The figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-57) 
Sec. 18-47. - Payment of tax; due date. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the city clerk, on January 1 each year and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before March 1 each year. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-58) 
Sec. 18-48. - Payment of tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid on the date of commencing business in the city. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-59) 
Sec. 18-49. - More than one place or line of business; calculation of tax. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the business identified on a form to be furnished by the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-60) 
Sec. 18-50. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year. 
On or before March 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for the occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city clerk's office, on a form furnished by the city, a sworn tax return setting forth the bracket shown in section 18-62 which corresponds to the gross receipts of his respective business. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-61) 
Sec. 18-51. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied in this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using the returns for the purpose of the occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-62) 
Sec. 18-52. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city clerk, through officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made pursuant to this article. The revenue collection officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city and upon demand of the city clerk. Such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency exists, it shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum until paid in full. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-63) 
Sec. 18-53. - Tax registration revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of the returns within the time required, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in this article, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business in the city for the current year shall be ipso facto revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions of section 18-50. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-64) 
Sec. 18-54. - Failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revoked. 
Any person, his managers, agents or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for the business has been revoked as provided in this article; any person, his managers, agents or employees, hereby required to make returns, showing the amount of gross receipts and who fail to make the returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, or refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any person, his managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in section 1-5. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-65) 
Sec. 18-55. - Issuance of execution for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the person liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when the tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police upon the property of the defendant located in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-66) 
Sec. 18-56. - Amendment, repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. The amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-67) 
Sec. 18-57. - Application of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in the ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-68) 
Sec. 18-58. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and the chief of police to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the provisions to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in his judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-69) 
Sec. 18-59. - Provisions remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-70) 
Sec. 18-60. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-71) 
Sec. 18-61. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this article that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-73) 
Sec. 18-62. - Gross receipts brackets. 
The following gross receipts brackets shall be used in determining the amount of tax due under this article: 

 
State law requires that this information be kept confidential. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, app. A) 
Sec. 18-63. - Schedule of businesses classified by profitability ratios. 
The following schedule shows businesses classified by profitability ratios (six classes): 

 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, app. B) 
Sec. 18-64. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-5. 
(Ord. of 1-2-95, § 19-53) 
Secs. 18-65—18-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-07, §§ 1—6, adopted Dec. 19, 2011, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 18-86—18-92, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to insurers and derived from Ord. No. 2-5-30, §§ 1—7, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 01-07, §§ 1—5, adopted 11-26-2001. 

Sec. 18-86. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 18-87 of this article, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 1, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 18-87. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 2, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 18-88. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 18-86 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 3, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 18-89. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 18-86 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 4, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 18-90. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 18-86 and 18-87 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 5, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 18-91. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 6, 12-19-2011) 
Secs. 18-92—18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 18-116. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 12-6-83(1), § 1) 
Sec. 18-117. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 12-6-83(1), § 2) 
Secs. 18-118—18-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POOL/BILLIARD HALLS 

Sec. 18-201. - Pool/billiard hall defined. 
For the purposes of this Code section, the term pool/billiard hall shall mean: the operation of any business within the jurisdiction of this city in which said business offers for use by its customers two or more billiard tables for free or a fee. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98) 
Sec. 18-202. - License required. 
No person shall keep, operate or maintain for profit a billiard table, pool table or any other tables of like character for use of the public, whether alone or in connection with another business, without first obtaining a license. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98) 
Sec. 18-203. - Closing hours. 
No person operating a pool or billiard hall covered by the provisions of this article shall permit any table to be played upon after 12:00 midnight Sunday through Saturday. Such playing shall be prohibited until 8:00 a.m. each day. If operated in conjunction with any other business, the proprietor/operator/owner shall keep dark and not allow public access to that part of the business in which the pool or billiard tables are located before and after business hours. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98) 
Sec. 18-204. - Clear view of interior. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, employee, or manager of any pool or billiard hall in the city to keep any blinds, screens, posters, signs, or other obstructions, or partitions in the doors or windows of such place. All pool tables and billiard tables shall be located so that they can be seen by passersby, and such owner, keeper, employee, or manager shall not construct any partitions or obstructions which will obstruct the clear view thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98) 
Sec. 18-205. - Posting of placard as to admission of minors. 
Every licensee under this article shall post, in the room where the billiard tables are operated, a placard with the language of section 6-30, alcoholic beverages, conspicuously written thereon for the information of his or her patrons. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98) 
Sec. 18-206. - Conduct of other business on premises. 
No owner, keeper or manager of any pool/billiard hall shall operate or permit anyone else to operate any other kind or class of business in the same room where such tables are located. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98) 
Sec. 18-207. - Admission of persons under 18 years of age to pool halls, billiards rooms in which alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to play pool or billiards in, or for any other purpose to enter or remain in, a pool or billiard room in which beer, wine or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale or consumed. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and their lawful agents to verify the age of all persons entering such establishments. Failure to check identification and/or to allow persons under the age of 18 to enter said establishment shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 6-15-98) 
Secs. 18-208—18-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OPEN AIR MARKETS 

Sec. 18-220. - Purpose of provisions. 
This chapter is enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the city to promote the health and general welfare of its citizens; by regulating the impacts that open air markets have on the general welfare of the residents of the city. 
( Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 18-221. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Improved lot means a lot of record in the city containing a building that has received a certificate of occupancy or has a parking lot constructed to the minimum standards of the Senoia Land Development Ordinance. 
Open air market means an outdoor market for the retail sale of new or used merchandise, produce or other farm products, whether operated by a single vendor or composed of stalls, stands or spaces rented or otherwise provided to vendors. The term does not include the outside display of merchandise as an incidental part of retail activities regularly conducted from a permanent building on sidewalks or other areas immediately adjacent to, and upon the same lot as, such building. The term also does not include merchandise sold at festivals or other special events run by the city or downtown development authority, temporary in duration, at which the display and sale of merchandise is incidental to the primary cultural, informational or recreational activities of such festival or special event. 
Permit holder means a person issued the open air market permit. 
Temporary use means a short term or seasonal commercial uses and activities that are temporary in nature. 
Vendor means a person who distributes, offers for sale or sells produce, merchandise, food or other products at the open air market. 
( Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 18-222. - General requirements. 
(a)  Open air markets shall only be permitted on an improved lot in the GC and GI district. 
(1)  If the open air market is to be located on property adjacent to a residential district 50 feet shall be provided to buffer the market from the residential property. 
(b)  Applicants shall complete a special events permit application provided by the city. The application fee will be set periodically by resolution of the mayor and council. It shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Event title, type and description. 
(2)  Dates of event. 
(3)  Name, address and contact information of event host. 
(4)  Location of event. 
(5)  Admission criteria. 
(6)  Proposed signage. 
(7)  Site plan. 
(8)  Parking plan. 
(9)  Location of vendor area. 
(10)  Emergency vehicle access points. 
(c)  Each vendor of the open air market is required to supply proof of payment of an occupational tax and provide the city with proof of sales tax identification from the state. If a new application, vendor shall provide the city with sufficient time to process the application. 
(d)  All food/produce vendors shall be properly licensed by the department of health and/or department of agriculture, as required by law or regulation. 
(e)  Vendor spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet from the public right of way. Location and dimensions of the vendors' spaces shall be shown on the site plan. 
(f)  Applicant shall provide one trash receptacle per ten vendors. Refuse shall be removed from the site at the end of each day and not placed in or alongside of public trashcans. 
(g)  Applicant shall provide restroom facilities on site. Location shall be shown on the site plan. 
(h)  All vendor spaces shall be under tent/canopy. All tents/canopies or other items used to provide cover for the vendors shall be of a solid color without writing or logos. 
(i)  Applicant shall provide one parking space for each vendor located either on-site or on privately held property. A parking plan shall be provided as part of the site plan. If event is planned more than 300 feet from public parking, applicant shall provide two parking spaces for each vendor. 
(j)  Loading and unloading of merchandise shall not occur from the public right of way between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(k)  Frequency and duration of open air markets shall be in accordance with section 74-235(2)d. 
( Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 18-223. - Signage. 
No cloth, paper, banner, flag device or other similar advertising matter shall be permitted to be attached, suspended from or allowed to hang loose from any sign, building, structure, motor vehicle, tree, shrub, or bush. 
( Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 18-224. - Reasons for denial; appeal; revocation. 
(a)  The city manager shall deny a temporary use permit if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to adequately provide for: 
a.  The protection of the vendors and attendees at the open air market; 
b.  Maintenance of public order in and around the temporary use location; 
c.  Crowd security, taking into consideration the size of the market; or 
d.  Emergency vehicle access. 
(2)  The applicant fails to comply with or the proposed temporary use will violate a city ordinance or other applicable law, unless the prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under this chapter; 
(3)  The applicant makes a false statement of material fact or an application for a temporary use permit or fails to properly complete an application for a market permit; 
(4)  The applicant has had a temporary use permit revoked within the preceding 12 months; 
(5)  The applicant fails to pay any outstanding fees assessed under this article for the proposed temporary use for the past open air market; 
(6)  The chief of the police or fire department or the city manager determines that the temporary use would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(7)  The applicant or any other person responsible for the conduct or sponsorship of the temporary use is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or other person; or 
(8)  The applicant fails to acquire or maintain approval from the property owner to operate the temporary use on the property identified in the application. 
(b)  The city manager shall revoke a temporary use permit for; 
(1)  The permit holder fails to comply with or the proposed temporary use will violate a city ordinance or other applicable law, unless the prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under this chapter; 
(2)  The permit holder makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a temporary use permit or fails to properly complete an application for a market permit; 
(3)  The chief of the police or fire departments or the city manager determines that the temporary use would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare 
(4)  The applicant fails to pay any outstanding fees assessed under this article for the proposed temporary user for the past open air market. 
(5)  The permit holder or any other person responsible for the conduct or sponsorship of the temporary use is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessedd against or imposed upon the applicant or other person; or 
(6)  The permit holder fails to acquire or maintain approval from the property owner to operate the temporary use on the property identified in the application 
(c)  Appeal. If the city manager denies the issuance or renewal of a permit or revokes a permit, the city manager shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the denial or revocation and of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council by submitting a written request to the mayor within ten business day after receipt of such denial or revocation. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-19-2016 ) 
Chapter 22 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is derived from an ordinance adopted on March 28, 1980. The grantee accepted the franchise on that date. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 74. 

Sec. 22-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as a cable television franchise. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Preamble. 
This chapter was passed after a full, open and public hearing upon prior notice and opportunity of all interested parties to be heard and upon careful consideration of the grantee's qualifications, including its legal, character, financial and technical qualifications, and the adequacy and feasibility of its construction arrangements. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Senoia, a municipal corporation under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
City council means the city council or its designated representative. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by the United States Congress. 
Grantee means Peach State Cablevision, or its designee subsidiary, a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, and it is the grantee of rights under this franchise. 
Gross subscriber revenues includes any and all compensation or receipts derived by the grantee from installation, disconnection and reinstallation charges and periodic service charges in connection with the carriage of broadcast signals and FCC-mandated nonbroadcast services within the city, but shall not include any refunds or credits made to subscribers or any taxes imposed upon the services furnished by the grantee. It shall not include revenue from ancillary or auxiliary services, which include, but are not limited to, advertising, leased channels, and programming supplied on a per-program or per-channel charge basis, if any. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Regular subscriber services means the carriage of broadcast signals and FCC-mandated nonbroadcast services, but shall not include ancillary or auxiliary services, which include, but are not limited to, advertising, leased channels and programming supplied on a per-program or per-channel charge basis, if any. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-4. - Grant of authority. 
There is hereby granted by the city to the grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over or under the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city, all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city of a cable television system for the transmission of television signals and all other signals permitted by the FCC, either separately or upon or in conjunction with any public utility maintaining them in the city, with all the necessary and desirable appliances and appurtenances pertaining thereto. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this franchise and grant shall and does hereby include the right in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements and public grounds and places in the city to install, erect, operate or in any way acquire the use of, as by leasing or licensing, all lines and equipment necessary to a cable television system and the right to make connections to subscribers and the right to repair, replace, enlarge and extend such lines, equipment and connections. The rights granted in this chapter for the purposes set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of the franchise; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require the granting of an additional CATV franchise if, in the opinion of the city council, it is in the public interest to restrict such franchises to one or more. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-4) 
Sec. 22-5. - Exercise of police power; rights of city retained. 
The grantee shall at all times during the term of the franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city. The right is hereby reserved to the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this chapter and any other existing applicable ordinances, such additional applicable ordinances as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power; provided, however, that such additional ordinances shall be reasonable, shall not conflict with or alter in any manner the rights granted in this chapter, and shall not conflict with the laws of the state, the laws of the United States of America, or the rules, regulations and policies of the FCC. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-5) 
Sec. 22-6. - Indemnification. 
The grantee shall save the city harmless from all loss sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever against the city resulting from negligence on the part of the grantee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its cable television system in the city; and for this purpose the grantee shall carry property damage and personal injury insurance with some responsible insurance company qualified to do business in the state. The amounts of such insurance to be carried for liability due to property damage shall be $100,000.00 as to any one occurrence; and against liability due to injury to or death of person, $100,000.00 as to any one person and $300,000.00 as to any one occurrence. The city shall notify the grantee, in writing, within ten days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the city on account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the grantee. Where any such claim or demand against the city is made by suit or other legal action, written notice thereof shall be given by the city to the grantee not less than five days prior to the date upon which an answer to such legal action is due or within ten days after the claim or demand is made upon the city, whichever notice period yields the grantee the larger amount of time within which to prepare an answer. Failure by the city to notify the grantee properly in accordance with the foregoing of any such claim, suit or demand against the city shall release the grantee from its obligation to indemnify the city as provided in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-6) 
Sec. 22-7. - Construction and maintenance of system. 
(a)  All structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, easements and other public ways and places to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners, and the grantee shall comply with all reasonable, proper and lawful ordinances of the city now or hereafter in force. Existing poles, posts, conduits and other such structures of an electric power system, telephone company or other public utility located in the city shall be made available to the grantee for leasing or licensing upon reasonable terms and shall be used to the extent practicable in order to minimize interference with travel and avoid unnecessary duplication of facilities. The city shall actively assist the grantee to the fullest extent necessary in obtaining reasonable joint pole or conduit use agreements from the owners of existing poles or conduits. To the extent that existing poles, posts, conduits and other such structures are not available, or are not available under reasonable terms and conditions, including excessive cost or unreasonable limitation upon the use of the grantee's cable television system, the grantee shall have the right to purchase, lease or in any other way acquire land or rights-of-way upon or under which to erect and maintain its own poles, conduits and other such structures as may be necessary for the construction and maintenance of its cable television system. 
(b)  In case of any disturbance by the grantee of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface so disturbed in as good condition as before the work was commenced. 
(c)  If at any time during the period of the franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change any street, alley, easement or other public way requiring the relocation of the grantee's facilities, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay and relocate the same at its own expense; provided, however, that where public funds are available for such relocation pursuant to law, the grantee shall not be required to pay the cost. 
(d)  The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of the building. The expense of such temporary removal shall be paid by the person requesting it, and the grantee shall have the authority to require the payment in advance. 
(e)  The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging all streets, alleys, easements, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of the trees from coming into contact with the grantee's facilities. 
(f)  All poles, lines, structures and other facilities of the grantee in, on, over and under the streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements and public grounds or places of the city shall be kept by the grantee at all times in a safe and substantial condition. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-7) 
Sec. 22-8. - FCC rules applicable. 
The franchise is governed by and subject to all applicable rules, regulations and policies of the Federal Communications Commission, specifically including Part 76, and by the laws of the state. Should there be any modifications of the provisions of Part 76 of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, specifically including section 76.31, that must be incorporated in this franchise, the city and the grantee agree that such incorporation shall be accomplished within one year after the effective date of the FCC's adoption of the modification or upon renewal of the franchise, whichever comes first. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-8) 
Sec. 22-9. - Franchise term. 
The franchise shall take effect and be in full force from and after acceptance by the grantee as provided in section 22-19, and shall continue in full force and effect for a term of 15 years; provided, however, that should FCC certification be necessary in connection with implementation or continuation of the cable television service contemplated by the franchise, the term shall begin upon the effective date of the grant by the FCC of the necessary certification. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-9) 
Sec. 22-10. - Renewal procedure. 
The grantee shall have the unlimited option to renew the franchise for an additional period not to exceed five years. Should the grantee desire to exercise this option, it shall so notify the city, in writing, not less than three months prior to expiration of the franchise. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-10) 
Sec. 22-11. - Forfeiture. 
If the grantee should violate any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of the franchise or if the grantee should fail to comply with any reasonable provisions of any ordinance of the city regulating the use by the grantee of the streets, alleys, easements or public ways of the city, and should the grantee further continue to violate or fail to comply with the same for a period of 30 days after the grantee has been notified in writing by the city to cease and desist from any such violation or failure to comply so specified, the grantee may be deemed to have forfeited and annulled and shall thereby forfeit and annul all the rights and privileges granted by the franchise; provided, however, that such forfeiture shall be declared only by written decision of the city council after an appropriate public proceeding before the city council affording the grantee due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any such notice of violation or failure to comply. The city council may, in its discretion and upon a finding of violation or failure to comply, impose a lesser penalty than forfeiture of the franchise or excuse the violation or failure to comply upon a showing by the grantee of mitigating circumstances. The grantee shall have the right to appeal any findings of violation or failure to comply and any resultant penalty to any court of competent jurisdiction. If forfeiture is imposed upon the grantee, it shall be afforded a period of six months within which to sell, transfer or convey the cable television system to a qualified purchaser at fair market value. During this six-month period, which shall run from the effective date of the final order or decision imposing forfeiture, including any appeal, the grantee shall have the right to operate the cable television system pursuant to the provisions of the franchise. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-11) 
Sec. 22-12. - Surrender of rights. 
The grantee may surrender the franchise at any time upon filing with the city clerk a written notice of its intention to do so at least three months before the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in the notice, all of the rights and privileges and all of the obligations, duties and liabilities of the grantee in connection with the franchise shall terminate. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-12) 
Sec. 22-13. - Transfers. 
All of the rights and privileges and all of the obligations, duties and liabilities created by the franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the successors of the city and the successors and assigns of the grantee, and shall not be assigned or transferred without the written approval of the city council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. However, this section shall not prevent the assignment or hypothecation of the franchise by the grantee as security for debt without such approval. Transfers or assignments of the franchise between any parent and subsidiary corporation or between entities of which at least 50 percent of the beneficial ownership is held by the same person or entity shall be permitted without the prior approval of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-13) 
Sec. 22-14. - Franchise fee. 
The grantee shall pay the city an annual fee of four percent of its gross revenues derived from the supplying of regular, basic cable subscriber service; provided, however, that the annual fee shall in no event exceed three percent of the grantee's gross revenues per year from all cable services in the community. If subsequent to the granting of the franchise the FCC authorizes and/or approves an increase in the annual fee over and above the three-percent rate the grantee shall pay the city the increased fee, upon notification of the grantee by the city, provided the annual fee shall not be in excess of four percent. Such annual sum shall be payable one-half thereof at the end of each semiannual period. The semiannual anniversary shall be June 30 and December 31 of each year, and each semiannual payment shall be paid within 60 days thereafter. All other license fees or taxes levied upon the grantee by the city shall be credited against the payment required in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-14) 
Sec. 22-15. - Customer service; complaint procedure. 
The grantee shall maintain a business office or a toll-free telephone listing in the city for the purpose of receiving inquiries and complaints from its customers and the general public. The grantee shall investigate all complaints within five days of their receipt and shall in good faith attempt to resolve them swiftly and equitably. The mayor shall be responsible for receiving and acting upon any unresolved complaints. Notice of this complaint procedure, including the identity of the city official responsible for receiving unresolved complaints, shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable system. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-15) 
Sec. 22-16. - Construction schedule. 
Should any construction be necessary for the grantee to provide the cable television service authorized by the franchise, a significant portion of such construction (at least 50 percent) shall be accomplished within one year after the effective date of this chapter, or, if FCC certification is required prior to implementation of the cable television service authorized by the franchise, within one year after the effective date of the grant by the FCC of the necessary certification. Thereafter, the grantee shall equitably and reasonably proceed to complete the necessary construction at a rate of not less than 25 percent per year of the total construction authorized by the franchise. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-16) 
Sec. 22-17. - Rate schedules. 
(a)  The initial rates for installation of equipment and regular subscriber services shall be nondiscriminatory and shall be as set forth below; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit reasonable promotional rates which may, from time to time, be less than the rates set forth as follows: 

 
(b)  No increase in the rates charged for the installation of equipment and regular subscriber services as specified above shall be made effective without notification to the city council 90 days prior to effective date of the increase so that the city council may have, if it deems it necessary, a full, open and public proceeding and grant an opportunity to all interested parties to be heard; provided, however, that if the city council does not call for a public hearing within the 90-day notice period, the proposed increase shall be effective at the end of the 90-day notice period. Approval or disapproval by the city council of any rate increase proposed by the grantee may be expressed by simple resolution, and this chapter need not be amended for that purpose. A proposed rate increase shall not be unreasonably denied, and any denial of a rate increase, in whole or in part, shall be accomplished by a written statement by the city council which shall set forth the reasons for denial. If the city council denies a proposed rate increase, in whole or in part, the grantee shall have the right to request arbitration, in accordance with rules of the American Arbitration Association, to determine the reasonableness of the city council's action, or, at its option, the grantee shall have the right to request review of the denial by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Recognizing that Public Law 94-553 has established copyright liability for cable television systems which may be increased after the grant of the franchise by action of the United States Copyright Royalty Tribunal, and further recognizing the uncertainty and jeopardy into which such potential additional copyright liability places the grantee, should such additional copyright liability be imposed upon the grantee by the Copyright Royalty Tribunal, the grantee shall have the right to increase its rates for regular subscriber services in order to offset such additional copyright liability. Any increase in the grantee's rate schedule pursuant to this subsection shall be limited to the amount of the additional copyright liability imposed. Such increase shall not be subject to the procedures specified in subsection (b) of this section and shall become effective ten days after notice of the increase is given to the city council together with a certification that the increase is due solely to the imposition of additional copyright liability and that the increase is limited to an amount necessary to cover the amount of the additional liability. 
(d)  Prior approval of the city council need not be obtained for any increase in rates charged for installation of equipment and regular subscriber services resulting from the imposition of or an increase in taxes and license charges imposed upon cable television facilities, services, operations or income; provided, however, that any such increase in rates shall be limited to an amount necessary to offset the aforesaid imposition of or increase in taxes or license charges. Any such increase shall become effective ten days after notice of the increase is given to the city council together with a certification that the increase is due solely to the imposition of or increase in taxes or license charges. 
(e)  Prior approval of the city council need not be obtained for any increase in rates charged for installation of equipment and regular subscriber services that does not exceed five percent in any one 12-month period; provided, however, that any increase in rates pursuant to this provision shall not be in excess of the increase, if any, in the consumer price index applicable to the same 12-month period. Any such increase shall become effective ten days after notice of the increase is given to the city council together with a certification that the increase is limited to five percent or less of the grantee's existing rate schedule for installation of equipment and regular subscriber services, or that the increase is limited to the increase in the consumer price index for the applicable 12-month period, whichever is the lesser. 
(f)  Rates for services other than installation of equipment and regular subscriber services shall be established and published by the grantee pursuant to the rules of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-17) 
Editor's note— The mayor and council adopted the following resolution on September 7, 1993: 
"1.  The City will follow the FCC Rate Regulations in its regulation of the Basic Service Rates and Charges of the Company and any other cable television system operating in the City, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the Franchise; and 
 2.  In connection with such regulation, the City will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties; and 
 3.  The Mayor, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the City and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the City to regulate Basic Service Rates and Charges; and 
 4.  The Resolution shall be effective immediately." 
Sec. 22-18. - Receiver sales, repair prohibited. 
As a condition of the franchise, the grantee agrees that it shall not engage in the business of sales or repair of television receivers owned by its subscribers; nor shall it be responsible for the operating condition of the receivers; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to convertors, decoders, home interactive terminals and other such devices as may be used in furnishing any programming or service via the grantee's cable television system. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-18) 
Sec. 22-19. - Acceptance. 
This chapter shall become effective when accepted by the grantee and shall then be and become a valid and binding contract between the city and the grantee; provided, however, that this chapter shall be void unless the grantee shall, within 90 days after the final passage of this chapter, file with the city clerk a written acceptance of this chapter and the franchise herein granted, agreeing that it will comply with all of the provisions and conditions of this chapter and that it will refrain from doing all of the things prohibited by this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-19) 
Sec. 22-20. - Regulation of basic service rates and charges by city. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the grantee and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The mayor or his designee is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Res. of 9-7-93, § 3) 
Sec. 22-21. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make an unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of the grantee's cable television system for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence transmitted over the grantee's cable system without payment to the grantee or its lessee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires or other equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence transmitted over the grantee's cable system. 
(c)  It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-5, for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-20) 
Sec. 22-22. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any federal or state court or administrative or governmental agency of competent jurisdiction, specifically including the Federal Communications Commission, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-21) 
Sec. 22-23. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall become effective upon acceptance by the grantee as provided in section 22-19. The effective date shall be the date upon which the written acceptance provided for in section 22-19 is received by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3-22) 
Sec. 22-24. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 22-25. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes its city administrator, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 1-7-2008) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 26-1. - Election officials. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2-1) 
Editor's note— The Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.) requires the city to make provision for the following matters: 
(1)  Payment of expenses of elections, and other matters, §§ 21-3-8, 21-3-37, 21-3-99, 21-3-162. 
(2)  Voting machine procedures, § 21-3-227 et seq. 
(3)  Selecting polling places, § 21-3-163. 
(4)  Compensation for rent, heat, etc., for polling place, § 21-3-166. 
(5)  Conduct of elections, § 21-3-30. 
(6)  Appointment of managers, § 21-3-32. 
(7)  Vote recorders; tabulating machines, § 21-3-251. 
(8)  Applications for absentee ballots, § 21-3-283. 
Sec. 26-2. - Voter registration deadline. 
The deadline for registration of voters in city elections shall be as set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A.) § 21-3-123(a). 
(Code 1980, § 2-2-2; Ord. of 9-2-97) 
State Law reference— Voter registration, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-120 et seq. 
Sec. 26-3. - Notice of candidacy; filing dates. 
Notices of candidacy shall be filed by candidates for offices of the governing authority as set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A.) § 21-3-91(a)(1)—(3). 
(Code 1980, § 2-2-3; Ord. of 9-2-97) 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 26-4. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be as set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A.) § 21-3-90. The fees shall be received by the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2-4; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 2-2-4; Ord. of 9-6-94, § 2-2-4; Ord. of 9-2-97) 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-90. 
Sec. 26-5. - Challenge of name on electors' list. 
(a)  Any elector of the city desiring to challenge the right of registration of any person whose name appears upon the electors' list shall appear before a registrar on or before election day and state the grounds for the challenge, in writing. The registrar shall notify the challenged elector and provide him with an opportunity to answer the challenge. If the registrar does not find persuasive evidence for sustaining the challenge, the challenged elector shall be allowed to cast a challenged ballot, which shall be verified or discarded by the mayor and council. 
(b)  An elector of the city whose right to vote is challenged at the poll shall be allowed to cast a challenged ballot, which shall be verified or discarded by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2-5; Ord. of 9-6-94, § 2-2-5) 
State Law reference— Challenges by other electors, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125. 
Sec. 26-6. - Polling places. 
Polling places shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2-6; Ord. of 9-6-94, § 2-2-6) 
State Law reference— Polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163. 
Sec. 26-7. - Petition to contest results. 
(a)  A petition to contest the result of a primary or election shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court having jurisdiction within five days after the official consolidation of the returns of that particular office or question and certification thereof by the election official having responsibility for taking such action under this chapter or within five days after the official consolidation and certification of the returns of that particular office or question by the election official having responsibility for taking such action under this chapter following a recount pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-405 and shall allege: 
(1)  The contestant's qualification to institute the contest. 
(2)  The contestant's desire to contest the result of such primary or election and the name of the nomination, office or question involved in the contest. 
(3)  The name of the defendant. 
(4)  The name of each person who was a candidate at such primary or election for such nomination or office in the case of a contest involving same. 
(5)  Each ground of contest. 
(6)  The date of the official certification of the result in dispute. 
(7)  The relief sought. 
(8)  Such other facts as are necessary to provide a full, particular and explicit statement of the cause of contest. 
(b)  The state election board shall be served with a copy of the petition, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, by serving it on the chairman thereof, by mailing a copy to the chairman by certified or registered mail; and a certificate that such service has been made shall be filed by the plaintiff or his attorney. 
(c)  When an error in the counting of votes is alleged as a ground of contest, it is sufficient for the contestant to state generally that he believes that error was committed in the counting of the votes cast for the filling of the nomination or office in dispute, or for or against the question in dispute, in one or more specified precincts; and it shall not be necessary for the contestant to offer evidence to substantiate such allegation. If a recount of the votes cast in any precinct shall change the result in dispute, any aggrieved litigant may require a recount of the votes affecting such result, which were cast in any other precinct, by amending his pleadings and requesting such relief. 
(d)  The petition shall be verified by the affidavit of each contestant. Such affidavit shall be taken and subscribed before some person authorized by law to administer oaths and shall state that the contestant believes the facts alleged therein are true, that according to the best of his knowledge and belief the contested result of the primary or election is illegal and the return thereof incorrect, and that the petition to contest the same is made in good faith. 
(e)  A statement of the grounds of contest shall not be rejected, nor the proceedings dismissed by any court, for want of form, if the grounds of contest are alleged with such certainty as will advise the defendant of the particular proceeding or cause for which the primary or election is contested. 
(f)  Upon such petition being filed, the clerk of the superior court shall issue notice, in the form of special process directed to the sheriff of such county, requiring the defendant and any other person named in such petition as a candidate for such nomination or office, if any, to appear and answer such petition, on a day to be fixed in such notice, not more than ten days nor less than five days after the service of such notice. Such notice, with a copy of the petition attached, shall be served by the sheriff upon the defendant and any other person named therein in the same manner as petitions and process are served in other civil cases. On or before the day fixed in such notice, unless for good cause shown the presiding judge shall extend the time therefor, the defendant shall appear and answer such petition and may set up by way of answer or cross action any right of interest he may have or claim in such proceeding. Any other person who was a candidate at such primary or election for the nomination or office involved and upon whom notice was served as provided in this subsection shall be deemed a litigant to such proceeding and may set up by way of answer or cross action any right of interest or claim he may have. 
(g)  After filing, any petition, cross action or answer may be amended with leave of the court so as to include the specification of additional grounds of contest, other relevant facts, or prayer for further relief. After each amendment, a reasonable time to respond shall be given by the court to any opposing litigant. 
(h)  Contest procedures shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-420 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2-7; Ord. of 9-6-94, § 2-2-7) 
Sec. 26-8. - Plurality determines outcome. 
The candidates for each respective office who receives the highest number of votes cast for such office by the electors of the city shall be elected to such office. In the event of a runoff election to break a tie vote, the same shall be held not earlier than the 14th day and not later than the 21st day from the day of the general election. The same rules and regulations for the general election are applicable for the runoff election. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 2-2-8) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Constitution reference— Authority for local stormwater systems and air quality control, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(6), (13). 
State Law reference— State grants to municipalities for water pollution control projects, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-33; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-5, 41-2-15 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 30-26. - Prohibited generally. 
The creating of any unreasonably loud and disturbing noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-3) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 30-27. - Unlawful acts enumerated. 
(a)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud and disturbing noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of that device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(10)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(b)  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(c)  The prohibitions shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city; provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county or the city, nor to public agencies. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-3) 
Secs. 30-28—30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. tit. 41. 

Sec. 30-51. - Conditions declared to be nuisances. 
The following conditions are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises. 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or disturbing to the inhabitants of the city. 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(4)  The pollution of public water. 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit. 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or disturbing to the public. 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities. 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed. 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city. 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1980, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 30-52. - Complaint of nuisance. 
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the code enforcement department, which shall investigate and may issue a ten-day written warning upon the basis of the investigation. The warning shall be issued to the owner, agent in control or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated. If the nuisance is not abated within a reasonable time, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public, the code enforcement personnel shall issue a citation for the owner, agent in control or tenant to appear at the municipal court. 
(Code 1980, § 9-2-2) 
Sec. 30-53. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such in the opinion of the code enforcement personnel that it must be immediately abated, the municipal court judge may issue an order to the code enforcement personnel directing the nuisance to be abated. The code enforcement personnel shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating it, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  The police department shall assist the code enforcement department as is necessary in abating nuisances under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 30-54. - Violation penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. 
(Code 1980, § 9-2-4) 
State Law reference— Failure to abate nuisance after notice, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6. 
Secs. 30-55—30-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER CONTROL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-76. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1(1), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-77. - Definitions. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1(2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-78. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1(3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-79. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1(4), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-80. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished before the municipal court, as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1(5), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 30-81—30-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 30-101. - Tree preservation. 
(a)  Purpose. The guiding presumption behind this article is the belief that the natural environment has significant value in and of itself, and that all reasonable measures should be used in the preservation of that environment, consistent with continued development of the city. The purpose of this article is to cultivate and encourage a healthy and sustainable community forest within the city. This article is written to promote the general provisions within this article and to develop detailed provisions within the administrative guidelines in order to implement the regulations set forth to preserve, maintain, and replant trees within the city. The standards are for the preservation of trees as part of the land development, building construction and timber harvest processes. It is not the intent of this article to regulate individual properties where activities do not require land disturbance, building construction or timber harvest permit. 
Tree protection and replanting will help to achieve the following: 
• Preserve and increase property value and thus protect private and public investment. 
• Moderate storm water runoff and improve water quality. 
• Improve control of soil erosion. 
• Reduce air pollution. 
• Preserve habitat for wildlife. 
• Reduce noise and light pollution. 
• Moderate climate. 
• Protect and enhance the natural beauty of our community. 
(b)  Authority and applicability. 
(1)  Standards for tree preservation established hereunder supersede and replace those contained in the former tree preservation ordinance. 
(2)  Terms and provisions of the tree preservation ordinance and the administrative standards established herein, shall apply to all activity which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the city. No land disturbance permit shall be issued without it being determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(3)  The terms and provisions of these regulations shall also apply to timber harvesting activities. 
(c)  Establishment of the tree committee. In November of 2000, the council approved the formation of a tree committee, which started with four members. The tree committee will, from the time of approval of this article, consist of the following: 
A maximum of five volunteers appointed by the council to serve for three-year terms. 
[3]Two of the original volunteers will serve two-year terms. 
A member from the historical preservation committee. 
A member from the planning and zoning committee. 
The city arborist. 
The city code administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the duty of the tree committee to study, develop, and update a written plan for the disposition of trees and shrubs on public lands, and undeveloped land within the city limits. Upon completion of the written plan, the tree committee will review such plan annually and, each October, present a report to the mayor and council. The tree committee, when requested by the mayor and council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter coming within the scope of its work. 
It shall also be the duty of the tree committee to apply for Tree City USA status and, if such status is achieved, to provide guidance in order for the city to continue as a Tree City USA. The tree committee will be responsible for the yearly Arbor Day Celebration. 
Operation. The tree committee shall elect a chairperson and a secretary. The secretary shall maintain official minutes of all meetings and proceedings. The tree committee shall meet as often as is necessary but at least quarterly. Meetings shall be called and conducted in accordance with the state open meeting law and minutes shall be maintained in accordance with the state open records law. A majority of active members shall be a quorum for transaction of business. 
Funding. Funding for the tree plan shall be included as a line item in the city's annual budget. The city administrator is responsible for providing a detailed tree care plan and budget. 
(d)  Definitions. All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definitions except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. 
Agent(s), designated or authorized means an individual or entity authorized to administer and enforce the standards set forth in this article. 
Buildable area means the portion of a parcel of land where a building may be located and which shall contain enough square footage to meet the minimum required by the zoning district. That portion which is not located in the minimum setbacks, utility corridors, driveways, slopes to build streets, tee save areas, landscape strips, specimen tree areas, state water buffer, tributary buffers, zoning buffers, wetlands, storm water and sanitary sewer easements. 
Buffer means: 
State waters buffer. An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Zoning buffer. A natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses. Buffer is achieved with natural vegetation and must be replanted subject to the approval of the city arborist or his/her designated agent(s) when sparsely vegetated. Cleaning of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited except when accomplished under the supervision of the city arborist or his/her designated agent(s). 
Caliper means the standard for trunk measurements of nursery stocks. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Cambium means tissue within the woody portion of trees and shrubs which gives rise to the woody water and nutrient conducting system and the energy substrate transport system in trees. Cambium growth activity results in a tree's radial development, i.e., increase in diameter. 
Cambial dieback means the irreparable radial or vertical interruption of a tree's cambium, usually caused by mechanical damage, such as skinning bark or from excessive heat. 
Clear cutting means the removal of all trees from a property, whether by cutting or other means, excluding stream buffer requirements. 
Coniferous means belonging to the group of cone bearing evergreen trees and shrubs 
City arborist means the agent(s) of the city having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of this article. Such person shall be certified by the SIA. 
Critical root zone means the area of tree roots within the crown dripline. This zone is generally defined as a circle with a radius extending from a tree's trunk to a point no less than the furthest crown dripline. Disturbances within this zone will directly affect a tree's chance for survival. 
Crown drip line means a vertical line extending down to the ground from the end of the tree's longest branches. 
Deciduous means not persistent; the shedding of leaves annually. 
D.B.H. means diameter-at-breast-height is a standard measure of tree size (for trees existing on site) and is a tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the SPL. 
Improvement setback means an area adjacent to a zoning buffer in which no improvements and/or structures shall be constructed. No development activity such as tree removal, stump removal or grinding, land disturbance or grading is permitted without the approval of the city arborist. 
Land development means the performance of any building or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, the division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or termination of rights of access or riparian rights. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity, which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
Land disturbance permit means a permit issued by the city that authorizes the commencement of alteration or development of a given tract of land or the commencement of any land disturbing activity. 
Landscape plan means a plan that identifies areas of tree preservation and methods of tree protection within the protected zone, as well as all areas of replanting. Within replanting areas, the common and botanical names of the proposed species, the number of plants of each species, the size of all plant materials, the proposed location of all plant materials, and any unique features of the plant materials shall be indicated. 
Landscape strip means an area required by this article by any condition of zoning, use permit or variance approval, which is reserved for the installation and/or maintenance of plant materials. 
Minimum setback means the minimum yards as specified in the regulations related to the zoning districts or use permit categories. A minimum required space between a property line and a structure. An area defined by a building line. 
Protected zone includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Critical root zone plus an additional three feet; 
(2)  All areas of a parcel required to remain in undisturbed open space; 
(3)  All areas required as landscape strips and/or buffers; 
(4)  Tree save areas according to city ordinances, conditions of zoning, use permit or variance approval, and/or this article. 
Re-vegetation means the replacement of trees and landscape plant materials to satisfy the minimum tree density and landscape requirements, as determined by the city ordinances, condition of zoning, use permit or variance approval, or this article. 
Roots means: 
(1)  Feeder roots. A complex system of small annual roots growing outward and predominantly upward from the system of "transport roots." These roots branch four or more times to form fans or mats of thousands of fine, short, non-woody tips. Many of these small roots and their multiple tips are two-tenths to one-millimeter or less in diameter and less than one to two millimeters long. These roots constitute the major fraction of a tree's root system surface area and are the primary sites of absorption of water and nutrients 
(2)  Major woody roots. First order of tree roots originating at the "root collar" and growing horizontally in the soil to a distance of between three and 15 feet from the tree's trunk. These roots branch and decrease in diameter to give rise to "rope roots." The primary functions of major woody roots include anchorage, structural support, the storage of food reserves, and the transport of minerals and nutrients. 
(3)  Rope roots. An extensive network of woody second order roots arising from major woody roots, occurring within the surface 12 to 18 inches of local soils, and with an average size ranging from one-quarter to one-inch in diameter. The primary function of rope roots is the transport of water and nutrients and the storage of food reserves. 
(4)  Transport roots. The system or framework of tree roots comprised of major woody roots and rope roots. 
Root collar means the point of attachment of major woody roots to the tree trunk, usually at or near the ground line and associated with a marked swelling of the tree trunk. 
Root respiration means an active process occurring throughout the feeder root system of trees and involving the consumption of oxygen and sugars with the release of energy and carbon dioxide. Root respiration facilitates the uptake and transport of minerals and nutrients essential for tree survival. 
Setback means a space between a property line and the line to which a building or specified structure may be constructed. 
Soil compaction means a change in soil physical properties, which includes an increase in soil weight per unit volume and a decrease in soil pore space. Soil compaction is caused by repeated vibrations, frequent traffic and weight. As related to tree roots, compacted soil can cause physical root damage, a decrease in soil oxygen levels with an increase in toxic gasses, and can be impervious to new root development. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Thinning means selective cutting or removal of timber. A minimum of 80 D.B.H. per acre must remain. 
Timber harvesting means the felling of timber products (pulp wood, etc.). The term "timber harvesting" may include both clear cutting and thinning of timber. 
Tree means: 
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, which has a trunk diameter of two inches or more measured at a point six inches above the ground level and which normally obtains a height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Heritage tree. A tree, which is designated upon approval by the tree committee or authorized agent(s) to be of notable historical value or interest because of its age, size, or historical association. 
Specimen tree. Any tree, which has been determined by the city arborist to be of high value because of its type, size, age, or other professional criteria, and has been so designated according to administrative standards established by the city council. 
Stand of specimen trees. A contiguous grouping of trees which has been determined to be of value by the city arborist or authorized designee(s). 
(1)  A relatively mature even-aged stand. 
(2)  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
(3)  A stand of historical significance. 
(4)  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
Tree preservation ordinance means the ordinance from which this article is derived, approved and adopted by the city council to provide standards for the protection, preservation and replacement of trees regulated and enforced by the city arborist in conjunction with the planning and zoning committee or designated agent(s) through development and construction permits and processes. 
Tree protection plan or TPP means a plan to be submitted as part of the land disturbance process. This plan will include tree protection details, spatial limits, and implementation schedule as outlined in section 30-102 and appendices. 
Tree save area means all areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving specimen trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Tributary means any perennial stream (or portion thereof) within the affected area that is portrayed as a solid blue line on the United States Geological Survey 7.5 Quadrangle Maps, 1968 edition, or other perennial streams as identified by the city. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Zoning regulations means the zoning resolution of the city as amended or such regulations subsequently adopted by the city council inclusive of conditions of zoning, use permit or variance approval established pursuant thereto. 
All other terms. All other words or phrases as appropriate to the context of their uses shall be interpreted as defined in the zoning regulations. 
(e)  Permit procedures. 
(1)  All applications for a land disturbance permit shall provide a tree protection plan and other documentation as required and as applicable for all areas of the tract of land within a protected zone. All applications and required supplemental information shall be submitted to city hall. [The tree protection plan may be separate from or included with the landscape plan.] 
(2)  All tree protection plans (TPP) and related documentation shall be reviewed by the city arborist for conformance to the provisions of these regulations and either approved, returned, for revisions, or denied within 30 days of receipt. If denied or returned for revisions the reasons for denial or revision shall be annotated on the TPP or stated in writing. 
(3)  Issuance of a valid land disturbance permit shall constitute an approval of the required tree protection plan and shall indicate conformance to the provisions of these regulations. 
(4)  For issuance of any residential building permit, applicants must sign and agree to abide by the residential erosion and sedimentation control tree protection agreement, (see appendices to section 30-102). 
(5)  For issuance of a timber harvesting permit, applicant agrees to maintain a 25-foot undisturbed buffer along the entire perimeter of the property. This buffer must be maintained for the duration of the timber harvesting activity. 
(f)  Removal of tree(s). 
(1)  If the owner/developer proposes to remove any tree(s) in the protected zone, then the owner/developer must document a hardship such as but not limited to economic or zoning restrictions and submit it as part of the application for a land disturbance permit. The application shall be subject to the approval of the city arborist or designated agent before any trees are to be removed from the site. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to allow the removal of vegetation in a natural, undisturbed buffer required by the zoning regulations. 
(2)  When no trees are present in the protected zone or when disturbance of any portion of the protected zone is approved, it shall be the responsibility of the owner/developer to re-vegetate said areas (in which improvements are not constructed) with trees or other plant materials subject to zoning regulations or, in lieu thereof, administrative standards. 
(3)  Not withstanding any of the other requirements of these regulations, it shall be unlawful to remove a specimen tree without the express written consent of the city arborist or authorized agent(s). Administrative standards have been established for the identification, preservation and protection of specimen trees. 
(4)  The city arborist or designated agent shall approve an application for the removal of a protected or specimen tree provided at least one of the following conditions are met: 
• The location of the tree prevents the opening of reasonable and necessary vehicular traffic lanes; 
• The location of the tree prevents the construction of utility lines or drainage facilities, which may not be feasibly relocated; 
• The location of the tree prevents reasonable access to the property, if no alternative access exists; 
• Allowing the tree to remain would impose an economic burden upon the owner of the property entirely out of proportion to with the benefit gained by retaining the tree; 
• The tree is diseased, dead or dying to the point that repair or restoration is not practical or the disease may be transmitted to other trees; 
• There is no reasonable assurance that if the tree is saved with proper construction precautions, it will continue to live as an asset to the site. 
(g)  Violations. Citations for any of the following violations, by authorized city enforcement agent(s) may constitute issuance of an immediate stop work order: 
(1)  Land disturbance and/or tree removal within state water, tributary, or zoning buffer(s). 
(2)  Land disturbance and/or tree removal within tree save area(s). 
(3)  Illegal removal or disturbance of specimen tree, heritage trees or stands of trees. 
(4)  Improper installation of tree fencing. 
(5)  Other violations of any provision(s) of this article established pursuant thereto, including appendices. 
(h)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city administrator or designated agent(s) to enforce this article. The city administrator or designated agent(s) shall have the authority to modify, revoke, suspend, or void any land disturbance permit and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof. 
The city administrator or designated agent(s) is the issuing authority and shall have the power to withhold all permits, including, but not limited to, final certificates of occupancy, building permits and all permits on the subject site until it is determined by the issuing authority that the site complies with this article and the provisions of the formal plan approved by the county. 
(i)  Inspections. The city arborist is the issuing authority and may cause inspection of compliance to be made periodically by it's designated agent(s) during the course of the project and shall make a final inspection following the completion of the work. Applicants shall cooperate with the issuing authority in conducting such inspections. 
The city arborist shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, including but not limited to the power to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land disturbing or tree removal activities. 
The city administrator is authorized to design and implement an inspection program involving private inspectors acceptable to the department. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for the purpose of inspection and who presents appropriate identification, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(j)  Notice of violation. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person, firm, or corporation has: 
(1)  Engaged in land disturbing or other activities, which have resulted in the removal of trees; or 
(2)  Failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a validly issued permit, then a written notice of violation shall be served upon the property owner or the agent of record. 
Where a person, firm, or corporation has engaged in land disturbing or tree removal activities without having first secured a permit therefore in violation of this article, notices under the provisions of this article may be served upon the person in charge or any person representing the person in charge on the site. All construction and land disturbance activity shall be discontinued until the necessary measures to achieve compliance have been fulfilled. 
The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the permit and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed 
If the person, firm, or corporation engaged in land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he/she shall be subject to citation for violation of this article. 
(k)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  Upon notice from the city administrator, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provision of this article shall be immediately stopped, until such time that the violation has been remedied to the satisfaction of the city manager. Prior to re-mediation a plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city arborist. 
(2)  Such notice. 
a.  Shall be in writing. 
b.  Shall state the specific violations. 
c.  Shall be given to the applicant, owner, the authorized agent of either, or the person in charge, or any person representing the person in charge of the activity on the subject property. 
d.  Shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
e.  Shall allow only erosion control work to continue while stop work is in effect. 
(l)  Modification, revocation, suspension, voidance of permit. A land disturbance permit and/or other permit(s) required by this article may be modified, revoked, suspended, or voided by the city arborist upon finding that the holder is in violation of the terms of the permit or any portion of this article. 
(m)  Bonding. The city will evaluate all development projects (excluding timber harvesting) requesting property clear cutting. If upon completion of the site evaluation, the city arborist deems it appropriate to allow property clear cutting activities; a bond will be required. The bond will be required by the city as a mechanism to cover any potential cost associated with re-vegetation of the clear-cut property in the event of property abandonment. 
The required bond amount will be 100 percent of the total cost for replanting trees to satisfy the density standards for the project site. A tree replacement cost obtained from a plant nursery will be provided to the city with the clear-cut request and the bond amount will be based on the tree replacement cost, the city reserves the right to request additional replacement cost if deemed appropriate. The city will hold the bond until the project activity, including tree replacement to satisfy the site density requirements, is completed. If upon issuing the land disturbance permit, the property is clear-cut and there are no construction or development activities conducted within six months, the city will attempt to contact the property owner (via certified mail) for a project update. Should the property owner not respond within 30 days of receipt of the status request, the bond will be used to re-vegetate the project site. 
(n)  Fines and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for a fine of up to a maximum $1,000.00 per violation per day. Each calendar day a violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. There are no maximum limitations to the accrual of fines. Each owner of any property wherein a violation exists shall be jointly and severally responsible for said violations. 
(o)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the city arborist relating to the application of these regulations may file an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the city council for relief or reconsideration. Appeals shall only be granted for errors of interpretation or where the unique natural features of the site are such that application of these regulations would create an undue hardship to the property owner, and in other instances where an undue hardship is created for the owner of the property. 
( Ord. No. 01-08, 12-6-2001 ) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Terms of founding members: Jim Lindquist, Mary Provost November, 2000—October, 2002 Cathy Martin, Jim Rodgers November, 2000—October, 2003 Brian Hendry July, 2001—October, 2004 

Sec. 30-102. - Administrative guidelines for residential and commercial districts. 
(a)  Procedures. 
(1)  Land disturbance permits. 
Step 1. Application forms. Filing application forms and obtaining Ordinance and Administrative Guidelines information. 
Step 2. Tree protection plan. A tree protection plan (TPP), shall be submitted with other permit drawings as part of the land disturbance permit process. This plan may either be a separate drawing or part of the landscape plan and shall include the following information: 
a.  Tree protection details, detail drawings of tree protection measures and landscape strips (whichever is applicable or both). 
• Protective tree fencing. 
• Erosion control fencing. 
• Tree protection signs. 
• Transplanting specifications. 
• Tree wells and aeration systems. 
• Staking specifications. 
• Other applicable drawings. 
• Landscape installation plans, planting details, plant list. 
b.  Spatial limits. 
• Definition of spatial limits. 
• Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading and trenching. 
• Tree protection zones. 
• Specimen trees or stands of trees. 
• Areas of re-vegetation and tree density calculations, 
• Water buffers and/or tributary buffers. 
c.  Implementation schedule. 
• Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of tree protection measures. 
Step 3. Review process. These plans shall be reviewed by the city arborist or designated agent(s) for conformance with: 
• Overlay district regulations. 
• City zoning resolution. 
• Applicable zoning, use permit, and/or variance conditions. 
• Tree preservation ordinance and administrative standards. 
• Any and all ordinances and administrative guidelines dealing with natural resources: 
1.  Plans will either be approved or returned for revisions. 
2.  Reasons for denial shall be stated in writing on the tree protection plan. 
Step 4. Tree protection measures. All tree protection measures shall be installed and inspected by the city arborist or designated agent(s) prior to land disturbance. 
Step 5. Land disturbance permit. Issuance of the land disturbance permit is contingent upon approval of the tree protection plan. 
Step 6. Follow-up. The City arborist will conduct follow-up site inspections for enforcement of the tree preservation ordinance and its administrative guidelines. 
(2)  Rezoning and special use permits. 
Step 1. Application forms. Filing application forms and obtaining ordinance and administrative guideline information. 
Step 2. Case review. The city arborist will conduct a preliminary review of all rezoning cases and special use permit applications. 
Step 3. Field review. A field review of cases will occur under the following conditions: 
• For community unit plans and major development cases. 
• For cases within all watershed areas of the city reservoir and wetlands. 
• Other cases as determined necessary by the preliminary review. 
• For cases within overlay districts. 
Step 4. Conditions. Conditions to rezoning will be applied as found necessary by the preliminary review. These conditions may either be general or specific in nature and will reflect the standards or provisions of the tree preservation ordinance and administrative guideline and/or the zoning resolution. 
Step 5. Verification. Compliance with these conditions will be verified by review of a revised site plan prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(3)  Timber harvesting permit requirements for non agriculture land uses. A timber harvest permit is required when more than two acres of land is thinned. If no more than two acres is thinned a timber harvest permit will not be required. This permit does not allow any thinning or disturbance of water, tributary or wetland buffers. Any portion of land thinned under this provision is required to meet the minimum site density of 80 inches DBH per acre, which will typically require replanting some trees. 
Step 1. Application form and site plan. Filing application form must be accompanied with site plan. 
Step 2. Application and site plan review. The city arborist will conduct review of all timber harvesting applications and site plans. The review of applications and site plans will be based on meeting standards listed below. 
Site plan minimum standards note stating that no strip removal or grading is allowed under this permit; 
• All areas of existing trees shall be shown; 
• All areas of trees to be thinned shall be shown; 
• All areas of trees to be saved shall be shown; 
• All streams, creeks, lakes, wetlands, applicable buffer areas and tree save areas shall be shown; 
• Investigation must be conducted by a forester or landscape architect registered in the state or a certified arborist. Plan must be designed by a forester or landscape architect registered in the state. The plan must be affixed with the forester or landscape architect's registered seal. 
Other minimum standards timber harvesting under this provision shall be in compliance with the following standards: 
Erosion control prescribed by the city ordinance [this Code]. A 25-foot undisturbed buffer shall be provided and maintained along the entire perimeter of the property, including road frontages, during the timber harvesting activity, except for authorized access crossings. The property shall be required to meet a tree density standard of 80 inches D.B.H. per acre, not including the 25-foot buffer, upon completion of the authorized timber harvesting activities. The owner/developer shall utilize the recommended best management practices as established by the state forestry commission. 
(4)  Residential erosion and sedimentation and tree protection agreement form. 
Step 1. Application form. Obtain a residential erosion and sedimentation and tree protection agreement. Fill out and submit the residential erosion and sedimentation and tree protection agreement form. 
Step 2. Requirements. 
a.  Mass removal of trees on construction sites is limited to a "defined building envelope of 25 feet," driveways and utility routes. 
or 
b.  Enough trees must be protected somewhere on the lot to meet the minimum of 80 inches diameter per acre. [See appendix to review a copy of the residential erosion and sedimentation control and tree protection agreement form.] 
or 
c.  When land that is devoid of trees such as pastureland is to be developed for building, a 50 percent credit will be allowed. That is, 40 D.B.H. inches per acre of trees shall be planted. 
(5)  Tree protection. Standards for specimen and heritage trees and stands of trees: 
Specimen and heritage tree. Any tree in fair or better condition which equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes: 

 
A tree in fair or better condition must meet the following minimum standards: 
• A life expectancy of greater than ten years. 
• A relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
• No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
• No major insect or pathological problem. 
• A lesser-sized tree can be considered a specimen if it is a rare or unusual species, of exceptional quality, or of historical significance. 
• A lesser size tree can be considered a specimen tree if it is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a project or landscape. 
Specimen tree stands. A contiguous grouping of trees which has been determined to be of value by the city's authorized agent(s). Determination is based upon one of the following criteria: 
• A mature even-aged stand. 
• A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
• A stand of historical significance. 
• A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
(b)  Methods of tree protection. 
(1)  Planning consideration. Tree space is the most critical factor in tree protection throughout the development process. The root system of trees can easily go beyond the dripline of the tree canopy. The root system within the dripline region is generally considered to be the critical root zone. Disturbance within this zone can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. To protect these critical root zones the following standards shall apply: 
• The protective zone of specimen trees, heritage trees, stands of trees or otherwise designated tree save areas shall include no less that the total area beneath the tree(s) canopy as defined by the farthest canopy of the tree(s) plus a minimum of three additional feet. In some instances, the city arborist or authorized agent(s) may require a protective zone up to ten feet outside the dripline area. (See appendix A—Typical critical root zone.) 
• Layout of the project site utility and grading plans must accommodate the required tree protective zones. Utilities must be placed along corridors between protective zones. 
• Construction site activities such as parking, material storage, bury pits, concrete washout, burn hole placement, etc., shall not be allowed within tree protection zones. 
• No disturbance shall occur within the protective zone of tree save areas. 
(2)  Protective barriers. Protective tree fencing shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely surrounding the critical root zones, plus a minimum of three additional feet of all specimen trees, heritage trees, stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones, prior to any land disturbance. Acceptable tree fencing procedures: 
• A minimum of four feet high, constructed in a post and rail configuration. A two-inch by four-inch post and a double one-inch by four-inch rail is recommended. 
• Four-foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing. 
• Any deviation from the requirements listed above must be authorized by the city arborist or designated agent(s). 
• All tree protection fences must be accompanied by "keep out" or "tree save" signage. 
• All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with "tree save area" signs posted visibly on exterior sides of the fenced in area. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. Signs requiring subcontractor compliance with tree protection standards are required at all site entrances. 
• A stop work order or notice of violation will issued if project is found to be out of compliance with the tree protection/landscape plan. A copy of the approved tree protection/landscape plan shall be attached to all building permits to be checked by each inspector (building, electrical, plumbing, etc.) 
• All specimen trees, heritage trees, stands of trees or otherwise designated tree protection zones must be protected from silt. 
Silt fencing reinforced with wire mesh fencing must be placed along the outer uphill edge of tree protective zones at the land disturbance interface. 
Silt fencing should be backed by 12 gauge, two-inch by four-inch wire mesh fencing in areas of steep slope. (Steep slopes are defined at greater than 3H:IV). 
All erosion control measures must comply with city standards. 
• All tree fencing and erosion control barriers must be installed prior to and maintained throughout the land disturbance process and building construction and may not be removed until certificate of occupancy is issued, and approved by the city administrator or designated agent(s). 
(3)  Re-vegetation—Tree replacement. 
a.  The replacement of trees to satisfy the conditions of zoning, or this article, shall occur under the following conditions: 
• To establish the minimum tree density requirements for the site. 
• Where grading occurs outside the buildable portion of the lot. 
• If the lot's buildable area leaves no protected zone. 
• If no trees are present within an existing zone. 
• Where specimen trees or stands of trees within the buildable portion of the lot are to be removed. 
• Where specimen trees or stands of trees and trees within otherwise designated protective zones have been irreparably damaged or removed through land disturbance or construction activities. 
b.  The spacing of replacement trees must be compatible with special limitations and with responsible consideration towards potential species size. The following criteria shall be used to determine which trees are to be retained, removed and where trees are to be located for replacement: 
POSITIVE CRITERIA: 
• A species that is long-lived; 
• A species that is native to the area; 
• The hardiness of the tree; 
• A low incidence of exfoliating bark, branch drop, and pruning; 
• The protection of buildings from wind, sun, and other climatic considerations. The encouragement of wildlife residence; 
• The suitability of size and maturity to the tree's function; 
• The ability to retain soil and erosion; 
• The ability to reduce noise; 
• Draught resistant. 
NEGATIVE CRITERIA: 
• Susceptibility to insect and disease attack and to air and water pollution; 
• Existence of disease, rot, or other damage to the individual tree. 
c.  Where the city arborist or designated agent has determined that site spatial constraints result in the inability to provide tree density, as many trees as possible must be planted on site. The remaining balance of trees must be allocated to the tree replacement fund. 
(4)  Tree replacement fund. Arrangements will be made through the city arborist. The following criteria apply: 
• Tree replacement cost obtained from three plant nurseries must be provided for approval and the tree replacement cost will be based on the average of these estimates. 
• The required replacement fee will be 100 percent of the total cost to replant the balance of trees that were unable to be planted to satisfy the site density requirements. 
( Ord. No. 01-08, 12-6-2001 ) 
ARTICLE V—APPENDICES 
BUFFER STANDARDS FOR MAJOR THOROUGHFARES 
In order to maintain and enhance aesthetic standards in the city, the city has determined that buffer standards need to be adopted and enforced along its community collector roads. These roads are Rockaway Road, Highway 16, Highway 85, Stallings Road from city line to Matthews Street, Pylant Road from city line to Clarke's Street, Rockhouse Road, and Luther Bailey Road. 
Other benefits associated with these regulations are: 
• Enhanced property values. 
• Reduced soil erosion, storm-water management costs and flooding potential. 
• Moderation of microclimates. 
• Improved air and water quality. 
• Mitigation of noise and glare. 
• Energy conservation through reduced heating and cooling. 
The following buffer standards shall apply to all residential and nonresidential development along these highways: 
(A)  Residential buffers. A continuous 60-foot-wide (minimum) greenbelt buffer shall be preserved or established for any residential development adjacent to a collector road. The natural tree/landscape is to be preserved wherever possible. 
(B)  Nonresidential buffers. A continuous 50-foot-wide tree-save/landscape buffer shall be preserved or established for any nonresidential development adjacent to an arterial highway. The natural vegetation is to be preserved wherever possible. 
(C)  Special conditions and exceptions. 
(1)  The required tree-save/landscape buffer for any nonresidential property may be reduced as follows, subject to the approval of the city landscape architect and the planning commission: 
A.  A buffer may be reduced from ten feet, provided the developer installs additional landscaping that amounts to at least ten-percent of the caliper inches of the trees required for the entire site by the landscape ordinance. 
B.  A buffer may be reduced from 15 feet, provided the developer installs additional landscaping that, amounts to at lease 15 percent of the caliper inches of the trees required for the entire site by the landscape ordinance. 
(2)  The buffer requirements for subsections (a) and (b) above shall not apply to any existing lot adjacent to a community collector road unless the zoning of the property is changed or there is a major change in the intensity of the existing use. 
(3)  The buffer requirements for subsections (a) and (b) above shall not apply to any existing lot adjacent to an arterial highway if that lot is less than one-acre in area or has an average depth of 200 feet or less (measured from the right-of-way of the adjacent arterial highway). For these lots, the minimum buffer shall be not less than 20 feet wide. 
(4)  For any existing lot which is adjacent to a community collector road and which has an average depth of between 200 feet and 220 feet (measured from the right-of-way line of the adjacent a community collector road), the required buffer width may be established at 20 feet plus the number of feet the average depth of the lot exceeds 200 feet. 
(5)  For lots that front more than one community collector road, the buffer standards shall apply for each front. 
APPENDIX A. TYPICAL CRITICAL ROOT ZONE 

APPENDIX B. TUNNELING  (Optional but Preferred Specimen Tree Save Method) 
How to use funneling for underground utilities, (such as cable, electric, and natural gas) instead of cutting an open trench. This method will help preserve existing specimen trees or smeller tree save areas: 

APPENDIX C. GRADE CHANGES 
How to preserve existing trees with the use of retaining walls when grade changes are necessary: 

Grade change examples—Methods of preventing root suffocation from fill dirt when changing grade: 

APPENDIX D. CHECK LIST FOR LANDSCAPE DRAWINGS AND TREE PROTECTION PLANS 
• Landscape drawings (generally used for commercial zoned projects) shall have a separate sheet submitted with the landscape plan, to include: 
• All required undisturbed buffers, landscape strips, parking islands, and state water (streams, lakes, river, etc.) and tributary buffers with the required dimensions. 
• Planting schedules with proposed plant material names (common and botanical), quantity, size, and any special planting notes. 
• Planting and staking details. 
• Location of proposed irrigation systems, if applicable. 
• Drawings for irrigation systems within the rights-of-ways must show the locations of lines, heads, spray radius, timers, and an emergency 24-hour contact number. 
• All required landscape strips must be planted at a density so as to provide at least 60 percent spatial coverage of trees and shrubs. 
• Parking islands must be planted with shade trees. (Minimum two-inch caliper.) 
• Permanent structures cannot be permitted in landscape strips, landscape islands, or buffers; including but not limited to, headwalls, drop inlets, catch basins, rip-rap, light fixtures, phone booths, etc. 
• Curb stops must be used to prevent vehicle overhang into required landscape strips and parking islands. 
• The following notes shall be indicated on all landscape plans in large letters: 
• ALL LANDSCAPING SHALL BE IN PLACE PRIOR TO THE CONNECTION OF PERMANENT POWER OR RECORDING OF A FINAL PLAT. 
• CONTACT THE CITY MANAGER, 770-599-3679, FOR A SITE INSPECTION UPON COMPLETION OF LANDSCAPE INSTALLATION. 
• IF THE LANDSCAPE DESIGN OR PLANT MATERIAL ARE CHANGED IN ANY WAY FROM TEE SENOIA CITY PERMITTED PLAN, YOU SHALL SUBMIT TWO SETS OF REVISED PLANS TO THE CITY ARBORIST'S OFFICE FOR APPROVAL PRIOR TO ANY LANDSCAPE INSTALLATION. 
Tree protection plans (generally used for residential zoned projects) 
1.  Provisions for tree protection on the site shall be, at minimum, in conformance with the requirements of the city tree ordinance. 
2.  A tree protection plan shall be submitted either as part of the landscape plan or as a separate drawing to include the following: 
• All tree protection zones and areas of re-vegetation. 
• Ground-run location of all specimen trees. 
• Indicate those specimen trees to be removed. Removal of specimen trees is subject to the approval of the city arborist. 
• Limits of clearing and land disturbance such as grading, trenching, etc. where these disturbances may affect tree protection zones. 
• Proposed location of underground utilities. 
• Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree protections zones including tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signage, etc. 
• This plan should indicate staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, and debris bum and burial holes, where these areas might affect tree protection. 
• The required site tree density factor must be satisfied. Compliance shall be demonstrated on the tree protection plan. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculation must be indicated on the drawing. 
• Flowering ornamental replacement trees may not be used in density calculation. 
• Replacement trees used in density calculations must be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. 
• An irrigation plan is required and it must include a watering schedule for existing and replacement trees on the site. 
• The following notes shall be indicated on both tree protection plans and grading plans in large letters: 
• CONTACT SENOIA CITY HALL AT 770-599-3679 TO ARRANGE A PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE WITH THE CITY ARBORIST OR DESIGNATED AGENT(S) PRIOR TO ANY LAND DISTURBANCE. 
• ALL TREE PROTECTION AND EROSION CONTROL MEASURES MUST BE INSTALLED PRIOR TO GRADING. 
• UNDISTURBED BUFFERS SHALL BE REPLANTED TO BUFFER STANDARDS WHERE SPARSELY VEGETATED OR WHERE DISTURBED AT APPROVED UTILITY CROSSINGS. REPLANTINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CITY ARBORIST OR DESIGNATED AGENT(S) APPROVAL. 
APPENDIX E. TREES RECOMMENDED BY THE CITY OF SENOIA (DROUGHT RESISTANT TREES ARE PREFERRED) 

 
APPENDIX G. TREE AND SITE RELATED DISTURBANCES 
Tree protection zones, specimen trees or stands of trees designated to be saved must be protected from the following damages which may occur during all phases of land disturbance and construction processes, Methods of tree protection and disturbance prevention are provided in section 30-101(b)(2). 
• Direct physical root damage. 
• Indirect root damage. 
• Trunk and crown disturbances. 
A.  Direct physical root damage most frequently occurs during site clearing and grading operations, where transport or feeder roots are cut, torn, or removed. 
1.  Transport and feeder roots tend to tangle and fuse among the roots of adjacent trees. The removal of trees with heavy machinery along the outer periphery of a tree save area can result in considerable damage within the tree save area. 
2.  The most substantial form of root damage for all root types occurs in the form of cut roots. Roots are cut in grade reduction or from trenching for underground utilities, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer lines. 
3.  A more subtle form of root damage is the loss of feeder roots. Feeder roots normally occur within the organic layer and the surface four inches of topsoil, subsequently, these roots can be easily damaged by the track action from a single bulldozer pass. The stripping of topsoil within a tree's critical root zone can totally eliminate its feeder root system. 
B.  Indirect root damage through site modification can result from positive grade changes, temporary storage of fill material, sedimentation of erosion materials, soil compaction, and soil chemical changes. 
• Positive grade changes from fill and sedimentation causes a decrease in soil oxygen levels. An increase in soil carbon dioxide and other toxic gases can also occur, leading to large areas of anaerobic soil conditions and causing a decrease in the root respiration process, which is essential for the uptake and transport of mineral and nutrients. 
• Anaerobic soil conditions are also produced by soil compaction, the increase in soil bulk density with a decrease in soil pore space. Compacted soil is also impervious to root penetration, and thus inhibits root development. Soil compaction is generally caused by the weight and vibrations of heavy machinery, vehicle parking, and the storage of fill and/or construction material within the critical root zones of trees. 
• Changes in soil chemistry will adversely affect tree survival. The most frequent occurrence is the change (decrease) in soil acidity by concrete washout. Most trees native to the county area prefer slightly acid soils; concrete residues are highly basic. The leakage or spillage of toxic material such as fuels or paints can be fatal for trees. 
C.  Trunk and crown disturbance are generally mechanical in nature and are either caused directly by clearing and grading machinery, or indirectly by debris being cleared and falling into trees marked for protection. 
• Common forms of damage include stripped bark and cambium, split trunks, and broken limbs. 
• Damage also occurs for the posting of signs such as building permits or survey markers on trees. 
• Indirect damage can be caused by the placement of burn holes of debris fires too close to trees. The possible range of damage includes scorched trunks with some cambial dieback, the loss of foliage due to evaporative heat stress (leaf desiccation), and completely burned trunk and crowns. 
APPENDIX H. RESIDENTIAL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL AND TREE PROTECTION 
Agreement Building Permit No._______ 
THIS PERMIT AUTHORIZES _______ TO BEGIN RESIDENTIAL GRADING/LAND DISTURBANCE ON LOT _______ IN _______ SUBDIVISION OR AT THE FOLLOWING ADDRESS _____ 
THE AUTHORIZED PERSON ACKNOWLEDGES THAT HE/SHE IS RESPONSIBLE FOR TAKING THE ADEQUATE STEPS TO: 
EROSION CONTROL 
1.  Control erosion on said property. 
2.  Control the movement of sediment off the site by means of properly constructed and maintained silt straps (silt fence, hay bales, etc.) in those areas where water exits the property. 
3.  Keep mud off of the streets fronting this property by construction and maintenance of a driveway pad and removal of mud from the street when necessary. 
4.  Otherwise comply with all applicable erosion and sedimentation requirements. 
TREE PROTECTION 
1.  Protect tree save areas on this lot, so that standards are met after construction is completed. If a specimen or heritage tree * exists in a tree save area and is in the way of a proposed utility corridor or drainage swale, please contact the city arborist at 770-599-3679 to schedule and on-site meeting to try and find alternate ideas for the disturbance. 
2.  Tree fence is required on a lot when clearing and grading for home construction commences. All tree fences shall remain and be maintained until the home construction is 100 percent completed. 
3.  Otherwise comply with all applicable tree preservation requirements, including those of the tree preservation ordinance and administrative guidelines. 
*  Specimen or heritage trees—Any tree in fair of better condition which equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes: 
A.  Large hardwoods 25-inch diameter at four and one-half feet above the ground. 
B.  Large softwoods like Pines and Cedars, 26-inch diameter at four and one-half feet above the ground. 
C.  Small flowering trees like Dogwoods, Redbuds, and Sourwoods, eight-inch diameter at four and one-half feet above the ground. 
FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THESE REQUIREMENTS WILL RESULT IN THE ISSUANCE OF A STOP WORK ORDER OR OTHER CITATIONS. 
EFFECTIVE THIS _______ DAY OF _______, 20_______. 
APPLICANT _____ 
CITY OFFICIAL _____ 
DISPLAY THIS PERMIT AT THE MAIN POINT OF ACCESS AND VISIBLE FROM THE STREET. 
APPENDIX K. PROTECTIVE FENCING 

OPEN SPACE DESIGN GUIDELINES 
While ordinances provide basic development standards, details of aesthetic and other criteria of appropriateness often become the responsibility of planning commissions or zoning boards. 
The following "considerations for open space guidelines" are proposed to enable local planning commissions and zoning boards to develop and adopt their own design guidelines. Each community is unique, and there is no set of one-size-fits-all guidelines. 

Map A represents an aerial view of a 75-acre site with property lines indicated and will serve as a base map for examples in "considerations." The tract would yield a maximum of 15 lots upon conventional subdivision in an agricultural zone with a minimum lot size of five acres. Map B shows a stereotypical build out plan. Geographical constraints and the developer's desire for one super lot, yield a total of 13 lots. 
The open space option, in contrast, would allow a developer to take advantage of a density bonus to achieve a total of 30 units, as seen in Map C. 
These "considerations" are offered in hopes of drawing attention to basic open space design issues that must be addressed in our region. The accompanying illustrations are provided only to reduce the abstract quality of the text and to stimulate the imagination. The tract depicted does 




BASIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR OPEN SPACE DESIGN GUIDELINES 
1.  Set aside ridgelines, steep slopes, flood prone areas, wetlands, significant natural features, and historic and archaeological resources as a core for open space. Take care to ensure that the resulting configuration is coherent and reasonably contiguous. Whenever possible, arrange open space to abut existing or potential open space on adjoining properties. Map D displays topographical features that should be conserved, while Map E shows cultural, historic, and archaeological resources. 
2.  Site buildings in harmony with landforms. Locate new buildings and structures where neither construction nor access causes substantial alteration to topography or natural resources. 
3.  Take advantage of existing topography to preserve the lay of the land. Fit buildings and other amenities in to the site. Use slopes advantageously to accommodate multilevel structures with entrances on more than one level (e.g. walk out basements, garages under houses). Reserve flatter areas for septic fields and parking. Use natural landforms to screen structures from public roads. Map F illustrates how a natural feature such as a hill can protect a viewshed by screening new construction from view of a country road. 

4.  Do not make large cuts in hillsides or grade large areas flat. Both practices can cause erosion and disrupt natural drainage patterns in addition to being ugly. Site buildings to avoid substantial modification to natural landforms. 
5.  Situate new construction to minimize disruption of traditional viewsheds. Loss of traditional viewscapes results in erosion of local sense of place. Progressive destruction of community character will result in the loss of any sense that one place is distinct from another place. 
6.  Set buildings back into or against tree lines to lessen the impact to the viewshed. New construction isolated in a field can destroy traditional atmosphere. Tree lines and other vegetative backdrops have a certain ability to absorb disruptive impacts on the landscape. Map G shows some house sites set back into the woods to prevent their intrusion into the viewshed. 

7.  Do not site buildings in open fields. If greater constraints apply to the rest of the parcel, locate buildings at the farthest edges of the fields, as seen from public roads. Map H shows two illustrations of this principle. 
8.  Take advantage of open fields as sites for septic tanks and fields. These uses are non-disruptive of traditional appearance. 

9.  Maintain existing tree lines and field edges, including irregular configurations. These features define outdoor space in traditional ways, and add variety and interest to viewsheds. Map I points out the kind of edges that should be conserved. 

10.  Use existing vegetation and topography to buffer and screen new construction from public roads. Viewsheds are protected, and housing is shielded from read noise and the gaze of the curious. 
11.  Plant traditional species and maintain traditional planting patterns. Communities that have developed over time generally have established planting practices. Ensure that new species harmonize with existing vegetation. Map J shows how new plantings of traditional species can lessen the impact of development on a viewshed by screening new construction from a country road. 

12.  Use existing roads whenever possible to minimize clearing and landscape destruction. Map K points out old alignments that can serve new development. 
13.  Widen existing roads as little as possible to take advantage of existing vegetation as a buffer. In addition, conventional wide, clear cut rights of way translate as super highway as opposed to rural. 
14.  Construct new roads as narrow as possible to maintain a rural atmosphere and avoid a discordant expressway atmosphere. 

15.  Do not run roads through the middle of open fields. Lessen the impact of a new road on a viewshed by placing it along tree lines or other landscape boundaries. Map L shows some applications of this principle. 

( Ord. No. 01-08, 12-6-2001 ) 
Secs. 30-103—30-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 30-110. - Title; purpose. 
This article will be known as the Senoia Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Regulations. This article is enacted to satisfy the requirement of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4 for a comprehensive ordinance establishing the procedures governing land-disturbing activities within the city's jurisdiction. The city elects not to be certified as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 30-111. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) shall include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. The manual is also known as the "green book." 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 30-113(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 30-112(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (also referred to as the "manual" or "green book") published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through Federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 30-112. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land within the city limits, except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 30-113(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10); 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 30-113. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The city may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 30-114(b)(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16), there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq. shall prevent the city from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 30-114(b) and (c). 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 30-114. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer, and designated planners and engineers are encouraged to review all city development standards including, but not limited to, the zoning ordinance, the storm water management ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, the flood hazard mitigation ordinance, this article, and any other laws, rules, regulations, or permits which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. As required by EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10, the design professional shall make a site visit before submitting the general development plans. 
(b)  Application and permits. Inasmuch as the city has elected not to become certified as a local issuing authority for land disturbance permits, the terms of the general state permit for construction activities shall apply, as administered and enforced by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, and no individual land-disturbing activity permit shall be required; provided, however, that notice of intent (NOI) shall be submitted to EPD prior to commencement of any land-disturbing activities within the city, and a copy of the NOI shall simultaneously be filed with the city manager or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 30-115. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to inspection and enforcement by EPD under the general permit for construction activities, the city manager or his designee may periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with approved plans and if the measures required in the erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 30-116. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity within the city without first complying with the state general permit, the person shall be immediately reported by the city manager to EPD and subject to suspension or revocation of any permit or other authorization issued by the city for the conduct of associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violation of the provisions of this article, the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the city manager, in consultation with the division shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without first obtaining the necessary permit, the city manager shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the city manager shall issue an immediate stop-work order and notify the director of EPD; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one. The director may call the bond, or any part thereof, to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 7, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided by law shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalties not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 30-117. - Administrative appeal. 
The suspension, revocation, or modification of any permit issued by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; that the holder is in violation of state general permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any law, rule or regulation pertaining to land disturbance within the city; shall entitle the aggrieved person to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the city manager of a written notice of appeal. The appellant shall have the burden on appeal to show cause why the permit(s) should be reinstated in order to allow development to continue. The decision of the mayor and council shall be deemed final. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the mayor and council shall have 30 days in which to file a petition for certiorari in the superior court of the county. 
( Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide fire protection services, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(1). 
State Law reference— Fire escapes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; forest fires, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-89; transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. tit. 25; remedy of unsafe conditions upon failure to comply with court order, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-25; local ordinances, regulations or codes relating to fire prevention or protection, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; state grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; electronic security systems, installation, service, etc., by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Firemen's Pension Fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of officers, agents, etc., of fire departments for activities, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30. 

Sec. 34-1. - Building fires in open air. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build a fire in the open air on any street or any public alley and it shall be unlawful for any person to build a fire in the open air on any private lot within the city when the fire is for the purpose of burning leaves, weeds, grass or trash without a burning permit. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-7) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 54. 
Chapter 36 - FOOD SERVICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 70. 

Sec. 36-1. - Adoption of food service rules and regulations. 
The rules of the department of human resources public health, being more specifically chapter 290-5-14, food services, are hereby adopted in their entirety. A copy of such rules is attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section derives and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. of 2-6-95) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Constitution reference— Local hospitals and other public health facilities and services, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(3). 
State Law reference— Georgia Pesticide Use and Application Act, O.C.G.A. § 2-7-90 et seq.; municipal hospitals and clinics, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-4; repair, closing and demolition of buildings unfit for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; removal of weeds, trash, junk, filth, etc., O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Growth of weeds; accumulation of trash; junked vehicles. 
(a)  Vegetation. It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any real property in the city to permit any weeds, grass or plants other than trees, shrubs, flowers or other ornamental plant growth to exceed a height of eight inches on the curtilage of any property designated residential or commercial. This section does not regulate natural growth outside the curtilage of any real property, commercial or residential. Certain exemption may be authorized if the owner/tenant can show just cause to the chief of police or the city council. 
(b)  Accumulations. It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any real property in the city to permit or cause the accumulation or presence of any rubbish, trash, refuse or brush on property inside the city limits. Any person who accumulates any trash, brush or rubbish as a result of renovation or excavation shall make arrangement for its removal in a timely manner. 
(c)  Abandoned or junked vehicles. It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any real property in the city to allow any vehicle to remain on the property that has been junked, abandoned or is not legal to operate upon the roadways in the state. Any owner who possesses a vehicle that is being actively restored may be exempt from this subsection providing they show proof of active restoration to the chief of police. Owners of a vehicle being actively restored are required, if so directed, to relocate a vehicle being actively restored to an area on the property that would be less noticeable or otherwise take appropriate action to enclose or cover the vehicle. 
(d)  Complaints. After a complaint is received, the owner or tenant of any real property in the city who is in violation of this section shall receive a ten-day written warning to come into compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 1-3-95, § 9-2-6) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
Sec. 38-2. - Disposal of refuse. 
(a)  As used in this section, the word "refuse" shall have the following meanings: combustible trash, including but not limited to paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including but not limited to metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass bottles, crockery, other mineral wastes; street rubbish, including but not limited to street sweepings, dirt, contents of litter receptacles and leaves. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city, including vacant lots, any garbage or refuse of the type that would attract vermin or flies except in a container provided by the city sanitation contractor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to deposit or place or throw on any public city street or sidewalk any garbage or refuse, unless placed at edge of street to allow pickup by the city or other removal companies. 
(Ord. of 6-7-82(1); Ord. No. 00-08, 11-6-2000) 
Sec. 38-3. - On-site burial of debris. 
(a)  Nothing shall be buried on any construction site to include, but not be limited to: Garbage, rubbish (paper cartons, boxes, lumber, furniture, wire, and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery), street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludge, animal manures, industrial wastes, demolition wastes, clearing debris, abandoned automobiles or parts and dredging wastes shall not be buried on a construction site. 
(b)  All construction debris that must be removed from the construction site shall be removed by Friday of each week or upon the lapse of 48 hours following written notice by the city building official or their designated appointee to the property owner, construction contractor/foreman or their agent to remove the debris from the construction site. 
(c)  Effective October 1, 1998, every builder that has built a home in the city before the effective date of this section shall be required to: 
(1)  Place a statement in the sales contract alerting the buyer that a burial pit is on the property. 
(2)  The final plat delivered to the buyer at final closing shall depict the exact location of the trash pit and shall be initialed by the buyer before the plat being filed with the city. 
(3)  The builders will recover any burial pit that requires recovering within five years of the original owner's date of occupancy. 
(d)  Any person who violates any portion of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-21-98) 
Sec. 38-4. - Litter control. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this section are: 
a.  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
b.  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(2)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(3)  Compatibility with other regulations. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(4)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(c)  Prohibition against littering on public or private property or waters. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(d)  Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(e)  Construction sites. Construction site operators must control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
(f)  Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  Evidence. 
a.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
b.  Except as provided in subsection (f)(2)a., whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. 
(3)  Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished before the municipal court, as follows: 
a.  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
b.  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (3)a., the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
c.  1.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
2.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
d.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(4)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this section. 
( Ord. No. 17-10, § 1, 1-8-2018 ) 
Chapter 39 - HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 39-1. - Intent. 
The purpose of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is to protect the city's historic neighborhoods from incompatible development and to advance long term plans for these areas. The town finds that its historic neighborhoods are important cultural and economic assets, critical to the city's downtown development, heritage tourism and heritage education goals, and ultimately to the public's long term interest. 
Zoning standards and regulations should protect these areas while advancing community development goals and furthering and protecting the public's health, safety and welfare. New construction in these areas should complement rather than interrupt, obscure, or otherwise damage or destroy the historic neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 1; Ord No. 12-07, § 1, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-2. - Description of district. 
Historic neighborhoods shall be those areas listed and described herein and further delineated on the official zoning map of the city, which is incorporated, by reference, and made a part of this chapter. 
Historic neighborhoods shall include that area listed in the National Register of Historic Places on March 17, 1989 as the Senoia Historic District. Additional historic neighborhoods may be designated after public hearing and following the process and protocols described herein. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 1; Ord No. 12-07, § 2, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-3. - Applicability. 
Within the designated historic neighborhoods, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  New construction, building additions, and material changes to the exterior of existing buildings, as described below, 
(2)  Relocation of existing buildings, into or out of the historic neighborhoods, 
(3)  Proposed demolition of existing structures, and 
(4)  Other applicable issues, if specified herein. 
Historic neighborhoods shall function as overlay districts to the zoning ordinance of Senoia. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 3; Ord No. 12-07, § 3, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-4. - Definitions. 
Building. A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness. Means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features. Means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Historic neighborhood. Means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development, listed and described within this chapter, and further delineated on the official zoning map of the city as the historic overlay. 
Historic property. Means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 39-48 of this chapter. 
Material change in appearance. Means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, or object within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object. An object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site. A site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure. A structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 4; Ord No. 12-07, § 4, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-5. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 8; Ord No. 12-07, § 8.4, 11-19-2012) 
Secs. 39-6—39-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 39-21. - Creation of the commission. 
There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Senoia Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.1; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.1, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-22. - Commission position within the city of Senoia. 
The preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.2; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.2, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-23. - Commission members: number, appointment, terms and compensation. 
The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
To the extent available in the city, at least two members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions, at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal, and all members, to the extent available, shall be residents of the city's historic neighborhood(s) overlay. Further, one of the five members shall be a member of the city planning commission. 
Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms, unless necessary due to an absence of apparent replacements. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.3; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.3, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-24. - Statement of the commission's powers. 
The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. 
Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and to grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
Negotiate terms and conditions with applicants for certificates of appropriateness that are satisfactory to the applicant while preserving the aesthetic integrity of the property and district; 
Provide guidance to property owners in the historic district who desire to make alterations to properties in the historic district; 
Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A., Section 44-10-1 through 5); 
Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources provided all costs involved have prior city council approval; 
Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Senoia historic preservation program; 
Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission provided all costs involved have prior city council approval; 
Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the national register of historic places; 
Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the prior consent of the city council enter into agreements to do the same. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.4; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.4, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-25. - Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. 
The preservation commission may adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws and removal of membership provisions. All guidelines and criteria are subject to review and approval by council (Adoption of such rules and standards shall not require an amendment to this chapter). The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.5; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.5, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-26. - Conflict of interest. 
The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia statutes, in the city's charter, code of ethics and/or in the city code. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.6; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.6, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-27. - Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. 
The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.7; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.7, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-28. - Records of commission meetings. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 5.8; Ord No. 12-07, § 5.8, 11-19-2012) 
Secs. 39-29—39-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECOMMENDATION AND DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 

Sec. 39-46. - Preliminary research by commission. 
(a)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(b)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(c)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
(1)  A physical description; 
(2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
(3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
(4)  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
(5)  Representative photographs. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 6.1; Ord No. 12-07, § 6.1, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-47. - Designation of a historic neighborhood. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic neighborhood is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
(1)  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
(2)  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(b)  Boundaries of a historic neighborhood. Boundaries of a historic district shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(c)  Evaluation of properties within historic neighborhoods. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(1)  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
(2)  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided in subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 6.2; Ord No. 12-07, § 6.2, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-48. - Designation of a historic property. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, city, or the state, for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 6.3; Ord No. 12-07, § 6.3, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-49. - Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic neighborhoods and historic properties. 
(a)  Application for designation of historic neighborhoods or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
(1)  For historic neighborhoods. A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
(2)  For historic properties. A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the Commission for designation. 
(b)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or neighborhood as historic shall: 
(1)  List each property in a proposed historic neighborhood or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
(2)  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
(3)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(4)  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(c)  Required public hearing. The commission and the city council shall hold a joint public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. 
Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least two consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than 15 nor more than 45 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the county tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(d)  Notification of historic preservation division. No fewer than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic the commission must submit the report, required in subsection 39-46(c), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(e)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in. The form of a resolution to the city council. 
(f)  City council action on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(g)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall notify said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax. digest and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(h)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(i)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 6.4; Ord No. 12-07, § 6.4, 11-19-2012) 
Secs. 39-50—39-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 39-61. - Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.1; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.1, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-62. - Submission of plans to commission. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.2; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.2, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-63. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effort on exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.3; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.3, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-64. - Technical advice. 
The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members from a list of consultants available from the department of natural resources historic preservation division with prior city council approval for costs involved on any application. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.4; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.4, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-65. - Administrative bypass procedure. 
Certain applications for certificate of appropriateness shall be eligible for the administrative bypass procedure. To use the administrative bypass procedure, the property owner submits an application to the city administrator or his designee. If it is determined by the city administrator or his designee that all elements of the approved guidelines have been met, the certificate of appropriateness shall be approved without consideration by the historic preservation commission. Any requests that do not meet the requirements of the approved guidelines shall be submitted to the historic preservation commission for consideration. The following applications shall be considered for administrative bypass: fences, roofs, rear decks, and signs. 
(Ord No. 12-07, § 7.5, 11-19-2012; Ord. No. 17-03, 11-6-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-07, adopted November 19, 2012, set out provisions for use herein Art. IV. For the purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, Art. IV was amended by adding a new § 39-65 and renumbering, §§ 39-65—39-74 as §§ 39-66—39-75. 
Sec. 39-66. - Meeting on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and public hearings. 
At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall conspicuously post a sign on the affected property stating the date, time, location and purpose of the meeting at which the application will be reviewed in order to inform the applicant and adjacent owners of property likely to be affected, and shall afford the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard at the meeting. 
In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may advertise and hold a public hearing concerning the application. Not less than seven days prior to the day of the hearing, the commission publish notice in the newspaper having the greatest general circulation within the city, and mail written notice to all owners of the subject property, as shown on the most recent tax digest. A sign shall be posted conspicuously on the affected property stating the date, time, location and purpose of the hearing. 
The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. Other interested persons will be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.5; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.6, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-67. - Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. The commission will to the best of its ability make the review of certificates of appropriateness a process of negotiating with and providing guidance to property owners in designated districts and sites. The commission will attempt to negotiate certificates of appropriateness which are satisfactory to the applicant, while at the same time preserving the historic, aesthetic integrity of the property and the designated district and site of which it is a part. The goal of the commission in this review process is to preserve the city's historic, aesthetic resources, not to dictate how property owners will develop their property. The commission shall also recognize the importance of approving plans that will be reasonable for the applicant to implement. 
In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
(1)  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall grant certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
(2)  Relocation. An action by the commission to approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting; 
b.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
c.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
d.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
(3)  Demolition. An action by the commission to approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structure, sites, judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object; 
b.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
c.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
d.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city; 
e.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
f.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse; and 
g.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is capable of earning a reasonable economic return on its value. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.6; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.7, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-68. - Undue hardship. 
When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting relief, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.7; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.8, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-69. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
The commission shall take action to approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within an historic district. 
Notice of the action on a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. The failure of the commission to act within said 45 day period constitutes an approval. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.8; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.9, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-70. - Necessary action to be taken upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
In the event the commission denies an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a written record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant and the city council. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and resubmit the application at any time after making said changes. 
In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.9; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.10, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-71. - Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the building official shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
The city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.10; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.11, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-72. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.11; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.12, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-73. - Recording applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all proceedings in connection with said application. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.12; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.13, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-74. - Acquisition of property. 
The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.13; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.14, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Sec. 39-75. - Appeals and emergency administrative approval. 
(a)  Appeals. Any applicant who is dissatisfied by a decision of the historic preservation commission may appeal such decision to the city council. Such appeal must be in writing to the city administrator and shall be filed within 30 days of the decision being appealed. The city council will schedule the matter for hearing at the next scheduled meeting of the council and at such meeting may continue the matter, affirm, reverse or modify the decision. 
Any applicant adversely affected by any determination made by the mayor and council relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness or any other appeal from commission action may petition the superior court of the county, for a writ of certiorari. Any such petition must be filed with the court within 30 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to section 39-67 of this article. 
(b)  Emergency administrative approval. In the event of the need for emergency action to prevent undue hardship due to acts not in the control of the applicant the city administrator shall have the right to grant a COA where to delay the approval would cause undue economic harm. Approval shall granted to the applicant if the proposed change(s) meet the requirements of the guidelines. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 7.14; Ord No. 12-07, § 7.15, 11-19-2012) 
Note— See editor's note, § 39-65. 
Secs. 39-76—39-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND BUILDING AND ZONING CODE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 39-91. - Ordinary maintenance or repair. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 8.1; Ord No. 12-07, § 8.1, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-92. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. 
The commission shall also recognize the importance of enacting plans that will be reasonable for the applicant to implement. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 39-5 of this chapter and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 8.2; Ord No. 12-07, § 8.2, 11-19-2012) 
Sec. 39-93. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
Nothing in the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be construed as to exempt property owners form complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 8.3; Ord No. 12-07, § 8.3, 11-19-2012) 
Chapter 40 - LAND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Development Regulations of the City of Senoia, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 101) 
Sec. 40-2. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(2)  To assure the provisions of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services of land developments; 
(3)  To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land development; 
(4)  To assure the provision of needed public areas and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(5)  To assure that land development conforms with the currently approved comprehensive land use plan for the city; 
(6)  To assure that the aesthetically pleasing atmosphere presently existing in the city will be maintained in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of all citizens of Senoia; and to assure the preservation of the historic character of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 102) 
Secs. 40-3—40-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 40-21. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by Webster's Dictionary Unabridged Latest Edition. The term "shall" be mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, the words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
As-built drawings shall mean amended site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Base flood shall mean the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceed in any given year. 
Buffer shall mean an area to set aside and separate different use districts or to separate a special use from other property by diminishing sound transmission and interrupting vision by landscaping or fencing; not to be used for other structures. 
Construction shall mean any alteration of land for the purposes of achieving its development or changes use, including particularly any preparation for, building of, or erection of a structure. 
Developer shall mean any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development shall mean any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. 
Drainage shall mean a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage plan shall mean a plan using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system, as may be required by the city engineer. 
Drainage system shall mean the surface and subsurface systems for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swells and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element, which includes culverts, ditches, channels, retention facilities and the storm sewer system. 
Erosion shall mean the general process whereby earth is moved by flowing surface or subsurface water, wind, or other naturally occurring forces. 
Flood shall mean a temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams and lakes which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Flood hazard boundary map shall mean a map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the report entitled the flood insurance study for the city and any revisions thereto where the boundaries of the area of special flood hazard have been defined as "Zone A". 
Flood insurance rate map "FIRM" shall mean an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study shall mean the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, containing flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary flood map and the water surface elevation of the base flood (IRF), which cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Intermediate regional flood (IRF) shall mean a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
Lot shall mean a tract, portion, or parcel of land separated from other tracts, portions, or parcels by description of a subdivision plat of record or survey map or described by metes and bounds, and intended to be used to facilitate transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms do not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Owner shall mean the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, by proprietor, this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant, including a developer. 
Person shall mean a human being, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body or other legal entity. 
Pervious/permeable parking lot shall mean a parking lot that is created though brick pavers that allow stormwater to be absorbed back into the earth and will reduce stormwater run-off. 
Retention facility shall mean a facility which provided for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Right-of-way shall mean a strip of parcel of land occupied by or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, utility system, water main, sanitary sewer or storm drain sewer main, drainage ditches and water courses or any other valid public use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a record or final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such other lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or other use involving maintenance by a public agency, shall be dedicated or deeded to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Runoff shall mean the portion of precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff coefficient shall mean the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
Sedimentation facility shall mean natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
Street shall mean a way for vehicular traffic whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purposes of this chapter, streets are divided into the following categories: 
Arterial streets: These streets are intended to provide higher travel speeds between or within communities, or to and from collectors and expressways. Access is controlled so that only community significant land use may have direct access to these streets. Identified arterial streets: Stallings Rd., Standing Rock Rd., Ga. Hwy 16, Ga. Hwy. 85, Rockaway Rd., Luther Bailey Rd. and the intersection of Johnson St. and Seavy St. to Hwy. 85. 
Collector streets: Collector streets connect residential streets to the highway system's major and higher arterials or provide access to nonresidential uses and arterials. Collectors form barriers between neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are residential streets. Collectors are classified as major collectors and minor collectors. 
Major collector: The primary function is to carry traffic from most major intraurban trips over one mile, particularly during peak hours. These streets provide only limited access to adjacent land. This direct access is usually focused on major facilities, shopping centers or other significant traffic generators. Major collectors are usually designed with four travel lanes and may be either divided or undivided. 
Minor collector: The primary function is to carry traffic for short to medium (one-half to one mile) intraurban trips. These streets receive traffic from residential streets and transmit it to major collectors and arterials. Minor collectors, spaced to relieve excessive traffic volumes on local streets, are commonly designed with two travel lanes. 
Divided streets: Any street with a median greater than 100 feet in length separating the travel lanes. A divided street may be a major collector, minor collector, industrial, commercial or residential street. 
Driveway: A vehicular access corridor privately owned and maintained. Residential driveways shall not serve more than two single-family residential lots. 
Private street: Private street means any parcel of land set aside to provide access to a development and which will not be dedicated or deeded to the city. These streets shall be constructed to standards adopted by the city. 
Public street: Public street shall mean any right-of-way dedicated or deeded to an accepted by the city for purposes of public travel. Public streets shall be constructed to standards adopted by the city. 
Residential street: Residential streets function primarily to provide access to residential areas. All residential streets are intended to accommodate relatively low traffic volumes to ensure safety in residential areas. 
Resurfacing shall mean installing one or more courses of asphalt construction over existing pavement. 
Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, fences, swimming pools and buildings. 
Subdivider shall mean any person, persons, partnership, corporation or other entity or the estate of such entity, having a proprietary interest in the land to be divided. 
Subdivision shall include all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building site, or other divisions for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of sale, gift, or building development and includes all division or development of land involving a new street or a change in an existing street. It shall also include resubdivision, the process of subdividing and the land or area subdivided; provided, however, division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved are not included in this definition. 
Substantial improvement shall mean any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Tree shall mean a woody plant which has a single or combined trunk with a caliper (diameter) of eight or more inches five feet above the ground, or any flowering ornamental woody plant having a caliper of two or more inches five feet above the ground. 
Vegetation shall mean all plant growth especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
Wetlands shall mean areas that are inundated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as determined by the Corp of Engineers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 201; Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 1-8-2018 ) 
Secs. 40-22—40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 40-31. - Platting authority. 
The city council along with the planning commission and city engineer shall be the official platting authorities of the city, and not plat of a subdivision shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coweta County unless it shall have the approval of the city as delineated in section 40-74 inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of subdivision without prior approvals as required by this chapter is hereby a misdemeanor. 
The provisions of this chapter may change from time to time. Only those portions of the chapter in effect at the time a given plat/site plan is accepted by the city shall apply to development of the lots or site as depicted on the plat/site plan. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 301) 
Sec. 40-32. - Use of plat. 
The transfer of title or sale of land by reference to a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coweta County is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 302) 
Sec. 40-33. - Erection of building. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any subdivided lot in the city unless the final plat or final site plan has been approved in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 303) 
Sec. 40-34. - Review and inspection. 
In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Senoia, and in order to offset some of the cost for review and inspection of public improvements required, a fee shall be collected for the development of all land within the city, as set forth by a scheduled adopted by the mayor and city council. 
(1)  In phased developments, the fee shall be paid for each respective phase prior to the insurance of any development permit. 
(2)  Development fees shall not be collected for additions to existing building or subdivisions so long as no additional acreage is involved. If additional acreage is involved, development fees shall be paid for that additional acreage in the amounts set by the mayor and city council. 
(3)  No development fee shall be charged for any recreation land included in any development, which is to be dedicated to Senoia for public use. 
This fee shall be collected for each review performed with the exception of reviews requested by city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 304) 
Secs. 40-35—30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVALS, CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION OF SUBDIVISIONS AND MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 40-51. - General requirements. 
If a proposed development includes land to be subdivided, the development shall be subject to all requirements for the Senoia Zoning Ordinance, these land development regulations, and all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations of the city. The proposed development shall be designed to conform to the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan, including its future land use element. 
The following general principles for subdivision design shall be observed: 
Lot arrangement. Side lot lines shall be at right angles (90 degrees) to the public right-of-way on which the lot fronts, or project radially on curved rights-of-way. Each lot shall front upon a dedicated public right-of-way having a minimum width of not less than 50 feet. 
Building lines. Building lines shall conform to the zoning ordinance requirements. 
Double-frontage lots. Access (driveway curb cuts) to lots having frontage on two public streets shall be restricted to the interior street. 
Sewer service. Individual septic systems shall not be permitted where public sanitary sewer is accessible to the building lot. For purposes of this chapter, where public sewer is available in a public right-of-way adjoining the property or in an easement touching upon the property at any point, or within 250 feet of either of the foregoing, access shall be deemed to exist. Where a public sewer connection can be extended through an easement across adjoining private property to an existing sewer line within 250 feet of the property boundary, it shall be the duty of the property owner to seek such easement and cause a connection to be made and the owner, at its cost, shall exercise its best efforts to secure the necessary easement, to be dedicated to the city for future maintenance. Owners shall coordinate with the city their efforts to obtain easements and for approval of the design and installation of the sewer connection. All dwellings and structures intended for human occupancy of at least four hours per day shall be connected to public sewer whenever such service is or becomes accessible, at the property owner's expense. When connecting to public sewer, septic tanks shall be removed or properly filled to prevent future usage or liability. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 400) 
Sec. 40-52. - Conceptual plan approval procedure. 
(a)  Conceptual plat acceptance. All applicants proposing developments that require a subdivision of land shall submit 15 copies of a conceptual plat to the city administrator. Plats must be submitted a minimum of 30 calendar days prior to the planning commission meeting at which such plat shall be considered. All plats shall be presented on a scaled drawing having a minimum dimension of 17 inches by 22 inches and at a scale no larger than one inch equals 100 feet. Plats shall depict all adjacent streets and proposed streets, public water and sewer services, all lots and the proposed use(s) and a general indication of the storm drainage system. Plats that do not comply with these informational requirements shall not be considered until resubmitted in compliance. The city administrator shall inform the applicant of such noncompliance, in writing, within one week of conceptual plat submittal. 
(b)  Conceptual plat review. Conceptual plats shall be reviewed by the public works director, city engineer and city planner. Plats shall be evaluated for conformance with city zoning ordinance, this chapter, and comprehensive plan. A report prepared by the city engineer summarizing his findings and a report prepared by the city planner summarizing the findings of city staff shall be presented to planning commission one week prior to their regular meeting. 
(c)  Conceptual plat approval. Planning commission shall consider conceptual plats, applying the purposes and intent of this chapter the goals ands objectives of the comprehensive plan and the City of Senoia Short Term Work Program and other public documents that indicate the timing and location of public improvements and services as relate to the proposed development. Planning commission shall forward a written record to mayor and council recommending approval of the conceptual plat upon a finding that the plat conforms to these parameters. The commission shall forward a recommendation of denial upon a finding that the plat fails to conform to these parameters, specifying the areas of nonconformance. The commission may enable the applicant to generate information deemed by the commission as essential to evaluating plat conformance. 
Upon receipt of a recommendation by the planning commission, mayor and council shall place the conceptual plat on the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of city council. In evaluating the plat, mayor and council shall consider the findings of the city engineer and city planner, as contained in a written report, the recommendations of planning commission and the parameters presented in section 40-51. The mayor and council shall approve the conceptual plat upon a finding that the plat conforms to these parameters; alternately, the council shall deny the plat upon a finding that the plat does not so conform, specifying in writing the nature of the nonconformance. Conceptual plat approval shall expire within a period of six-months immediately following action by council should the applicant fail to submit a preliminary plat conforming to the requirements of section 40-56 and such approval shall have no force or effect. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 401) 
Sec. 40-53. - Preliminary platting process. 
(a)  Preliminary plat acceptance. No preliminary plat shall be accepted prior to approval of the conceptual plat. Applicants for preliminary plat approval shall submit 15 copies of preliminary plat to the city administrator. Plats must be submitted a minimum of 45 calendar days prior to the planning commission meeting at which such plat be considered. All plats shall be presented on a scaled drawing having a minimum dimension of 17 inches by 22 inches ands at a scale no larger than one inch equals 100 feet. Plats shall address all requirements of section 40-55. No plat shall be distributed for review prior to a finding by the city administrator that such plat conforms to these requirements; acceptance of a plat represents only such compliance and in no way constitutes plat approval. Applicants whose plat submittal fails to comply with these specifications shall be notified by the city administrator, in writing, of the nature of such noncompliance within 30 days of preliminary plat submittal. 
(b)  Preliminary plat review. Preliminary plats shall be reviewed by the city administrator, city engineer and city planner. Plats shall be evaluated for conformance with this chapter, the applicable standards of the zoning ordinance, and the comprehensive plan. A report prepared by the city engineer summarizing his findings and a report prepared by the city planner summarizing the findings of city staff be presented to planning commission prior to their regular meeting. 
(c)  Preliminary plat approval. Planning commission shall review preliminary plats, applying the minimum requirements of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, and the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan as well as other public documents that indicate the timing and location of public improvements and services as relate to the proposed development. Planning commission shall forward a written record to mayor and council recommending approval of the preliminary plat upon a finding that the plat conforms to these regulations, ordinances and plans. The commission shall forward a recommendation of denial upon a finding that the plat fails to so conform, specifying the areas of nonconformance. The commission may table consideration of a preliminary plat for a maximum period of 45 days for the purpose of enabling the applicant to generate information deemed by the commission as essential to evaluating plat conformance or to revise the plat such that conformance with the city regulations, ordinances and plans is achieved. 
Planning commission may recommend approval of a preliminary plat subject to minor revisions as a condition of approval. However, in no event shall a plat be recommended for approval by the planning commission prior to submittal of the written comments of the city engineer and city planner. 
Upon receipt of a recommendation by the planning commission, mayor and council shall place the preliminary plat on the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. In evaluating the plat, mayor and council shall consider the findings of the city engineer and city planner, as contained in a written report, the recommendations of planning commission, purposed and intent of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, and the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan as well as other pubic documents that indicate the timing and location of public improvements and services. The mayor and council shall approve the preliminary plat upon a finding that the plat conforms to applicable city regulations, ordinances and plans; city council shall deny the plat upon a finding that the plat does not so conform, specifying in writing the nature of the nonconformance. 
(d)  Preliminary plat approval expiration. Preliminary plat approval shall expire within a period of one year immediately following action by council should the applicant fail to submit construction drawings acceptable to the city engineer and consistent with acceptable engineering practices, and such approval shall have no force or effect. Plat approval shall also expire within a period of six months of approval of construction drawings should the applicant fail to obtain a land disturbing permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 402) 
Sec. 40-54. - Construction authorization. 
(a)  Approval by city engineer. Following approval of the preliminary plat and prior to the issuance of any permit for land disturbance or any removal of trees or other vegetation from the platted site, two sets of construction drawings, together with evidence of an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with Chapter 7 of Title 12, O.C.G.A. (or evidence of the project's exemption therefrom), shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. Said plans must comply with all city design and environmental standards. The submission must include a grading plan, profile of streets, storm sewers and drainage facilities, water and sanitary sewer lines and facilities, required easements, and other supporting documents as may be required by the city engineer, including but not limited to a hydrological study. All plans shall clearly delineate the limits of construction activity upon the site. The city engineer shall have 30 days in which to complete his review and comments. Any findings of noncompliance shall be given the applicant in writing, with a reasonable period in which to make corrections and respond. 
(b)  Performance bonding. The completion of all required drainage and retention facilities, grading, water and sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction, and other public improvements shall be secured by a cash deposit, escrow account, commercial surety bond, irrevocable letter or credit (UCC form) or other legally binding instrument of financial security in an amount equal to 110 percent of the projected costs of completion. The city engineer shall determine the projected cost of completion of these improvements. Prior to issuance of any permits, financial security in a form acceptable to the city shall be deposited with the city administrator. Said financial security may be withdrawn by the city and refunded to the developer in direct proportion to the amount of site work completed as approved by the city engineer, provided that sufficient security is retained to complete satisfactory installation of all remaining required improvements. 
(c)  Permit issuance. Following approval of construction plans and specifications, in writing, by the city engineer, the posting of financial security, and evidence of compliance with all other requirements of state law and city ordinance, the city administrator shall issue a land disturbance permit for the purposes of site clearance, grading and preparation for development. Upon satisfactory completion of the entire site preparatory work, including proper installation of all required erosion and sedimentation control measures, drainage facilities, and tree protection, based upon inspection by the city, the city administrator shall issue the development permit. 
(d)  Authority to proceed. Upon receipt of a development permit, the developer may proceed to construct the subdivision or development project. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 403) 
Sec. 40-55. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
The preliminary plat shall be clearly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision, proposed street names, and name and address of developer, including telephone numbers where developer may be contacted at all times. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner of record, if different from developer. 
(3)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates. 
(4)  Preliminary certificates and statements specified in section 40-56. 
(5)  Vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development. 
(6)  Location of property by land lot and district, tax map block and tract reference, and acreage within each tract. 
(7)  The proposed layout, including the location of property lines, lot lines, existing and proposed easements, burial grounds, rights-of-way, utilities, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, existing wooded areas, and location, width, and names of all existing, platted or proposed streets or other pubic rights-of-ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract being developed, including widths. Lot and block numbers shall be assigned to facilitate identifying each parcel or sub-parcel. 
(8)  The approximate location and size of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for recreation sue, open space or conservation lands, or other public use. If appropriate, common space within the development shall be designated on the preliminary plat. 
(9)  Location of sanitary sewage disposal areas, if applicable. 
(10)  The zoning affixed to the property to be developed. 
(11)  The location of areas to be landscaped. 
(12)  The name of any previously platted subdivision(s) within the boundaries of the land platted. 
(13)  Contour lines based on sea level datum shall be included and drawn at intervals no more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photography, and the basis for contour delineation shall be noted on the plat. 
(14)  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, and other environmentally sensitive areas or features. Watershed protection buffer boundaries shall be designated as appropriate. Designation of 100-year flood hazard boundaries shall be based on independent study if FEMA flood study is unavailable. Statutory buffers of not less than 25 feet from the banks of all state waters shall be shown in which no land disturbing activity shall occur. 
(15)  Cultural features within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision should also be indicated. 
(16)  Phasing or staging of development, as proposed by the developer. 
(17)  Development schedule showing proposed completion dates. 
(18)  If applicable, soil delineation by professional approved by Coweta County Health Department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 404) 
Sec. 40-56. - Preliminary plat certificates and statements. 
Each preliminary plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the face thereof: 
(1)  Certificate of design. 
I hereby certify that the design and layout of the proposed lots, blocks, streets and other planned features shown on this Preliminary Plat have been prepared by me or under my direct supervision in compliance with Georgia law and all requirements of the City of Senoia, Georgia. 

 
This certificate must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Certificate of preliminary plat approval. 
All requirements of the Senoia Land Development Ordinance relative to the preparation and submission of this Preliminary Plat having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted by the Mayor and Council. 
This _____ day of _______, 20___. 
By:___________  Mayor 
Reviewed and Approved by: 
___________  City Administrator 
___________  City Planner 
___________  City Engineer 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 405) 
Secs. 40-57—40-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 40-71. - Final plat. 
The final plat shall evidence that all improvements, including public improvements, required for marketing of individual building lots have been properly completed in accordance with approved construction drawings. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 500) 
Sec. 40-72. - Application for final plat approval. 
(a)  Upon satisfying of the requirements of these regulations, the developer shall apply to the city administrator for final plat approval and shall submit all documents required by section 40-73. 
(b)  After receipt of the application for final plat approval, the city administrator shall determine whether all required documents have been filed with the application. A completed application is required before the application can be processed. 
(c)  Final plat approval shall not be given until all improvements shown on the approval preliminary plat and construction drawings have been completed and inspected, all requirements under other ordinances of Senoia have been properly met, and the city administrator has received a legally binding commercial surety bond or other satisfactory instrument or assurance of financial security providing for the maintenance of all public improvements required by these rules and regulation for a period of five years following the date of final acceptance of such improvements by the city. In limited circumstances, where warranted, the Final Plat may be approved prior to final completion of minor improvements, such as landscaping, cleaning of detention facilities, and top pavement course on streets, provided a performance bond remains in effect for not less than 110 percent of the estimated cost of completing the work, as determined by the city engineer, and such remaining work is scheduled for completion within not more than six months. Upon the expiration of the warranty period provided for herein, any funds remaining in said deposit or account shall be returned to the depositor. 
(d)  The mayor, city administrator and city engineer must sign the final plat. After approval of the final plat, the final plat shall be recorded by the city in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coweta County. All costs for this recording are the responsibility of the applicant. As-built drawings shall be submitted before the recording of the final plat. Upon recording, the applicant shall provide the city three copies of the final plat (one on mylar drafting film), with all certificates required by this chapter endorsed thereon. All final plat and as-built drawings shall also be submitted to the city in a digital format acceptable to the city. 
As built drawings. 
As built drawings shall be submitted prior to final plat approval and shall document the following information: 
"As-built" plans of all streets indicating the actual location of all utility lines and street profiles, grades, vertical curve lengths, stations and intersections located on the profile. Whenever final grades vary more than 12 inches from the approved construction drawings, spot elevations shall be provided every 100 feet on street length. 
"As-built" plans indicating the actual location of all water system improvements consisting of fire hydrants, line valves, tees, water main sizes and types of materials. 
"As-built" horizontal and vertical alignment, including profiles and invert elevations, of all sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems. The sanitary sewer system as-built plans shall also indicate the location of all manholes, lines, services, line sizes and types of materials. 
"As-built" plans shall be provided indicating plan, profile and ditch cross-sections every 50 feet. The volume and weir certification of all detention ponds must also be indicated. 
Each lot and other parcel of land shall have the area, expressed to the nearest square foot, shown within the boundary of the same. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 501; Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 40-73. - Final plat specifications and application requirements. 
The application for final plat approval shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Fifteen print copies, including two mylar copies of the final plat, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not less than 100 feet to one inch (one inch equals 100 feet) on a sheet which measures 17 inches by 22 inches. Lettering size must meet the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act. 
(2)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the sub-divider proposes to record and develop at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the staging established in preliminary plat procedure and to other requirements of these rules and regulations. 
(3)  Subdivision lot numbering shall be as follows: 
On single-phase projects, the lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with "Lot 1". 
On multi-phase projects, the phases shall be numbered beginning with Phase A, Phase B, etc. Lot numbers within each phase shall be numbered consecutively with the phase number shown with each lot number, i.e. the first lot in Phase A would be Lot "A-1", the third lot in Phase B would be "Lot B-3". 
(4)  Location, dimensions, invert elevations of piped segments and control weirs, maximum water surface elevations of retention ponds; location of any easements, public service utility right-of-way lines, and an areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use; location of sites to be used for purposes other than residential with notes stating their purpose and limitations, and any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners shall be shown. 
(5)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers shall be shown. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as "future". 
(6)  Spaces for certificates and statements specified herein. 
(7)  All information required for the recording of maps, plats, etc., by the Clerk of Superior Court Act must be shown. All requirements specified by Georgia Plat Act shall apply. 
(8)  That approval has been provided for any required landscaping (Note: a performance bond may be posted for future plantings that have not been completed due to seasonal or other delays). 
(9)  When not to be developed on public sewer, the final plat shall contain a certification signed and dated by the Coweta County Environmental specialist assigned to the Coweta County Public Health Department that the property has been reviewed and approved for septic tank use. Any lots excepted from this certification shall be clearly marked on the plat. 
(10)  Two complete sets of "as-built" drawings on 24 inches by 36 inches sheets signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 502) 
Sec. 40-74. - Final plat certificates and guarantees. 
Each final plat submitted for approval shall bear the following certificates printed or stamped thereon: 
1.  Surveyor's final certificate. 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared form an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future" and their size, location, type and material are shown correctly. This plat conforms to all requirements of the Georgia Plat Act. 
This _____ day of _______, 20___. 
By: ___________  Registered Land Surveyor 
No. _______ 
2.  Final plat approval. 
This plat complies with the zoning regulations, the Land Development Ordinance and all other regulations governing the land development for Senoia. 

 
In addition thereto, the developer shall deliver to the city with the maintenance bond or other financial security, the following legal agreements: 
3.  Maintenance guarantee. The undersigned, its successors and assigns, hereby warrants and guarantees to the mayor and council of the city the full and complete maintenance of all public improvements for ______________ Subdivision, as shown hereon. This warranty and guarantee is made in accordance with the provisions of the Senoia Land Development Ordinance. This guarantee includes not only paving of publicly-dedicated streets, but all other appurtenant structures and amenities lying within the rights-of-way of said streets, within designated easements, and in the common areas, including but not limited to all curbing, drainage pipes, culverts, catch basins, drainage facilities and structures, bike paths, cart paths, pedestrian paths and other public improvements. Unless formal dedication has been expressly accepted by the city or other public utility by delivery of proper legal instruments, maintenance responsibility shall remain with the developer, its successors or assigns. The term of this Agreement shall be for a period of five years beginning on the date of written acceptance of said improvements by the city as evidenced by the final plat approval. The developer agrees to correct and repair or cause to be corrected and repaired all damages or defects to said improvements resulting from any cause whatsoever during this period; provided, written notice of said damages is given the developer prior to the date the five-year period expires. In the event the developer fails to correct any damages or defects within 30 days after written notice thereof, then said damages or defects may be corrected by the city by using any financial security or maintenance bond. In addition, the city may exercise any remedies available to it by law. After the termination of said five-year period the city shall be responsible to the citizens of Senoia only for the maintenance of those public improvements as are expressly dedicated to it, or for which it has maintenance responsibility by operation of law; provided, however, any damages which occurred prior to the end of said five-year period and which remain unrepaired at the termination of said period shall remain the sole responsibility of the developer. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the developer has caused this Agreement to be executed by its duly authorized officers this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
By: ___________ 
Title: ___________ 
4.  Deed of dedication. Developer, at its sole expense, shall have an attorney-at-law licensed in the State of Georgia prepare a Deed of Dedication, in form subject to recording in the land records of Coweta County, Georgia, together with an attorney's certificate of title to the mayor and council certifying that all lands dedicated therein by said deed are conveyed free ands clear of marketable encumbrances and obligations whatsoever. Said deed and title certificate shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney, prior to formal acceptance by resolution of the mayor and council. A copy of the deed, as recorded, shall be placed in the minutes of the council meeting where accepted and approved. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 503) 
Sec. 40-75. - Replatting. 
Replatting shall follow the process as outlined in section 40-53. The city engineer shall determine whether the manifest purpose of the requested replatting is to circumvent the terms and conditions of this chapter. Upon such determination, the replatting shall not be approved. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 504) 
Secs. 40-76—40-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROCEDURES FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL AND CONSTRUCTION AND CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION IN MR-MULTI-FAMILY, GC-GENERAL COMMERCIAL, OI-OFFICE INSTITUTION DISTRICT AND I-INDUSTRIAL 

Sec. 40-91. - General requirements. 
If a proposed development includes land that is zoned for other than single family residential the development shall be subject to all the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance and shall be subject to all the requirements of these land development regulations, other applicable city regulations, and shall conform to goals and objectives established in the city's land use plan. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in size and shape to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be provided in accordance with city specifications. 
(3)  The city engineer may, with the approval of the city council, impose additional requirements regarding design and construction of streets, curbs, gutters, cart paths and sidewalks. 
(4)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from a potential nuisance created by a proposed commercial or industrial development including provision of extra depth in parcels backing up to existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped screening when necessary. 
All new commercial structures within the overlay district of Senoia must conform to the historic nature of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 601) 
Sec. 40-92. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  A developer shall submit to the city, at least 15 working days prior to a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting 12 copies of the site plan, meeting the specifications set out in section 40-93. 
(b)  The city staff will review this site plan. If the site plan does not meet the requirements of this section, the city staff will return the plan to the developer for corrections. If the plan meets the requirements of section 40-93, the city clerk shall place the site plan on the next scheduled planning commission agenda three days prior to the meeting. 
(c)  The city clerk shall submit the results of the city staff's review in writing to the planning commission at their meeting. 
(d)  The planning commission will review the site plan, taking into consideration the requirements of section 40-93 and the city staff report. During the meeting, the planning commission will discuss the results of their review with the developer and will, if necessary, make recommendations for improvements, modifications or changes. 
The planning commission shall then vote to either approve or disapprove the site plan. 
If the planning commission does not recommend approval of the site plan, the developer may resubmit with necessary changes, following the procedures set out in section 40-91. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 602) 
Sec. 40-93. - Site plan specifications. 
(a)  Name of development and streets. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of property owner and developer. 
(c)  Vicinity map showing the location of the proposal development in relation to surrounding development. 
(d)  Location of property by land lot and district, graphic scale, north arrow, approximate total acreage, and date. 
(e)  Contour lines based on sea level datum shall be included and shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs, and the basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. 
(f)  The location and widths of streets. 
(g)  The location and size of any parcels of land to be set aside for park and playground use or other public use, or for the exclusive use of property owners on said property. 
(h)  The zoning of the property to be developed and adjacent property. 
(i)  The location of greenbelts and other areas to be landscaped. 
(j)  Setback lines. 
(k)  Location and size of building. 
(l)  Height of building. 
(m)  Parking area and number of spaces required and obtained. 
(n)  Distance between buildings. 
(o)  Use of building. 
(p)  Location of sanitary sewage disposal if applicable. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 603) 
Sec. 40-94. - Construction authorization. 
(a)  Following approval of the final site plan, two copies of the final site plan, soil sedimentation and erosion control plan, hydrological study shall be submitted to and approved by the state and the city engineer prior to any defoliation or alteration of the site. Said plans shall be in compliance with all design standards and environment and land development regulations as adopted by Senoia, and shall include a grading plan and such other engineering documents as maybe required by the city engineer. The city engineer shall have ten working days to respond to requests for construction authorization. 
(b)  Following approval of final engineering plans by the city and soil sedimentation and erosion control plans by the soil and water conservation service, a development permit will be issued by the city building department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 604) 
Secs. 40-95—40-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-111. - Suitability of land. 
Land that is subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for development use shall not be platted for any use that will continue or increase the danger to health or safety, unless the hazards are first corrected. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 701) 
Sec. 40-112. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must be approved by the city planning commission and it shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 702) 
Sec. 40-113. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be provided by way of a public street. A single entrance to a subdivision shall serve a maximum of 120 residential lots. Where individual circumstances related to lot configuration or existing street network prohibit or render such access impractical, the city administrator, upon the recommendation of the city engineer, may waive this requirement. Under no circumstances shall such access via a single entrance service more than 200 residential lots. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 703) 
Sec. 40-114. - Required street improvements. 
Any proposed development contiguous to an existing unpaved public city street will be required to bring hat portion of the unpaved street adjacent to the development up to current city standards. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 704) 
Sec. 40-115. - Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas. 
Recreation standards. The city encourages land be reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes by the developer of each single-family subdivision or multifamily development at locations designated on the master plan or where such reservations would otherwise be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character and shall have adequate street access for the particular purposes envisioned. Those areas shall be shown and marked on the final plat, "Reserved for park and/or recreation purposes". When recreation areas are provided the developer can dedicate all such recreation areas to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 705) 
Sec. 40-116. - Greenspace buffers. 
In residential subdivisions, a greenspace buffer area shall be reserved between the right-of-way of arterial thoroughfares, major collectors, and minor streets, as follows: 
(1)  Along arterials and major collectors, the greenspace are shall be no less than 100 feet between the street right-of-way and property line. 
(2)  Along minor streets, the greenspace area shall be no less than 50 feet between the street right-of-way and property line. 
(3)  The greenspace area shall be shown on the landscape plan. 
The greenspace area will be designated on all plats as "City Greenspace Area" to be dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 706; Ord. No. 18-10 , § 1, 1-7-2019) 
Sec. 40-117. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same width, unless other width is approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 707) 
Sec. 40-118. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs shall have center line offsets no less than 125 feet. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 708) 
Sec. 40-119. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to street and public grounds shall be permitted unless approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 709) 
Sec. 40-120. - Easements. 
Easements, where required, shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
The city engineer shall require sewer easements in subdivision not currently served by a sewer system if, in his opinion, the subdivision may some day be served by a sewer system. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage-way, channel or stream there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement subject to approval by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 711) 
Sec. 40-121. - Electrical street lighting. 
(a)  Electrical street lighting shall be installed in all subdivisions. 
(b)  Adequate street lighting shall be determined and approved by the city during the approval of a preliminary plat. One copy of the approved street lighting plan shall be forwarded to the electrical utility company servicing the subdivision. 
(c)  The developer shall provide adequate lighting at street intersections, and dead-end streets including cul-de-sacs, and at all at-gate pedestrian crossings. 
(d)  Luminaries are to be mounted at least 16 feet above grade, and not more than 28 feet above grade. Adjustment in spacing and luminaries height may be made due to street curves, topography and natural foliage and type of equipment. A design within the range of the minimum and maximum shall be considered for approval that produces the effective horizontal illumination that meets the (0.2) foot-candle requirements. 
(e)  Poles, fixtures and all related materials must be available standard stock items through the electric utility company servicing the subdivision or must be approved by the city. 
(f)  The developer shall pay the cost of installing the streetlights before final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 711) 
Sec. 40-122. - Cul-de-sacs. 
Cul-de-sacs should not be greater in length than 1,200 feet. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 712) 
Sec. 40-123. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Single-family residential developments. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all single-family residential developments, which are served by the public water supply at locations shown on the preliminary plat as approved by the city engineer. In no case shall the distance between fire hydrants exceed 800 feet. 
(b)  All other developments. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all other developments, which are served by a public water supply main. Accessibility for fire fighting equipment shall be maintained through all stages of construction. Fire hydrants and water service shall be installed to within 300 feet of all exterior points of buildings. If the units are of wood framing, the fire hydrants shall be installed before framing begins. The location and number of fire hydrants shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 713) 
Sec. 40-124. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Plans required. A detailed parking plan for all uses other than single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the city as part of the final site plan. 
(2)  Design standards. All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar designations. 
b.  Each space shall have not less than 162 square feet, and shall not be less than nine feet wide and 18 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street; no part of any parking space to exceed five percent slope. 
c.  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets; 
d.  Design of the parking area including space and driveway arrangement shall conform to the geometric design standards of the institute of traffic engineers; 
e.  Adequate lighting as determined by the city engineer and police department shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night; 
f.  The parking area shall be permanently maintained by the owners or the occupants; 
g.  Parking lots in developments permitted by the city and used by the public shall be constructed of a minimum of six inches of dense aggregate base and two inches of type "E" asphalt surfacing six-inch concrete (minimum 3,500 psi). 
h.  Parking lots in new developments can also be constructed by utilizing pervious measures. See Sec. 4.15.1 of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
i.  Handicap parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable state and federal. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 714; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 2-5-2018 ) 
Sec. 40-125. - Utility lines. 
All utility lines in Senoia shall be placed underground with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Those lines which were in place above ground prior to the enactment of this chapter; 
(2)  Those lines, temporary in nature, which are intended to provide immediate service to an area for a period not to exceed 180 days, subject to the approval of the building official; and 
(3)  Major transmission lines which do not provide service to adjoining properties, but are intended to distribute service between substations, subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 715) 
Sec. 40-126. - Sewage disposal. 
Each development shall include an adequate sewage disposal system. Such system must meet all regulations of the city, which may be amended from time to time. The design of any system to be dedicated to the city must be approved by the city council and the city engineer prior to beginning any construction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city, the applicant shall secure a permit from the Coweta County Health Department or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the installation of the sewage disposal system and such system shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the requirements established by the Coweta County Board of Health and the State of Georgia. 
Individual on-site sewage disposal system (septic tank with drain field) shall not be installed on lots of less than one acre. 
If the sewage disposal system proposed for a single-family development will serve more than one lot and utilize land application for effluent disposal, the disposal are shall either be deeded to a municipality or authority fee simple and such system shall be approved by the Georgia EPD. This system is only allowed where soil conditions on 80 percent of the lots meets the criteria for a conventional septic tank system. The developer shall also provide the owner with suitable ingress for effluent disposal that serve more than one single-family residential lot can not be contained as part of the lot. 
In all developments with sewer service the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Sanitary sewers shall be laid in all streets, service connections installed to property lines, and connections made to trunk line sewers. 
(2)  In all subdivisions with private disposal systems, lines shall be laid and temporarily plugged or capped at the points of service connections to the proposes trunk sewer line and individual lines. 
(3)  The proposed subdivision sewer system shall be designed by a registered civil engineer and the design shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Pipe shall be either concrete or PVC unless the use of ductile iron pipe is indicated; and the minimum size shall be eight inches for mains, four inch for force mains, and six inch for stub outs. 
b.  Ductile iron pipe shall be used as follows: 
1.  At all points where the sewer crosses drainage structures or open streams. 
2.  For the influent joint of pipe at all drop manholes. 
3.  For any sewers at depths less than three feet. 
4.  For stub-outs at depths of less than five and one-half feet. 
5.  For all force mains (must be polyurethane lined). 
c.  The sewer shall be locate as near the center of the street as practical, and shall not be located less than four feet from the curb. Outfall lines shall not be located less than four feet from property lines. 
d.  Minimum depths for sewers located in streets shall normally be seven feet for mains and five and one-half feet for stub-outs 
e.  Manholes shall be located not further than 400 feet apart; however, manholes shall be constructed at all turns and at all points where a grade change occurs. 
f.  Minimum slope for sewer pipes shall be 0.40% and maximum grade shall be ten percent. 
g.  A horizontal separation of at least 10' must be maintained between the water main and any sewer line. When sewer mains cross water mains, a minimum vertical separation of 18 feet must be provided (measured edge to edge) 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 40-127. - Water supply. 
All development in Senoia shall be connected to the city's water system and the developer shall bear the total expense for extending water mains to the area proposed for development. 
(1)  All proposed water lines shall be designed by a Georgia Registered Civil Engineer. No underground work shall be covered or concealed until inspected and approved by a representative of the city water department. Water service pipe shall not be installed less than 24 inches deep. 
(2)  All materials for water mains in subdivisions will conform to specifications of the American Water Works Association and shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe AWWA C900 or ductile iron pipe AWWA C151. 
(3)  Water valves will be installed in subdivisions to effect a minimum cutoff of mains in case of shutdowns. 
(4)  Stub-out water services will be installed in subdivisions in case where necessary to avoid cutting of pavement and will be placed where specified. 
(5)  Sizes of water mains in subdivisions will be determined to ensure adequate domestic supply and fire protection for the subdivision. 
(6)  Any water line laid under pavement shall be encased in .250-inch wall steel casing (minimum) from back of curb to back of curb. This does not include service lines. 
(7)  Bore and/or water tap on a state or state-aid road shall require a permit from the state DOT. 
(8)  All fittings under pressure to be blocked with concrete. 
(9)  Valves and valve boxes (cast iron only) set to grade and level. All valve boxes outside of pavement shall have two-foot square pads four-inch thick, including fire hydrant valve boxes. 
(10)  Typical single water service to be less than three-quarter-inch Wye (Y) reducer at stubout. Tapping saddle to be double strap, lines to be copper tube. 
(11)  Any open entrance of water and sewer lines will be closed to prevent foreign materials from entering when no work on that portion of lines is in progress. 
(12)  Sufficient dry chlorine will be added to new water lines to cause sterilization when filled with water. The lines will then remain unused for a 24-hour period. The lines will be thoroughly flushed. 
(13)  Disinfection of water lines and the disposal of heavily chlorinated water folling disinfection must be accomplished in accordance with AWAA Standard C651 (latest revision) and the State of Georgia Water Protection Division. Furthermore, all types of installed pipe must be pressure tested and leakage tested in accordance with the latest edition of AWWA Standard C600. 
(14)  At no time will water be turned on by anyone other than authorized city personnel. 
(15)  A horizontal separation of at least ten feet must be maintained between the water main and the existing or proposed sewer except as otherwise approved. When water mains cross sewers, a minimum vertical separation of 12 inches must be provided between the two pipes (measured edge to edge). At crossings, one full length of ductile iron pipe must be located so that both joints are as far from the sewer as possible. At crossings, special sewer construction may also be required such as using a ductile iron sewer pipe or encasing the sewer line in concrete. 
(16)  Any pipe, solder, flux, or joint compound used in the installation or repair of water lines must comply with US EPA and GA EPD requirement regarding lead and copper content. 
(17)  All plans and construction of water and sewer lines and appurtenances will be subject to review and inspection by the city personnel. However, such review/inspection by the city or other personnel shall not relieve the developer/installer of proper surveys, design, engineering, and construction, and the city, its engineer or personnel assume no liability in the performance of reviews, approvals and inspections. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 717) 
Sec. 40-128. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be installed on commercial, industrial and multi-family sites to provide logical pedestrian movement. Where parking spaces directly face a building, a paved sidewalk shall be provided between the front of the building and the parking spaces. The sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width, exclusive of vehicle overhang or other obstructions. If a four-foot sidewalk is placed contiguous to the curb or pavement, concrete wheelstops shall be installed two feet from the curb or edge of pavement to prevent vehicle overhang obstruction. If more than one building is constructed on one property, the building public entrances shall be connected with sidewalks that provide for logical pedestrian movement. Additional sidewalks shall be installed as needed to meet the requirements of the current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
Any sidewalk constructed in the city shall be four feet in width. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 718) 
Sec. 40-129. - Development impact. 
All persons proposing a development or construction project, which either contains 50 or more acres of residential use, or five or more acres of nonresidential use shall submit a study of the potential impacts of the developments. The study should contain as a minimum the following information: 
(1)  A comprehensive description of the proposed development or construction. 
(2)  A description of the probable impact (schools, traffic, environment, water quality, air, wildlife, roads, etc.). 
(3)  A description of any adverse effects unavoidable if the project is implemented. 
(4)  A description of alternatives, including no action, to be considered. 
(5)  An analysis both of the short term and long term impact of the development or construction project. 
(6)  A description of any irreversible or irretrievable impacts if the development or construction goes forward. 
(7)  A description of the proposed management practices to minimize the impacts of the proposed development including a fiscal analysis of necessary capital and O&M expenditures needed to implement these practices. 
This study shall be submitted with the preliminary plat/site plan. The city engineer may require the submission of a study on property not meeting the size thresholds if in his opinion the proposed development is located in an environmentally sensitive area or has the potential to create a significant environmental impact. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 719) 
Secs. 40-130—40-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 40-151. - Purposes. 
This chapter is enacted to provide standards and procedures for construction of streets in the City of Senoia. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 801) 
Sec. 40-152. - Plan submission requirements. 
Prior to receiving a development or building permit, any person proposing development or construction in the city shall submit the following documents and plans to the city engineer for his approval: 
(1)  Grading, erosion and sedimentation control and drainage plans, prepared by a professional engineer, or landscape architect currently registered and licensed in Georgia, which show compliance with this chapter. 
(2)  Statement of projected work sequence for the proposed project. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 801) 
Sec. 40-153. - Design standards. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction and workmanship for street and drainage installation shall conform to or equal to standards published by the city. 
If no city-published standard exists, the work shall conform to the latest specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(1)  Access. 
a.  All entrances or exits of any public or private street or drive onto any state highway must be approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation and the city council prior to the issuance of a city development permit. 
b.  Curb cuts on all nonresidential streets shall be located no less than 50 feet, measured from back to curb, from any intersection. 
c.  In all nonresidential zoning districts, curb cuts shall not be less than 50 feet apart measured between back of curbs. 
d.  Curb cuts onto arterial and collector streets shall not be closer than 20 feet, measured from back to curb, to any property line in all zoning districts. 
e.  All curb cuts onto arterial roads must be approved by the DOT and include a deceleration lane constructed to standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(2)  Minimum right-of-way widths. 
a.  Divided street—130 feet. 
b.  Major collector street—80 feet. 
c.  Minor collector street—60 feet. 
d.  Major industrial street—80 feet. 
e.  Minor industrial street—60 feet. 
f.  Commercial street—60 feet. 
g.  Residential street—50 feet. 
h.  Cul-de-sac right-of-way radius shall be the back of curb radius plus ten feet. 
i.  Design speed and grade. 
(3)  Design speed and grade. 

 
(4)  Street paving widths shall be as follows: 
a.  Divided street: 48 feet of pavement (four lanes), minimum median width 24 feet 
b.  Major collectors streets: 32 feet, if two lanes, 48 feet if four lanes; minimum median width for divided street 24 feet. 
c.  Industrial street: 32 feet. 
d.  Minor collector street: 28 feet. 
e.  Commercial street: 28 feet. 
f.  Residential street: 22 feet. 
g.  Residential cul-de-sacs: 
1.  40-foot radius without an island to back of curb. 
2.  50-foot radius with an island with a 20-foot minimum pavement width. 
h.  Commercial cul-de-sacs: 
1.  50-foot radius without an island. 
2.  60-foot radius with an island with a 30-foot minimum pavement width. 
3.  One-way cul-de-sacs 60-foot radius with an island with a 30-foot pavement width. 
i.  Industrial cul-de-sacs; 60-foot radius with or without an island with a 30-foot minimum pavement width. 
(5)  Street pavement section. All streets shall be constructed as follows: 
a.  Residential street. 
Six-inch compacted graded aggregate base. 
Two-inch type "B" asphaltic concrete binder. 
One-inch type "F" asphaltic concrete topping. 
b.  Commercial/minor collector. 
Eight-inch compacted graded aggregate base. 
Three-inch type "B" asphaltic concrete binder. 
One and one-half-inch type "E" asphaltic concrete topping. 
c.  Industrial/major collector. 
Eight-inch compacted graded aggregate base. 
Three-inch asphaltic concrete base. 
Two-inch type "B" asphaltic concrete binder. 
One and one-half-inch type "E" asphaltic concrete topping. 
(6)  Alignment. 
a.  Vertical arterial road profile grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in accordance with standards published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. Further, in approaches to intersections, there shall be a maximum four-percent grade for a distance of not less than 50 feet from the edge of pavement of an existing street. 
b.  Horizontal minimum radii or centerline curvature shall be: 
1.  Major and minor collector streets—400 feet. 
2.  Industrial/commercial streets—400 feet 
3.  Residential streets—250 feet. 
c.  Visibility requirements. Minimum horizontal and vertical sight distances shall be as follows: 
1.  Major collector streets—350 feet. 
2.  Industrial/commercial streets—350 feet. 
3.  Minor collector streets—275 feet. 
4.  Residential streets—250 feet. 
Vertical distance measured between two points shall be based on height of eye at 3.75 feet above pavement level and height of object at 0.5 feet. 
(7)  Other design requirements. 
a.  Curb and gutter sections. All new public streets constructed within the city limits shall have 24-inch high back curbs and gutters constructed in accordance with standards adopted by the city. 
b.  Curb inlets. Curb opening inlets shall be spaced to intercept 85 percent of the storm flows in the gutter section, based on the ten-year storm. Maximum inlet spacing should not exceed 600 feet unless drainage calculations by a professional engineer can show that gutter flow would be excessive for proper design performance. The designer shall provide for inlets to prevent a significant amount of storm flow from crossing an intersection. 
c.  Traffic control devices. If the traffic to be generated by a use within a nonresidential district will necessitate traffic devices to ensure public safety, the developer shall install such devices as are necessary to move the traffic generated by the development. This determination shall be made by the city engineer based upon standard traffic planning procedures of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, using traffic warrants of the federal highway administration and the state department of transportation. 
d.  Drainage system. 
1.  The street or road construction drainage system shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 25-year design frequency based on the existing city land use plan. 
2.  An appropriate class of reinforced concrete; corrugated plastic pipe or gauge of corrugated metal or pipe arch will be used for drainage systems. All storm drains within the street pavement and curb and gutter shall be fully coated with asphalt (if CMP is used) or aluminized steel type 2 pipe or its equivalent. 
3.  All drains shall have headwalls or end selections installed as part of ht overall system. 
4.  In residential outfall culverts shall extend a minimum of 25 feet to the rear of the proposed dwelling or structure. 
5.  Continuous length of storm drains without an inlet, manhole or junction box access shall not exceed 300 feet. 
6.  Maintenance easements for all drainage systems at least 20 feet wide shall be shown on the final plat and shall be dedicated to the city. 
e.  Street cuts. All street cuts shall be constructed in accordance with standards adopted by Senoia. 
f.  Private streets. Private streets shall be constructed in accordance with the public street specifications with exception of requirements of subsection (2), street right-of-way widths; subsection (5)b., horizontal-minimum radii or center line curvature; and subsection (5)c, visibility requirements, and shall be permitted in multi-family or commercial zoning districts only. However, horizontal and visibility requirements shall apply to private streets where such street intersects with a public street right-of-way. Private streets cannot become public streets until all requirements of this section have been met. 
g.  Every single-family residential subdivision containing 100 lots or more shall be served by at least two ways of ingress and egress. 
h.  Street signs. The city's standard street name signs shall have four-inch high reflective letters. Nameplates shall be mounted parallel or nearly parallel to the street. The names shall be marked and visible from both sides. Street signs shall be installed at all street intersections. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 803) 
Secs. 40-154—40-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 40-171. - Block lengths and widths. 
Block lengths and widths shall be determined by design considerations. It is suggested that blocks shall not be greater than 1,800 feet, nor less than 600 feet in length. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 901) 
Sec. 40-172. - Lot sizes. 
Lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Where individual septic tanks are used, the county health officer shall prescribe the minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards, but in no case shall be less than one acre. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 902) 
Sec. 40-173. - Multiple and reverse frontage lots. 
Multiple frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Review section 40-117, special screening and section 1108, landscape plans approval, for possible requirements if multiple or reverse frontage lots are located in city greenspace areas. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 903) 
Secs. 40-174—40-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 40-191. - Plan submission requirements. 
(a)  Policy. It is hereby declared to be public policy that all development submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements for their preparation and shall also provide information to enable a determination to be made by the city engineer as to plan conformance with public policy statements of this section. 
(b)  Standards. All persons proposing development or construction shall submit plans to the city engineer illustrating the means by which conformance with policy provisions may be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within right-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional flood plain shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with the other applicable code provisions. 
Grading, erosion control, sedimentation control, and draining plans shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently Georgia registered professional engineer, landscape architect, or combination as may be appropriate for project planning and design. When the hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles of flood routing, super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, flood plain studies or other advanced hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently state registered professional engineer proficient in hydrology. Erosion control plans shall meet all standards as established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conversation Commission. 
Plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with this chapter shall be submitted and shall include: 
(1)  Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this section for grading, vegetation alteration, erosion control, sedimentation control, flood control and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the two-foot interval; golf courses and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement but general grading plans shall be submitted. Related plans shall show locations of structure, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits and proposed alterations to the existing and proposed drainage conduits and proposed alterations to the existing site: 
(2)  A hydrologic engineering analysis of storm runoff under existing and proposed development site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, flood plain and channel cross section area required to carry the affected stream at the intermediate regional flood stage level. The requirements for a complete hydrologic study may be waived by the city engineer for any development where the plan submitted illustrates existing or proposed improvements sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Delineation of the boundaries and contour elevations of the intermediate regional flood plain for streams draining in excess of 100 acres shall be clearly designated on each site plan, subdivision plat and construction plan. The actual building site in relation to the intermediate regional flood plain boundaries shall be shown; once shown and accepted by the city the information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected. The elevation contours representing the intermediate regional flood plain conditions shall be shown when they are located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining IRF elevations shall be established; 
(4)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control and drainage plans as related to other major items of construction; 
(5)  Upon development project completion, location, size and invert elevations of piped segments of the storm drainage system, of control weirs, and maximum water surface elevations in retention pools shall be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on final plat for other developments which shall be submitted to the city engineer. The professional engineer or landscape architect reviewing the construction shall provide a certificate that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans for the project; and 
(6)  When reviewing any application for a land-disturbing activity permit, the city shall consider the past record of the permit applicant in complying with previous land-disturbing activity permits and the ordinance. If the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits of this chapter within three years prior to the date of the filing of the application under consideration, the city may require the applicant to post a bond up to, but nor exceeding $3,000.00 per acre of the proposed land disturbing activity prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the dity may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1001) 
Sec. 40-192. - Grading. 
(a)  Policy. It is hereby declared to the public policy to: 
(1)  Encourage the design of residential grading plans to provide natural appearance of land contours and to provide ease of use in public areas; 
(2)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon existing vegetation; 
(3)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon the drainage system by strict erosion control and sedimentation control measures; and 
(4)  Minimize erosions and shear failure potential by encouraging limited cutting and filling. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  All grading operations shall be conducted in compliance with the approved plans. 
(2)  Before beginning construction activity on property located in intermediate regional flood plain, the intermediate regional flood plain elevation contours shall be identified on the property by staking or other identifying mechanisms no less than every 100 feet, and shall be identifiable throughout project development. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1002) 
Sec. 40-193. - Watershed protection/erosion control. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to; 
(1)  Minimize the removal of vegetation during the development process; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of bare earth to precipitation by encouraging the scheduling of land development in increments of workable size which can be completed within a single construction season or within a time period compatible with the type and size of the project; 
(3)  Provide the re-establishment of vegetation within ten working days following completion of final grading and utility installation; 
(4)  Give priority to the paving of streets, parking lots, and other areas within a reasonable time following completion of final grading; 
(5)  Require the use of erosion control and sedimentation techniques found in "Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia" as published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Committee; and 
(6)  Insure that the impact on water quality is minimized by use of best management practices. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Sedimentation facilities (debris basins, sedimentation traps) and other control measures such as hay bales, berms, interceptor ditches and terraces, shall be installed in conjunction with the initial grading operations and be maintained throughout the development and construction process to remove sediment from runoff waters draining land under development. These shall be maintained by the developer to assure functional operation during all phases of construction by periodic maintenance activities. 
(2)  Land which has been cleared for development, and upon which construction has not commenced within 60 days of this initial clearing shall be protected from erosion and consequent sedimentation by appropriate vegetation and land covering techniques such as seeding, sodding, ground cover installation or other vegetative or earth covering techniques. 
(3)  Construction activity on individual single-family lots or a group of lots being developed simultaneously by one developer shall be conducted only of sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period to prevent soil from any lot or group of lots from being carried off site during all phases of project construction. Substantial completion of final grading and initial ground covering shall be completed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit through seeding, sodding, ground covering installation or other vegetative or earth covering techniques. 
(4)  No grading, cutting, or filling shall be accomplished on any site under development such that unprotected land surfaces will be in contact with surface water or will encroach upon natural waterways on their flood plains, unless erosion control can sedimentation control devices can be installed where determined by the city engineer between the grading area and water surface during development and construction, and vegetation can be restored upon project completion. The provisions of this section shall not apply to grading necessitated by drainage or other utility improvements required or authorized by the city. 
(5)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(6)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(7)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(8)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented. 
(9)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practical minimum. 
(10)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(11)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(12)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(13)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basis, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. 
(14)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(15)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(16)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(17)  Grading equipment must cross-flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any such case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(18)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for control or treatment of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent streams beyond the levels specified in subsection (21) of this section. 
(19)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within the 100-year flood plain unless compliance with section 40-195. 
(20)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer of 25 feet measured from the stream banks shall normally be retained adjacent to the state water except where otherwise required by the "Metropolitan River Protection Act", O.C.G.A § 12-5-440 et. seq., or by the department pursuant to O.C.G.A 12-2-8, or when the interest of public health, safety and welfare, or the contour of the land require a different buffer subject to the city's approval, or where a drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosions control measures are incorporated in the project plans and such buffer may be dedicated to the city as a city-owned greenspace. 
(21)  Discharges of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas shall be controlled to the extent that turbidity of the stormwater runoff shall not exceed 50 nephelometric turbidity units higher than the turbidity level of the receiving stream immediately upstream from the stormwater runoff discharge at the time of such discharge, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, the turbidity of the receiving stream downstream of the construction site shall not exceed 60 nephelometric turbidity units higher than the turbidity level of the receiving stream immediately upstream from the construction site. Downstream turbidity measurements shall be taken at points where the entering discharge is fully mixed with the receiving stream flow. 
(22)  All development contiguous to or within 200 feet of water supply reservoir or streams having a drainage basin in excess of one square mile shall have a 100-foot undisturbed natural vegetative buffer and additional 50 feet nonimpervious buffer measures from the stream bank or normal pool elevation. 
(23)  All perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir shall be protected by a 100-foot undisturbed natural vegetative buffer and an additional 50-foot nonimpervious buffer measured from the stream bank or normal pool elevation. No septic tank or septic tank drainfield shall be located within this buffer. 
(24)  All perennial streams within a water supply watershed and outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir shall be protected with a 50-foot undisturbed natural vegetative buffer and an additional 25-foot non impervious buffer measured from the stream bank. No septic tank or septic tank drainfield shall be located within this buffer. 
(25)  All developments shall be designed to minimize the impact on water quality. This shall be accomplished by utilizing best management practices for construction and where feasible by the installation of water quality enhancements. These enhancements can consist of constructed wetlands to improve water quality. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1003) 
Sec. 40-194. - Drainage. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Recognize the necessity of joint action where feasible by the city and the development industry in resolution of existing drainage problems and prevention of their worsening or recurrence; 
(2)  Work in cooperative relationship with the development industry to accomplish the above-state objective by encouraging through this chapter and other public actions the development of fewer but larger major retention facilities and the incremental resolution of existing drainage problems on a priority basis in concert with private development activities; 
(3)  Maintain where feasible, the natural environment of city streams through reduction of flow quantities resulting from new development, and where feasible, restore the flood plain to its natural functional purpose to resolve existing flooding problems, but recognize the necessity of using urban streams for stormwater runoff in those situations where maintenance of the natural stream environment would result in continuation or worsening of flooding conditions; 
(4)  Incrementally assume maintenance responsibility for the public drainage system on lands accepted by the city; 
(5)  Require of the development industry the responsibility to maintain the functioning of the storm drainage system during the development process; 
(6)  Encourage the construction of joint retention ponds serving several residential properties, which can be accepted for maintenance by the city upon completion of project development. The city encourages (where engineering judgment so warrants) the location of these retention facilities off the site of the property under development and may participate where it is in the general public's best interest in the construction of major retention facilities which would serve not only the needs of the property under development, but would assist in resolving existing flooding problems; 
(7)  Encourage innovative design solutions to the effective retention of runoff; 
(8)  Encourage accommodating runoff from residential properties or between individual single-family lots through underground piping rather than open surface drainage swells and minimize cross drains from streets to natural drainage ways by longitudinal piping or by retaining within the streets, for as long as reach as commonly accepted standards or engineering judgment permit, runoff to a point of discharge not directly individual single-family lots. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  All engineering design items for storm drainage and erosion control and sedimentation control and delineation of the intermediate regional flood plains shall meet the applicable minimum requirements of published design standards of the city, available from the city engineer. Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic computations shall not be less than shown by applicable rainfall curves published by the natural weather service for the affected area. 
(2)  A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all development and construction which will increase the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm and shall not apply to individual single-family lots of less than two acres which are not a part of a platted subdivision. 
(3)  The release rate of stormwater from all developments where retention is required shall not exceed 90 percent of the peak stormwater runoff rate from the area in its existing state for all intensities up to and including the 100-year frequency for all duration's of rainfall. 
(4)  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 100-year design frequency based on the existing land use plan. 
(5)  The live retention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall as published by the national weather service for the affected areas. The retention system required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any and all duration's from the proposed development, with a release rate that does not exceed the approved release rate during the same duration storm. Retention control structures and other drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. 
(6)  When the developer requests and the city engineer agrees that development and construction of nonresidential projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combines retention or other drainage facilities more practical, the city may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two or more properties by two or more developers. Where joint retention facilities service two or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention facility, and the owner(s) of the joint retention facility have submitted a written agreement to the city showing who is responsible for the maintenance of that facility. 
(7)  The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all retention and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff: 
a.  These facilities shall be located on tracts of land, designated for this use on the recorded plat, with sufficient area around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall be immediately adjacent to or be provided with an access easement to a public street. The access easement shall provide at least 20 feet of width outside of aboveground obstructions including trees, headwalls, weirs, settling basins or other drainage structures. 
b.  Perforated standpipes or a french drain, or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing of water and inadequate shall be installed within all these facilities. 
c.  Except as provided in (7)d., the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the retention facilities during grading, construction, and following final approval or the completed project. This maintenance shall be binding on future owners, successors and assigns of the property. 
d.  In the case of platted residential subdivisions, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility after the release of the maintenance agreement for subdivision streets. Upon completion of developer maintenance all retention ponds shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(8)  Special drainage system maintenance requirements. 
a.  No impoundment of water which retains in excess of one-half acre of runoff shall be altered without first obtaining a development permit, which shall only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the developer show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties. 
b.  Trash, garbage, construction materials, construction by-products or other debris shall not be deposited in any part of the drainage system. 
c.  No restrictions or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage systems without first obtaining a development permit. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1004) 
Sec. 40-195. - Flood control. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions; 
(2)  Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
c.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
d.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; 
e.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designated to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
f.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
g.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. 
(2)  Land uses within the intermediate regional flood plain shall not diminish or restrict the capacity of the channels or flood plains of the stream, its tributaries, drainage ditches or any other drainage facilities or systems and shall not increase the IRF elevation or velocity or concentration of flow in downstream areas. If the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the intermediate flood plain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the development permit shall be denied unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the intermediate regional flood plain. Altered sections of the intermediate regional flood plain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt build-up. 
(3)  In residential districts, not less than 70 percent of the minimum lot area, as established by applicable zoning district development standards, shall be above the intermediate regional flood elevation contours. 
(4)  All new buildings permitted after the effective date of this chapter and located on property contiguous to the intermediate regional flood plain shall be constructed so that all portions of the structure, including the basement floor or crawl areas, shall be not less than three feet above the intermediate regional flood elevations. No new development will be allowed in the intermediate regional flood plain. Any substantial improvement to an existing structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated not less than six inches above the intermediate regional flood elevation. 
(5)  The profile elevation of the centerline of all public streets shall be constructed a minimum of one foot above the intermediate regional flood elevation contours. Exceptions to this provision may be granted by the city engineer in cases where the construction of the street elevation below the intermediate regional flood elevation contours would improve drainage or reduce the effects of flooding. 
(6)  When on or off-site debris has accumulated within an immediate regional flood plain in such a manner as to interfere with the flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties adjacent to the intermediate regional flood plain, the city shall require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water. 
(7)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(8)  Flood ways. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as flood ways. Since the flood way is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments are prohibited unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions (see subsection (b)(1) above). 
(9)  "As-built" elevation certifications must be obtained for all future developments if land is to be removed from the hazard area. A certification from a registered professional engineer or land surveyor certifying as to the actual elevations of the development or structures must be obtained after the changes occur. 
(10)  Any relocation or realignment of river and stream channels shall be prohibited if it would reduce the capacity with respect to the base flood elevation or less, significantly alter water flow characteristics or create a flood hazard. Provisions must be incorporated in the proposal to ensure that adequate maintenance will be provided for the altered watercourse. Adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse if it is determined that an adjacent community could be affected, and evidence of such notification submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(11)  When base flood elevation data or flood way data have been provided by the flood hazard boundary map, then the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and flood way data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this section. 
(12)  All wastewater treatment plants shall be located a minimum of three feet vertically and 200 feet horizontally from the boundary of the intermediate regional flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1005) 
Secs. 40-196—40-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - VEGETATION PROTECTION AND LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-221. - Purpose. 
Intent of article and declaration of public policy. The guiding presumption behind this chapter is the belief that the natural environment has significant value in and of itself, and that all reasonable measures available should be used in the preservation of that environment, consistent with the continued development of a viable Senoia. 
The city council, therefore, declares it to be public policy to: 
(1)  Aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the process of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare, and heat abatement; 
(2)  Assist in providing adequate light and air by preventing overcrowding of land; 
(3)  Provide visual buffering and enhance beautification of the city; 
(4)  Safeguard and attempt to enhance property values and, in so doing, protect private and public investment; 
(5)  Preserve, protect and further the unique identity and environment of Senoia, and, thereby, preserve the economic base attracted to the city by such factors; 
(6)  Recognize that the protection and enhancement of the natural beauty, environment, and greenspace within Senoia contributes to the economy, as well as provides a truly necessary aesthetic balance to the development of an urban setting; 
(7)  Conserve an ever-dwindling supply of energy, by the preservation and enhancement of the natural environment; 
(8)  Protect the atmosphere, lands, and water from pollution, impairment or unnecessary destruction; 
(9)  Protect natural vegetation except where its removal is necessary for responsible property development or control of disease and infestation. This chapter shall serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing of land and its disturbance, so as to preserve, insofar as possible, the natural and existing growth of vegetation, and to replace whenever possible the removed foliage with new vegetation; 
(10)  Protect vegetation within the intermediate regional flood plain and for a minimum ten feet from the banks and those streams not having defined intermediate regional flood plain elevation contour, so as to assist in the retention of stormwater runoff and the control of erosion, including particularly the protection of stream bank stability by vegetation protection or restoration; 
(11)  Preserve protected and "specimen" trees or strands of trees which are exceptional representatives of their species either in terms of size, age or unusual botanical quality, and encourage the good care of same through properly applied forestry practices; and 
(12)  Protect and supplement existing vegetation within greenbelts, open space, recreation areas and protected area where feasible. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1101) 
Sec. 40-222. - Definitions. 
(a)  Dripline. A collective name for all vertical lines from the earth to the outermost tips of the crown of the tree. These lines will completely encircle the tree and thereby define its outermost reaches. 
(b)  Dripline area. The total area underneath a tree which would encompass all driplines. 
(c)  Ground cover. Natural plant materials such as vines shrubs, or grasses which would not normally attain a height of more than two feet. 
(d)  Landscaping. Any addition to the natural features of a plot of ground to restore construction disturbance and to make it more attractive, as by adding lawns, tree and shrubs, etc., to the natural environment. 
(e)  Natural vegetation. Natural vegetation shall connote a generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation compromised of indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses and trees. 
(f)  Natural vegetation area. That area within the boundaries of a given lot which is devoted to natural vegetation. 
(g)  Protected areas. Those areas having unique biological communities including wildlife or exceptional vegetation possessing outstanding botanical qualities. 
(h)  Scenic roads. Those roads designated by the city council as deserving special protection from land development because of their scenic beauty, extent of vegetation, or geological formations. 
(i)  Shrub. A woody plant of bush of relatively low height two to six feet, distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
(j)  Tree. A self supporting woody plant having one or more well-defined stems or trunks, a more or less definitely formed crown, usually attaining a mature height of at least ten feet and a trunk diameter of at least two inches measured at a point four feet above the ground. 
(k)  Tree canopy. Any tree having reached a relatively tall height compared to surrounding trees and vegetation and providing shade from its foliage mass; also individual or tree groups forming an overhead cover. Examples include oaks, read and silver maples, hickory, beech, pecan, Sycamore, sweetgum, poplar, ash, river birch, long leaf pine, loblolly pine and Virginia pine. 
(l)  Tree, protected. 
(1)  Any deciduous canopy trees 15 inches in diameter four feet above ground. 
(2)  Any evergreen canopy trees 18 inches in diameter four feet above ground. 
(3)  Any understory tree four inches in diameter at four feet above ground. 
(m)  Tree removal. Means cutting, uprooting, or severing the main trunk of the tree, or any other act which causes or may reasonably be expected to cause the death of a tree. 
(n)  Tree, "specimen." Any tree reaching the upper range of the mature diameter and the height for that species of tree. 
(o)  Tree, understory. Any tree, which is of relatively lesser height and spread than surrounding canopy trees, but still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. Examples include dogwood, cherry, red bud, sassafras, crabapple, pear, American holly, red cedar, and magnolia. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1102) 
Sec. 40-223. - Preservation of protected and specimen trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to remove or cause the removal of any protected or specimen tree without having first received approval either through the process of site plan review, in the case of new development, or in the form of a tree-removal permit. 
(1)  Approval through site plan review. When site plan review by the planning commission is required for any development, the actual or schematic locations of all protected or specimen trees shall be shown on all site plans by location, species and size. The site plans shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for evaluation and recommendation before submission to the planning commission. All site plans shall also include those requirements listed under tree removal application requirements (subsection (2) below). Final approval of the site plan shall constitute approval of the site plan shall constitute approval for removal of any protected or specimen trees impacted by development on the site plan. 
(2)  Application for permit to remove protected or specimen trees. The application for a tree removal permit shall be on a form provided by the city for this purpose. An application for the removal of any protected or specimen trees on public or private property shall include the following: 
a.  The approximate location of the tree(s); 
b.  The diameter of the trunk of each tree, as measured four feet above natural grade level; 
c.  The approximate crown size of each tree (measured dripline to dripline) and any distinguishing characteristics of the tree(s); 
d.  The species and common name of the tree(s); 
e.  The reason for the proposed removal; and 
f.  Such other information as may reasonably be required by the city planner. This could include, but is not limited to, a professional arborist's appraisal of the tree's viability and projected life span. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1103) 
Sec. 40-224. - Action on application. 
The zoning administrator shall approve an application for the removal of a protected or specimen tree provided at least one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The location of the tree prevents the opening of reasonable and necessary vehicular traffic lanes; 
(2)  The location of the tree prevents the construction of utility lines of drainage facilities, which may not feasibly be relocated; 
(3)  The location of the tree prevents reasonable access to the property, if no alternate access exists; 
(4)  Allowing the tree to remain would impose an economic burden upon the owner of the property entirely out of proportion with the benefit gained by retaining the tree; 
(5)  The tree is diseased, dead or dying to the point that repair or restoration is not practical or the disease may be transmitted to other trees; and 
(6)  There is reasonable assurance that if the tree is saved with proper construction precautions, it will continue to live as an asset to the site. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1104) 
Sec. 40-225. - Application not required (when). 
Approval for removing a protected or specimen tree is not required when at least one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  When removal of a protected or specimen tree is specifically approved by site plan review; 
(2)  When any protected or specimen tree sustains unrepairable damage and, therefore, constitutes a hazard to human life or property; 
(3)  When trees on commercial horticultural properties are to be removed as a direct part of the business conducted on those properties; 
(4)  When public service companies perform normal construction maintenance; or 
(5)  When trees are harvested as a part of agricultural and forestry operations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1105) 
Sec. 40-226. - Standards for review. 
The zoning administrator shall approve any request for removal of a protected or specimen tree when a completed application has been received and justification is made in accordance with the provisions of section 40-224. 
In making any determination concerning an application for any protected or specimen tree removal, the zoning administrator shall consider the following: 
(1)  Desirability, of preserving any tree by reason of its size; age or some other outstanding quality, such as uniqueness, rarity or species or status as a landmark; 
(2)  The extent to which the area would be subject to increased water runoff and other environmental degradation due to removal of the tree or trees; 
(3)  The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely developed or densely populated areas; 
(4)  The need for visual screening or buffering in area of differing zoning or usage, or relief from glare or commercial or industrial ugliness or other affront to the visual sense; 
(5)  The affect that the change in natural grade will have on the trees to be preserved; 
(6)  Good forestry practice—i.e. the number of healthy trees or species of trees which the site or any portion thereof can support; and 
(7)  Such other circumstances as may relate to a particular application. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1106) 
Sec. 40-227. - Treatment and removal of infected and infested trees. 
(a)  If any tree on public property is infested with insects or infected with a disease detrimental to surrounding vegetation, the city may remove the tree and otherwise control such infection and infestation. 
(b)  Private property. It shall be the responsibility of any person having trees on his property to treat and/or remove any infected or infested tree. However, before removing said trees, the property owner must apply for a tree removal permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1107) 
Sec. 40-228. - Enforcement. 
Each protected or specimen tree removed without approval, as provide herein, shall be considered a separate offense, which is subject to a penalty as determined by the judge of the municipal court. 
For evaluation purposes, the criteria of $100.00 per caliper inch of trunk should be used. This dollar evaluation of the damaged tree may be required to be invested on the site of commensurate replacement plantings. 
It could also be considered permissible to replace a removed tree with a number of smaller trees of the same species, provided the combination caliper measurements of the smaller trees is at least equal to the measurement of the protected or specimen tree which was removed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1108) 
Sec. 40-229. - Landscape pan requirements. 
A landscape plan is required for any development in Senoia other than the development of individual lots for single-family residential purposes: 
(1)  A landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered in the State of Georgia. 
(2)  All areas not devoted to structures, site development features, and natural vegetation shall be landscaped. 
(3)  A landscape plan shall include one canopy tree with a minimum trunk caliper of two and one-half inches (at four inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of permanently disturbed area on the site. An area is considered permanently disturbed if it is covered with a building, structure, or other impervious surfaces like walks, drives and patios. 
(4)  A landscape plan shall include one understory tree with a minimum trunk caliper of one of one inch (at four inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of permanently disturbed area on the site. 
(5)  All required landscaping shall be maintained in a horticulturally healthy aesthetically pleasing manner. 
(6)  It is recommended that no new planting should be more than 100 feet from a watering source; however, it is required that assurances, acceptable to the zoning administrator, will be provided that water will be available and appropriate watering will take place. 
(7)  All landscape areas within parking lots shall be 100 percent landscaped with deciduous trees, shrubs, ground cover (not requiring mowing), and/or flowers in mulched beds. 
(8)  Landscaped areas within and around parking lots must be large enough to provide for health and continued growth of the vegetation. 
(9)  Landscaping shall not obstruct the view between 24 inches high and 60 inches high on access drives, streets or parking aisles. 
(10)  The perimeter of all parking areas shall be landscaped. Parking areas designed to accommodate no more than 20 automobiles are not required to install interior landscapes areas like islands, peninsulas, and medians. Parking areas designed to accommodate more than 20 automobiles must install interior landscaped areas so that no more than 12 adjacent parking spaces exist without a landscaped separation of at least five feet in width. If significant tree-save areas or natural areas exist within a parking area, the city may make an exception to this requirement, as appropriate. 
(11)  Screening shall be used as a buffer between incompatible uses, and to reduce the effects of headlight glare, noise and other objectionable activities. The following minimum requirements shall apply to screening: 
a.  All vegetation used for screening shall be at least six feet in height at time of installation. Plants shall be placed as to provide for effective visual screening within three growing seasons. Planting beds required for screening shall be a minimum of six feet in width; 
b.  Screening may consist of a fence, a wall, or vegetation and/or a mix of any or all of the foregoing. The outer or public side of fences and walls shall be landscaped enough to soften the structure with a tree or shrub at least 50 feet, subject to approval of the zoning administrator; 
c.  Screening shall be installed on all lot lines where commercial, industrial, and institutional uses abut residential zoning districts except for entrances or exits; 
d.  No screening shall be removed without the written permission of the zoning administrator; 
e.  Screening vegetation and fencing shall be maintained in a healthy and attractive manner; 
f.  The zoning administrator may require screening in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit not requiring plat or site plan approval. 
(12)  The zoning administrator upon site inspection and landscape plan review may require an applicant to naturalize areas, which visually impair public rights-of-way. The intent of this requirement is to supplement tree requirements with small caliper material (one-gallon maximum) in areas where screening or landscape visual continuity is required. 
(13)  If significant trees are saved on a development site, then up to a 50 percent credit can be issued by the city. This will only be issued if the tree-save areas are considered to be aesthetically or environmentally significant by the zoning administrator. 
(14)  If there are significant landscape problems on site (for example, areas totally void of trees), the zoning administrator may not allow tree credit, even though trees may be saved. 
(15)  If a development involves an addition or modification to the side or rear of an existing building or structure which is already properly landscaped, the zoning administrator may allow up to a 50 percent reduction in the canopy and understory tree requirements. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1109) 
Sec. 40-230. - Landscape plan. 
Any landscape plan required by these regulations shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Title of project, address of site. 
(2)  Site location map, north point, and scale of drawings. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of owner/developer. 
(4)  Name and seal of landscape architect who prepared the plan. 
(5)  Planting key; botanical and common name of all plant materials proposed; quantity of each species; size of plant material (caliper, height, width); condition (i.e. balled and burlapped, container grown, care root, collected, etc); and special remarks (number of stems, color or bloom, etc.) 
(6)  Estimated cost of landscape improvements. 
(7)  Name and location of existing trees to be saved and protected during construction. Indicate all protected and specimen trees to be saved or removed. 
(8)  Retention areas, drainage inlets and structures. Floodplain limits shall be shown whenever subject property is within such areas. 
(9)  Show names of adjacent property owners, and adjacent land uses. Indicate all required greenspace and screened areas. 
(10)  Provide that sight distance at intersections are not obscured by planting. Keep planting below 24 inches and tree limbs above 60 inches. 
(11)  Submit three copies of prints for review. One will be returned with review comments. 
(12)  This note shall appear on all approved landscape plans: 
APPROVED BY PLANNING COMMISSION 
DATE: ________ 
BY: ___________ 
(13)  Show all pertinent site features; buildings, walks, drives, signs, lighting drains, meter boxes, underground utility lines, curbs, and the available water source for plant maintenance. 
(14)  Show calculations on the plan for: total area permanently disturbed and landscaped area (in acres and square feet). Indicate numbers of canopy and understory trees required by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1110) 
Sec. 40-231. - Landscape plan approval procedures. 
For any landscape plan required by these regulations, the following procedures shall be followed; 
(1)  A developer shall submit to the zoning administrator three copies of a landscape plan, which meets the requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  The landscape plan shall be submitted along with the required site plan and the required grading plan. 
(3)  For consideration at a planning commission meeting, the landscape plan must be submitted to and accepted by the zoning administrator at least 15 days prior to the planning commission meeting. 
(4)  The landscape plan will be reviewed by the zoning administrator if the landscape plan does not meet the requirements of these regulations; the zoning administrator will return the plan to the developer with comments and suggestions for correction. If the plan meets the requirements, the zoning administrator shall place the landscape plan on the next planning commission agenda. 
(5)  The zoning administrator shall submit the results of their review in writing to the planning commission. 
(6)  The planning commission will review the landscape plan, taking into consideration the requirements of these regulations, the zoning administrator's report and approve; disapprove; or approve with modifications. 
(7)  If the planning commission approves the landscape plan, a copy will be returned to the developer with the approval inscribed thereon, along with a notation of any appropriate conditions or review comments. 
(8)  If the planning commission does not approve the landscape plan, the developer may resubmit, with necessary changes, following the same procedures as if it were an original application. 
(9)  An approved landscape plan must be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or the developer may choose to provide the city clerk with a performance bond or other acceptable security in an amount equal to 150 percent of the city's estimated cost of the required improvements which have not been installed or are not installed in a satisfactory manner. 
(10)  Upon posting this bond or security, the developer shall have a one-year period in which to complete the required improvements in a satisfactory manner, or the bond or other security shall be forfeited and revoked, and the city shall then take whatever action is necessary to have the developer complete the required improvements as soon as possible thereafter. 
(11)  When a developer has installed the required landscaping improvements, he shall request that the zoning administrator schedule an inspection. If the zoning administrator approves the installation, he shall submit a written report to the city clerk, and the project will be released for a certificate of occupancy. If the zoning administrator does not approve the plan, he shall submit a report stating his reasons for disapproval so the developer can make the necessary corrections. A fee of $100.00 each shall be charged for any required re-inspections, and the fee shall be payable in advance for the re-inspection. 
(12)  The developer shall guarantee all plant materials and provide adequate maintenance of the above improvements for a minimum of one year from implementation. The city shall inspect said improvements during that period to ensure that the approved plan has been fully implemented and maintained. If the improvements have deteriorated within that one-year period, such landscaping shall be replaced by the developer. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1111) 
Secs. 40-232—40-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - APPEALS AND VARIANCE 

Sec. 40-251. - Appeals. 
These land development regulations shall be administered by the zoning administrator and other staff members, along with the planning commission and city council. However, should an issue concerning these regulations remain unresolved by the city staff and planning commission, or if a written request for appeal should be filed with the zoning administrator or by any interested party within five working days of any action, a hearing shall be held by the city council for final resolution of the dispute. Sufficient information shall be provided by the applicant, affected city staff members, and the planning commission to ensure a timely decision by the city council. For purposes of this section, an interested party shall be an applicant or a city resident who lives within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision or development at issue on appeal. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1201) 
Sec. 40-252. - Variance. 
The purpose of this section is to authorize variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Only the owner of the property of which a variance is desired, or his agent may submit an application for a variance. 
(1)  Variance application shall be filled with the zoning administrator on forms provided by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Any communication relative to a variance request will be guarded as information only until a proper application is made in the form required. 
(3)  An application of 50 dollars must accompany each variance application. 
(4)  Upon receiving an application, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing on the request before the city council within 45 days after receipt. 
(5)  A sign displaying the hearing date and the nature of the hearing shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property not less than 15 days prior to the hearing date. 
(6)  A notice of the public hearing date and the nature of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation, which serves as the legal organ for the city. The newspaper notice shall appear at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing date. 
(7)  At the public hearing before the city council, the applicant may appear in person or be represented by an agent of attorney. 
(8)  Variance from the provisions of this chapter may be approved by the city council if it is determined that they will not cause substantial detriment to other parties or impair the purpose of intent of this chapter; provided, however that no variance can be granted for a use that is specifically prohibited by this chapter within the zoning in which the property is located. 
(9)  In making a determination on a variance request, the city council shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Whether or not the special circumstances contributing to the request are peculiar to the property involved; 
b.  Whether or not the situation for which the request is being made poses an unnecessary hardship for the applicant; and 
c.  Whether or not the request is due to an intentional action of the applicant to violate the requirement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1202) 
Secs. 40-253—40-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 40-271. - Enforcement. 
The city engineer and other city staff shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1301) 
Sec. 40-272. - Inspection and right of entry. 
Upon presentation of identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, employees of the city may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development and construction. These employees may take inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with ordinance provisions. These designees may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All drainage facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be accessible at all times for city inspection. Where drainage facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. Where an easement does not exist for the drainage system, the permission of the owner shall be obtained before entrance; however, in the event of emergency maintenance requirements, permission of the owner shall not be mandatory. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1302) 
Sec. 40-273. - Emergency maintenance. 
The city may conduct emergency maintenance operations on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the city engineer create a condition potentially injurious to life, property, or the public road system. 
Emergency maintenance conducted on nay drainage system shall not be constructed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1303) 
Sec. 40-274. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city engineer/staff determines that activity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plan, he may issue a notice of violation. Wherever he determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, he may issue a notice of violation. The notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be to the owner of the property or his agent and shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  List the specific provisions of this chapter which have been violated; and 
(4)  State that if these repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector shall be issued for the owner to appear in recorder's court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
However, in the judgment of the city engineer, where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this chapter or constitutes a public health and safety hazard, he may obtain a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1304) 
Sec. 40-275. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 Code of ordinances City of Senoia for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1305) 
Secs. 40-276—40-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - FEE SCHEDULE 

Sec. 40-286. - Rates, fees and charges. 
A schedule of rates, fees and charges for permits, inspections, and other services provided by this chapter is hereby adopted. Such rates, fees, and charges shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and council and set forth [in] a written schedule on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, Art. XIV) 
Secs. 40-287—40-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 40-291. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The city administrator or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1(1), 4-2-2006) 
Sec. 40-292. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 40-293. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the City of Senoia; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1(2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-293. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the (municipal/county) separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city public works department. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1(3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-294. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the (municipal/county) separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1(4), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-295. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1(5), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-296. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1(6), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-297. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed, if not corrected. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, within ten days, then representatives of the city are authorized to file a complaint for maintenance of a public nuisance in the municipal court. The court is authorized to order the owner of the property to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property within a reasonable time, and may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. If the owner fails or refuses to abate the violation within the time allowed by the court, the order shall authorize the city to enter upon the premises and perform the necessary abatement action. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(d)  Costs of abatement of the violation; lien for special assessment. Within 45 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including court and administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(e)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear before the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment of six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(g)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1(7), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-298—40-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - STREAMBANK PROTECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 40-321. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Senoia Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(1), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-322. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the mayor and council of the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources. 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater. 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation. 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks. 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff. 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams. 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem. 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat. 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat. 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity. 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of city for the protection of water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-323. - Definitions. 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area 
(established by Section 5.1.1 below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 40-325(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Streambank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-324. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 40-323. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
• A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
• Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
• Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
• Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
• Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
• Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection a., above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the (review and permitting authority) on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 40-325(b). 
Sec. 40-325. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. A minimum 25-foot buffer requirement is established by state law and the city has no authority to grant variances or exemptions therefrom. Otherwise, variances from the above setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, so as to prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the mayor and council of city may grant a variance from the setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the mayor and council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the mayor and council. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a setback variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal setback requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(5)  A written decision of the mayor and council on the petition for setback variance shall be deemed final. A copy of the decision shall be served on the person seeking the variance. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the mayor and council, shall, within 30 days of receipt of the decision, have the right to petition the superior court of Coweta County for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(5), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-326. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(6), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-327. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
(3)  Any other documentation that the (review and permitting authority) may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(7), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-328. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon [the] city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(8), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-329. - Inspection. 
The city administrator or his designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city administrator or his designee in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(9), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-330. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city administrator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Enforcement actions. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions, the city administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city administrator may take any one or more of the following actions. 
a.  Stop work order: The city administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy: The city administrator may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit: The city administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city administrator may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(3)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city administrator shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city administrator has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city administrator may file a complaint for nuisance against the applicant or other responsible person in municipal court; upon finding a nuisance to exist by reason of the condition, the court shall order the nuisance abated within a reasonable time. In addition thereto, the court may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(4)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear before the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, six months imprisonment, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1(10), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-331—40-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 40-341. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(1.1), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-342. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(1.2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-343. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The city administrator or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(1.3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-344. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), effective May 16, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas acquired by the municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Coweta County, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the futureconditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to city; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Senoia City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(1.4), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-345. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(1.5), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-346. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(1.6), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-347. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(1.7), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-348. - Definitions. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in section 40-344. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 3, 1997. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 3, 1997. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after March 3, 1997. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 3, 1997. 
North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been preidentified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(2), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-349—40-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-356. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(3.1), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-357. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 40-387(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 40-386(5); 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations, future conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(3.2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-358. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(3.3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-359. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4 of this article; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the city administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(3.4), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-360—40-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 40-371. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(4.1), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-372. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(4.2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-373. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 40-374; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(4.3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-374. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 40-389 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(4.4), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-375. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(4.5), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-376. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(4.6), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-377—40-385. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 40-386. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 40-373, 40-374 and 40-375 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings—All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(5.1), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-387. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 40-386, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 40-373, 40-374 and 40-375 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 40-373, 40-374 and 40-375 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 40-386(5). 
(b)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 40-386(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 40-373, 40-374 and 40-375 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 40-373, 40-374 and 40-375 may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city administrator. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1- 30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the city administrator to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city administrator. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 40-386(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings-substantial improvements (subsection (1)b.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 40-373, 40-374 and 40-375 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
3.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 40-386(7). 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(5.2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-388. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(5.3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-389. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams. 
Without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the city administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 40-386(5). 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(5.4), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-390. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 40-386(5). 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and, 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(5.5), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-391. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 40-357. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(5.6), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-392—40-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 40-401. - Variance and appeals procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the mayor and council. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the mayor and council. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may petition the Superior Court of Coweta County for a Writ of Mandamus, within 30 days of the issuance of a written decision by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(5)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(6)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(7)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The city administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(8)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the mayor and council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(9)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the mayor and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(10)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(6), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-402—40-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 40-411. - Applicable violations. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(7), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-412. - Notice of violation. 
If the city administrator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(7.1), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-413. - Enforcement measures. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city administrator may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Stop work order: The city administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy: The city administrator may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit: The city administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city administrator may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(7.2), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-414. - Civil penalties. 
In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city administrator shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city administrator has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city administrator may file a complaint for nuisance against the applicant or other responsible person in municipal court; upon finding a nuisance to exist by reason of the condition, the court may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(7.3), 4-3-2006) 
Sec. 40-415. - Criminal penalties. 
For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1(7.4), 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-416—40-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, adopted December 15, 2014 , repealed art. XVIII, divs. 1—6, §§ 40-451—40-457, 40-471—40-478, 40-491—40-499, 40-521, 40-522, 40-541—40-544, 40-561—40-565, in its entirety, and enacted a new art. XVIII, to read as set out herein. Former art. XVIII, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 06-07, §§ 1(1.1)—(1.6), (2), (3.1)—1(3.8), (4)—(4.8), (5.1), (5.2), (6.1)—(6.4), (7)—(7.4), adopted April 3, 2006. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 40-451. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with existing greenspace protection plans; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public health and safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management site plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-452. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all land development on or after March 7, 2014, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to section 40-453. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface area, or that involves land development activity of 5,000 square feet or greater; 
(2)  Redevelopment that creates or adds of 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface area, or that involves land disturbing activity of one acre or more, including projects less than one acre if they are part of a larger common plan of development or sale; 
(3)  Any commercial or industrial new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, with a Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code that falls under the NPDES industrial stormwater permit program, or a land use that is defined by the city manager, or his designee, to be a "hotspot land use"; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsection (1) and (2) if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-453. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-454. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. The city manager is authorized to designate, in writing, another officer or employee of the city to perform and carry out the duties under this article, provided, such designation is accepted, in writing, by the designee. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-454. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-455. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual ("GSMM"), consisting of Volumes 1—3, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-456. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities, as required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 7 and local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means a land use or activity on a site that produces higher concentrations of trace metals, hydrocarbons, or other priority pollutants than are normally found in urban stormwater runoff. Examples of "hotspots" may be found in the GSMM. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious surface area means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Non-point source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subarticle of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management site plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes division of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-457. - Permit; application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this article, every owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 40-458; 
(2)  Stormwater management site plan in accordance with section 40-459; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 40-460; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 40-461, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 40-462. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-458. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the city manager or his designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities, and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-459. - Stormwater management site plan requirements. 
The stormwater management site plan shall address Minimum Stormwater Management Standards 1—10, found in Section 1.2.2.2 of the GSMM, detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed, and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 40-465. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and Section 1.5 of the GSMM, and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management site plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)  Vicinity map; 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 40-465; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 40-465 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 40-465; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with chapter 30, article VI, and no less stringent than the state general NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, identity the responsible parties for performing maintenance, funding mechanism, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public rights-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Easements shall be held by the entity or entities responsible for maintenance. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, access easements shall be shown on the final plat and recorded in the land records of the county. Applicant shall furnish a certificate from an attorney, licensed in the state and competent in real estate matters, certifying that such easements exist, have been duly recorded, and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 40-460, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 40-460. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of all applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-460. - Stormwater inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of a private site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is formally dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent assignees of the site. A notation or legend on a plat or survey of the owner's intent to publically dedicate drainage facilities to the city shall not suffice and dedication shall require formal presentment of a correctly drawn warranty deed, with current opinion of title from a competent real estate attorney acceptable to the city. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city attorney prior to plan approval, and recorded in the county deed records upon final plat approval. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to, and be assumed by, any successor or assignee of the owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance, and shall require the city's prior written consent to the transfer. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 40-468. 
The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-461. - Maintenance bonds. 
No stormwater inspection and maintenance agreement shall be approved until the city manager has received a legally binding commercial surety bond or other satisfactory assurance of financial security, in an amount sufficient to provide for the maintenance of all improvements required by this article. The amount of such bond or other assurance of financial security shall be based on reasonable estimate of the cost of routine maintenance, as set forth in the maintenance agreement, based upon prevailing costs of labor, materials and equipment, to perform annual maintenance requirements, as from time to time established by the consulting professional engineer for the storm water department. The city attorney shall approve the bond or other assurance of financial security, as to form and execution, prior to its acceptance. Such evidence of financial security shall remain in force until such time as the city unconditionally accepts dedication of the improvements. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-462. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 40-457 (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  The city shall inform the applicant, in writing, whether the application, stormwater management plan, inspection and maintenance agreement, and bond or other assurance of financial security, are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (c) and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management site plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city shall issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development, and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project site; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by 40-467. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-463. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by resolution of the mayor and council, as from time to time amended, and shall be established prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-464. - Modifications to off-site facilities. 
The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures to be located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater at an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or Federal regulations. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
DIVISION 3. - PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 40-465. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge by the stormwater management system to remove at least 80 percent of the calculated average annual post-development Total Suspended Solids (TSS) loading (as defined in the GSMM) from the site. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume, which is defined as the runoff volume resulting from the first 1.2 inches of rainfall from a site; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed, or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices, and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel/aquatic resource protection. Stream channel/aquatic resource protection shall be provided by using the following approaches: 
a.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
b.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control; and 
c.  Preservation of the applicable stream buffer. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour storm event. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood protection shall be provided by controlling the 100-year, 24-hour storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the storm water design manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Nonstructural stormwater controls. The city encourages the use of green infrastructure/low impact development practices and approaches on both new and redeveloped sites. Design information on GI/LID practices can be found on the Georgia EPD's website (www.gaepd.org) and in the coastal supplement to the GSSM. 
(7)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1). The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the GSSM. 
(8)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(9)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 40-466. - Inspections during construction. 
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by certified personnel of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city manager. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management site plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-467. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project was constructed in accordance with the approved stormwater management site plan. All permittees are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified, under seal, by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city storm water management department is required before the release of any performance bonds or other security can occur. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
DIVISION 5. - ON-GOING INSPECTION AND FUTURE MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 40-468. - Long-term inspection and maintenance of facilities and practices. 
Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the storm water management plan and this article. At a minimum, all publicly-owned structures and those privately-owned structures completed on or after March 7, 2014 shall be subject to inspection. The city may also inspect privately-owned structures completed before said date if the city has entered into an inspection and maintenance agreement with the owner/operator of the structure which establishes the minimum intended design for the structure or facility. Maintenance must be performed to the "maximum extent practicable" (MEP). 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city manager shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested or statutory overnight delivery to the person specified, at the last address given in the inspection and maintenance agreement. Responsible persons are under a continuing obligation to keep the city informed of their current mailing address or other contact information. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, may correct the violation as provided in section 40-471. 
Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-469. - Right of entry for inspections and maintenance. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection and, if necessary, performance of maintenance on the facility. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-470. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall keep written records of all maintenance and repairs, and provide the same to the city, upon request. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 40-471. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager, after ten days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city manager shall specially assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may cause the amount thereof to be placed on the next ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for collection of taxes. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 40-472. - Enforcement procedures; in general. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management site plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management site plan or the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner of the property or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Enforcement measures. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed: 
a.  Stop work order. The city manager may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the owner or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the city manager may deem necessary to enable the owner or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(3)  Civil penalties. In the event the owner or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager may file a complaint for nuisance against the applicant or other responsible person in municipal court; upon finding a nuisance to exist by reason of the condition, the court shall order the nuisance abated within a reasonable time. In addition thereto, the court may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(4)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and willful violations of this article, including engaging in a land disturbing activity without first obtaining the required permit, the city manager may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear before the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Chapter 42 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Constitution reference— Police protection, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(1). 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq.; appropriation for training of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-4-7; special police, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq.; salary of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Obstructing, hindering officers. 
A person who knowingly and willfully obstructs or hinders any law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85, § 9-1-12) 
Sec. 42-2. - Giving false information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give a police officer a false name, address or date of birth with the intent of misleading the officer as to his identity. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85, § 9-1-14) 
Secs. 42-3—42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 42-26. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 42-27. - Responsibilities. 
The police department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 42-28. - Volunteer police division. 
The police department is authorized to create a volunteer police division. The officers of the volunteer division shall abide by the rules and regulations established for the volunteer division. They shall be unsworn, noncertified officers, whose function is to supplement the activities of the police department and whose authority does not possess the power of arrest. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1-3) 
Chapter 44 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— All references herein to the Charter shall be to Act No. 75 (H.B. 342, 2013 General Session), signed April 24, 2013. Terms of office established pursuant to this chapter shall commence January 1, 2014. 

ARTICLE I. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 44-1. - Municipal court, established. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 and the Charter, there is hereby established a municipal court for said city having jurisdiction over the violation of municipal ordinances and over such other matters as are by general law or ordinance made subject to the jurisdiction of municipal courts. Said court shall be styled as "The Municipal Court for the City of Senoia, Georgia" and shall be a continuation of the court, by whatever name or style given, created and functioning under prior laws or ordinances of said city. In addition, the judge of said court shall have and may exercise the same powers and authorities as magistrates in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature in the several courts of this state. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-2. - Maximum punishment established by general law. 
In exercising its jurisdiction, the municipal court, unless otherwise limited by a general or local law, or by ordinance, shall be authorized to impose any punishment up to the maximum(s) specified by general law, expressly including but not limited to the maximum specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B) and (C); provided, however, the court shall not impose any punishment of confinement, probation (including community service work), or other loss of liberty, or impose any fine, fee, or cost imposed by ordinance of a penal nature unless the court provides to the accused the right to representation by a lawyer, or provides to those accused who are indigent the right to counsel at no cost to the accused. Such representation shall be subject to all applicable standards adopted by the state public defender standards council for representation of indigent persons in this state. The right of representation shall include all committal hearings conducted when the judge of the court is sitting as a magistrate, regardless of whether the court has jurisdiction to try or dispose of the charges. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-3. - Trial upon citation or accusation; bench trials, appeals. 
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, misdemeanor offenses or ordinance violations may be tried upon a uniform traffic citation or accusation. All trials shall be bench trials at which the judge serves as finder of fact. Unless a direct appeal is provided by law, alleged errors of law shall be brought before the superior court on petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of a final adjudication, with service upon the mayor in the manner provided by law, with copy to the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-4. - Evidence and procedure. 
In all respects, the municipal court of the city shall operate in accordance with the uniform municipal court rules, adopted by the supreme court of the state on April 1, 2010, as now exist and as may hereafter be amended. The rules of criminal and civil procedure, and rules of evidence, shall conform as nearly as practicable to the rules of procedure and evidence in the superior and state trial courts; provided, however, there shall be no trials by jury and no civil discovery unless allowed by the judge, by order, to prevent manifest injustice. Subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and production of evidence at trial shall be issued by the municipal court clerk, upon timely application of a party or defendant. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-5. - Terms of court. 
Regular terms of court shall convene in the courtroom, Senoia Police Department, 505 Howard Road, Senoia, Georgia, at a day and time certain as, from time to time, set by order of the court; special sessions may be convened, as needed, as set by order of the court. Whenever necessity requires, the court may convene at any time or place in, or without, the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
ARTICLE II. - BONDS AND RECOGNIZANCES 

Sec. 44-6. - Bail bonds; acceptance of driver's license in lieu of bond. 
As used in this section, the term "bail" shall include the releasing of a person on such person's own recognizance. Except for those offenses bondable only before a judge of the superior courts of this state, the judge of the municipal court shall have all the power and authority of a magistrate in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature, including the authority to set and accept bail as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 17, ch. 6. 
For misdemeanors and ordinance violations returnable to the municipal court for trial, the arresting officer shall give due consideration to release on the person's own recognizance, or for a traffic violation other than a parking violation accepting the person's driver's license in lieu of bail; in all other cases, a property, surety, or cash bond may be accepted in an amount sufficient to assure the person's appearance in court. The judge shall prepare and, from time-to-time revise, by order, a schedule of cash bonds for all offenses and penal or traffic ordinance violations triable before the municipal court. Such order shall designate the chief of police or municipal court clerk to accept cash bond payments. The officer assessing and accepting a cash bond shall issue a written receipt for the bond to the person charged; if accepted by an officer other than the municipal court clerk, bond proceeds shall be immediately transmitted to the municipal court clerk, who shall enter payment upon a docket of cash bond payments. Proceeds shall be deposited by the clerk into a separate bank account from other funds and receivables of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-7. - Failure to appear; bench warrants. 
Any person charged with a violation of a misdemeanor offense or ordinance violation returnable to the municipal court who gives a cash bond for his personal appearance in court at a designated date, time and place and who fails to appear on said date and at such time and place shall forfeit the cash bond upon the call of the case for trial. It shall not be necessary for the city to take any further action to forfeit the cash bond. Entry of a cash bond forfeiture shall be made by the municipal court clerk on the cash bond docket; periodically, funds representing forfeited cash bonds shall be transferred from the cash bond account to the general fund of the city. In the discretion of the court a bench warrant may issue for the arrest of the accused. Forfeiture of a cash bond shall not be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. 
Where a driver's license has been accepted in lieu of bail for a traffic violation other than a parking violation and the person fails to appear and answer to the charges against him or her, the municipal court clerk shall immediately forward to the department of motor vehicle safety the name and driver's license number for suspension of the driver's license and driving privileges of the accused, until the person appears and fully disposes of the charges against him or her. In addition thereto, the court may issue a bench warrant for arrest of the accused. 
Upon the failure of a person released upon his own recognizance to appear for trial, if the release is not otherwise conditioned by the court, the court may summarily issue a bench warrant for arrest of the accused which shall be enforced as in cases of forfeited bonds. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-8. - Bond forfeitures. 
Where a property or surety bond has been posted, bond forfeiture shall follow the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70, et seq., which by reference is made a part hereof as if fully set out herein. It shall be the duty of the municipal court clerk to issue notice to sureties as provided in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70(b). 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS OF THE COURT 

Sec. 44-9. - Municipal court judge. 
In accordance with section 3.6 of the Charter, the mayor and council shall appoint, by resolution, a municipal court judge to hold and preside over the municipal court. The municipal court judge shall be licensed to practice law in the state and have served at least seven years as an active member in good standing of the state bar. The judge shall meet all requirements and conform to all policies and procedures of the judicial qualifications commission of the state. The judge shall be appointed by resolution of the governing authority, who shall set his or her compensation by resolution, and shall satisfactorily complete the required training for such office. Before assuming the duties of the office, the person appointed shall subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as judge of the municipal court for the City of Senoia, Georgia." 
The office of municipal court judge shall be part-time and the person appointed to said office shall not practice law in the municipal court or appear in any matter in which the court has exercised jurisdiction or the underlying accusation arises from investigation and/or arrest by law enforcement officers of the city police department. The term of office of municipal court judge shall be four years; provided, however, an appointee shall hold over in office until his or her successor has been duly qualified and appointed. 
Compensation and any related employment benefits for the office shall be fixed in the resolution of appointment and shall be based upon an annual salary for each year of the term, payable in equal monthly amounts. A person appointed to the office of municipal court judge may only be removed, during his or her term, for cause, after written notice and opportunity to be heard before the governing authority. 
The governing authority may also appoint one or more assistant municipal court judges to hold and preside over the municipal court in the absence, disability, or disqualification of the municipal court judge, and shall set the term and compensation thereof by resolution. Assistant judges shall possess all qualifications and satisfy all training requirements for the office of municipal court judge. While presiding, the assistant municipal court judge(s) shall have and may exercise all powers and duties of the municipal court judge as granted by law or the Charter. 
In addition to the powers and duties granted by law or the Charter, the judge and any assistant judge(s) of the municipal court shall have and may exercise the same powers and authorities as magistrates in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatsoever nature returnable to the several courts of this state. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-10. - Solicitor. 
The office of solicitor, as established by section 3.7 of the Charter, shall be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court and shall represent the city, in all matters pertaining to quasi-criminal ordinance violations, misdemeanor offenses triable in municipal court, and such other duties as set forth in law, particularly in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. The solicitor shall be licensed to practice law in the state and have served at least three years as an active member in good standing of the state bar. The solicitor shall be appointed by resolution of the governing authority, who shall set his or her compensation by resolution, and shall satisfactorily complete the required training for such office. Before assuming the duties of the office, the person appointed shall subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as solicitor of the municipal court for the City of Senoia, Georgia." 
The office of solicitor shall be part-time and the person appointed to said office shall not practice law in the municipal court or appear in any matter in which he or she appeared before the court or in which the underlying accusation arises from investigation and/or arrest by law enforcement officers of the city police department. The term of office of solicitor shall be two years; provided, however, an appointee shall hold over in office until his or her successor has been duly qualified and appointed. 
Compensation and any related employment benefits for the office shall be fixed in the resolution of appointment and shall be based upon an annual salary for each year of the term, payable in equal monthly amounts. A person appointed to the office of solicitor may only be removed, during his or her term, for cause, after written notice and opportunity to be heard before the governing authority. 
If the solicitor is disqualified from engaging in the prosecution of a particular case or is unable to perform the duties of said office due to illness or incapacity, the city attorney, or his designee, shall serve as substitute prosecuting attorney unless an assistant solicitor has been duly appointed by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-11. - Municipal court clerk. 
In accordance with section 3.8 of the Charter, the office of municipal court clerk shall be the primary person most directly responsible for the administration of the municipal court other than the judge of said court. The municipal court clerk or his or her deputy clerks shall attend all sessions when the court is convened and perform the duties set forth in the Charter and laws, or as delegated by order of the court. The person appointed as clerk shall be at least 18 years of age, a graduate of a state-accredited high school or possess an equivalent diploma, and satisfactorily complete the required minimum training prescribed by the state municipal courts training council. The clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the governing authority, who shall set the compensation for the office by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 44-12. - Costs of mandatory training. 
Whenever an officer of the municipal court is required by law to complete and/or maintain training from the state municipal courts training council or prosecuting attorneys council of the state, the cost of training (registration, travel, lodging and meals) shall be paid from city funds as an expense and shall not be considered additional compensation paid to the officer. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Altering Code, § 1-9; environment, ch. 30. 
State Constitution reference— Limitations on local legislation, art. III, § VI, para. IV. 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. tit. 16; ordinances prohibiting loitering for prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24; adoption of municipal ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a); municipal action duplicating state criminal offenses prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(A). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb. 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil. 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Posting signs without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-4) 
Sec. 46-3. - Unlawful discharge of weapon. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city except as allowed under section 46-4. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or use any air rifle, pellet rifle, BB gun, bow and arrows or slingshot except as allowed under section 46-4. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-5) 
Sec. 46-4. - Permissible discharge of weapon. 
(a)  It shall be permitted to discharge a weapon within the city limits under the following conditions: 
(1)  In compliance with the game and fish code as set forth by the state general assembly and the regulations set by the state board of natural resources, wildlife resources division (a copy of the code and regulations may be obtained by contacting the secretary of state's office). 
(2)  On property of zero to 20 acres in size a permit to discharge a weapon must be obtained by the landowner from the chief of police unless landowners with adjoining acreage (totaling 20 acres) are in an agreement that discharging a weapon is allowable. 
(3)  The individual discharging the weapon must not do so in such a manner that the projectile crosses another's property line, endangering life or property. 
(4)  The individual discharging the weapon must be the landowner himself, the landowner's legal relative or a guest of the landowner holding written permission (leasing property to hunting clubs is not permissible). 
(5)  Possession of a pest control permit issued by the city. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall carry a fine punishable as set forth in section 1-5. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3-1; Ord. of 3-20-96) 
Sec. 46-5. - Damaging, destroying city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or destroy any property, whether it is real or personal, owned by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-6) 
Sec. 46-6. - Damaging, destroying property generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or destroy any property not his own. 
(Ord. of 5-7-85, § 9-1-15) 
Sec. 46-7. - Possession of less than one ounce of marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession less than one ounce of marijuana. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-9) 
Sec. 46-8. - Theft by shoplifting. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment. 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment. 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another. 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise. 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(b)  In all cases involving theft by shoplifting, the term "value" means the actual retail price of the property at the time and place of the offense. The unaltered price tag or other marking on property, or duly identified photographs thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the value and ownership of the property. 
(c)  The municipal court is granted jurisdiction to try and dispose of cases in which a person is charged with a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting when the property which was the subject of the theft was valued at $100.00 or less, if the offense occurred within the corporate limits of the city. The jurisdiction of such court shall be concurrent with the jurisdiction of any other courts within the county having jurisdiction to try and dispose of such cases. 
(d)  Any defendant charged in a municipal court with a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting property valued at $100.00 or less shall be entitled upon request to have the case against him transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the appropriate agencies of the city to make any reports to the Georgia Crime Information Center required under O.C.G.A. § 35-3-30 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-11) 
Sec. 46-9. - Use of fighting words, obscene, vulgar or profane language; harassing phone calls. 
A person who commits any of the following acts commits a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Without provocation, uses to or of another, in his presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in his presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called fighting words. 
(2)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(3)  Engages in indecent or disorderly conduct in the presence of another in any public place. 
(4)  Telephones another repeatedly, whether or not conversation ensues, for the purpose of annoying, harassing or molesting another or his family; uses over the telephone language threatening bodily harm; telephones and intentionally fails to hang up or disengage the connection; or knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this subsection. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85, § 9-1-13) 
Sec. 46-10. - Simple assault. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of simple assault when he either: 
(1)  Attempts to commit a violent injury to the person of another; or 
(2)  Commits an act which places another in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
(b)  A person who commits the offense of simple assault shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85, § 9-1-13) 
Sec. 46-11. - Public library—Failure to return borrowed items, notice; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who borrows from any public library in the city any book, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, pamphlet, recording, video product, microform, computer software, film, or other article or equipment necessary to its display or use belonging to or in the care of such public library under any agreement to return it, and thereafter fails to return such property shall be given written notice, mailed to his last known address or delivered in person, to return such article or equipment within 30 days after such date of notification. Said notice shall contain a copy of this Code section. 
(b)  If such person shall thereafter willfully and knowingly fail to return such property within 30 days, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-5 of the Code and shall be required to return such property or provide reimbursement for the replacement cost of such property. 
(Ord. of 9-2-97) 
Sec. 46-12. - Same—Stealing property; concealing with intent; penalty. 
Any person who, without authority and with the intention of depriving any public library located with the city of the ownership of such property, willfully conceals a book or other library property while still on the premises of such public library, or willfully or without authority removes any book or other library property from any public library within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-5 of the Code and shall be required to return such book or property or provide reimbursement for the replacement cost of such book or property. 
(Ord. of 9-2-97) 
Sec. 46-13. - Same—Concealment constitutes intent. 
Proof of the willful concealment of any book or other public library property while still on the premises of such library in the city shall be prima facie evidence of intent to violate section 46-12. 
(Ord. of 9-2-97) 
Sec. 46-14. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. Any person who engages in an act of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for a violation of this section, afford the person a reasonable opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or concern. 
(d)  It is not the intent of this section to infringe upon any citizens right of expression or association, as protected under the First and Fourteen Amendments to the U.S. Constitution, or their Georgia Constitutional counterparts; upon arrest or issuance of a citation for a violation of this section, the officer shall promptly prepare a sufficiently-detailed written narrative of the circumstances under which the suspect was encountered, the specific form of identification presented the officer, if any, and the explanation given by the suspect to dispel alarm or immediate concern; the arresting officer shall articulate the specific alarm or immediate concern in his written report. 
(e)  This section shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on public or private property after being lawfully notified by the officer to depart. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 46-15. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  The term "disorderly conduct" shall mean the commission of such words, acts and conduct upon public property, upon private property that is open to the general public, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which under ordinary circumstances will naturally tend to disturb the public peace, tranquility or decorum, scandalize the community, or shock the public sense of morality. Any person who engages in an act of disorderly conduct shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following specific acts and conduct shall be deemed a violation of this section: 
(1)  Fighting by two or more persons to the disturbance of the public tranquility; 
(2)  Use of obscene, vulgar, opprobrious or abusive language, without provocation, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to another person in the presence of the speaker, tend to provoke violent resentment; that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; 
(3)  Being and appearing in an intoxicated condition which is outwardly made manifest by boisterousness; by indecent condition or act such as to offend sentiments of delicacy and modesty universally recognized in civilized society; or by loud, vulgar, profane, opprobrious, abusive or unbecoming language, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(4)  Any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, parade or procession; 
(5)  Obstruction of any highway, road, street, sidewalk, passage or parking area in such a way as to render it impassable without reasonable inconvenience or hazard and the failure or refusal to remove such obstruction upon being lawfully commanded to do so by a police officer; 
(6)  Engaging in boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing acts after receiving oral warning from a police officer that such activities have caused complaint or annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the peaceful assembly of citizens in a lawful manner, the free exercise of protected speech, nor shall the mere possibility of disorder justify the exclusion of persons otherwise entitled to be present. 
(d)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall have the right, upon written demand filed with the clerk of the municipal court and a copy thereof served upon the city attorney, to a jury trial, upon a finding by the municipal court that probable cause exists to bind the case over to the appropriate state court. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 46-16. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 3-2-2009) 
Secs. 46-17—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW 

Sec. 46-31. - Imposed on persons 16 and under; exceptions; multiple violations reported to county. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or under to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor. 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance. 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time. 
(5)  When the minor is attending or travelling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. 
(b)  Two or more violations of this section by a minor will result in a report being forwarded to the county juvenile authorities by the police department. 
(Ord. of 11-4-91, § A) 
Sec. 46-32. - Duty of parent, guardian; violations. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 16 years of age and under to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in section 46-31(a)(1) through (5). Upon conviction of violation of this section for the first time, the parent or guardian shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, the parent or guardian shall be punished as provided in section 1-5. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-4-91, § B) 
Sec. 46-33. - Imposed on persons 17 years old. 
It is unlawful for any person 17 years of age to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the circumstances set out in section 46-31(a)(1) through (5). Upon conviction of violation of this section, the person shall be punished as provided in section 1-5. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-4-91, § C) 
Chapter 50 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-2-2013 , repealed ch. 50, arts. I—XVI, §§ 50-1—50-12, 50-21—50-40, 50-71—50-75, 50-91—50-93, 50-111, 50-112, 50-131, 50-132, 50-151—50-156, 50-171—50-177, 50-191, 50-192, 50-211—50-216, 50-231—50-235, 50-251—50-260, 50-271—50-274, 50-291—50-293, 50-311—50-313, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 50, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 50 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. of 10-15-97(2), policy I, II, IV—XIX and R-99-04, adopted March 15, 1999. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - PROVISIONS 

Sec. 50-1. - Authority. 
The city council, at the December 2, 2013 meeting does hereby approve the following personnel policies for the city adopted December 2, 2013. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-2. - Purposes. 
These policies are adopted to provide for the recruitment and development of the best available employee for each position in the city and to establish orderly procedures for administering the personnel system so as to be consistent with the following merit principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skill, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment; 
(2)  Establishing pay rates consistent with the principles of providing comparable pay for comparable work; 
(3)  Training employees, as needed, to assure high-quality performance; 
(4)  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, age, religion or handicapped status; 
(5)  Assuring fair treatment of applications and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, age, religion or handicapped status; 
(6)  Establishing a procedure for the presentation and adjustment of employee grievances based on alleged inequitable treatment because of some conditions of their employment; or based on alleged discrimination because of race, color, national origin, sex, age, religion or handicapped status; 
(7)  Assuring employees' protection against partisan political coercion and prohibiting their use of official authority for interfering with or affecting the results of an election or the nomination for an office. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-3. - Positions. 
These policies shall apply to all positions in the classified service including regular part-time employees as well as any temporary or part-time positions as may be specifically covered by action of the city council. A "classified position" is any full time year-round or regular part-time position that exists or which created in any agency of the city government, if wages or salary of the incumbent or future employee is paid wholly by the city government, and/or if the employee is under control of the city as prescribed by the city Charter. 
A regular full-time employee will be scheduled to work a minimum of 40 hours a week. A regular part-time employee will be scheduled to work a minimum of 20 hours a week. 
Those employees holding positions on an elective or appointive board, in an elected position or of a temporary full-time, temporary part-time or voluntary nature are not to be included in the classified service. 
Classified positions shall be divided into two categories: 
(1)  Salaried. 
(2)  Hourly. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-4. - Administration. 
The city manager shall administer these policies and in conformity with the personnel resolution adopted by the mayor and council. Throughout these policies, powers, and duties, inferred or expressed as pertaining to the city manager may be delegated to designees with the approval of mayor and city council. The city manager may formulate and prescribe such rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for the operation of the departments. Such rules and regulations, when approved by mayor and city council shall be binding on the members of the departments. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-5. - Amendment. 
These policies may be amended at any regular or special meeting of mayor and city council by adoption of an appropriate amendment by resolution. The copies of the proposed changes shall be posted in the prominent places in the city offices prior to the time they are to be considered by the governing authority. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-6. - Interpretation. 
These policies are intended to cover most personnel problems and action which may arise. Those not specifically covered shall be interpreted by the mayor and city council in keeping with the intent of the personnel resolution and these policies. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-7. - Veteran's preference. 
Procedures concerning honorably discharged veterans of any war will conform to Article III, Section VII, Paragraph XXIV, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-8. - Enforcement and administration. 
The responsibility and authority of the enforcement and administration of the policies set forth herein are vested in the mayor and city council. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-9—50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PLAN-HARASSMENT FREE WORK PLACE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT AND ADA AMENDMENTS ACT 

Sec. 50-21. - Equal opportunity. 
It is the policy of the city that all persons seeking employment with and/or employed by the city shall have equal employment opportunities, regardless of race, religion, creed, color, sex, national origin, age, disability or veteran's status. Further, it is the policy of the city that equal employment opportunities shall be granted to any and all such persons, aforementioned, by the elimination and avoidance of discrimination which shall include, but not be limited to the following practices, and: 
(1)  Ensure that recruitment, hiring and promotion for all job classifications is done without regard to race, religion, creed, color, sex, national origin, disability, age or veteran's status; 
(2)  Make employment decisions so as to further the principles of equal employment by imposing only valid job related requirements; 
(3)  Ensure that promotion decisions are in accordance with principals of equal employment by imposing only job related requirements for promotional opportunities. Also ensure that all other personnel actions and attributes of employment to which the employee shall be entitled and given, such as benefits, transfers, layoffs, return from layoff, training, education, social and recreational programs, will be administered without regard to race, religion, creed, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, or veteran's status; 
(4)  All supervisors and managers shall take an affirmative leading role in seeking out and removing all traces of discrimination within their respective departments. Management performance in regard to this program will be evaluated, as is performance on other organizational goals; 
(5)  The overall responsibility for enforcement of this policy will be through the city manager or his/her designee. If required, human resource can be reached by writing to: Human Resource, P.O. Box 310, Senoia, Georgia 30276 or by calling (770) 599-3679. 
(6)  All personnel actions will be analyzed regularly to ensure that this policy is followed. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-22. - Harassment free workplace. 
The city is dedicated to a work environment free from all forms of harassment or intimidation. The city regards harassment seriously and prohibits it in the workplace by any person and in any form. 
(1)  Harassment based upon sex, race, color, age, disability, religion, creed, veteran or national origin will not be tolerated. Harassment of any sort, i.e. verbal, physical and visual, will not be tolerated. 
(2)  Harassment is a serious offense, and any employee found to have engaged in such conduct is subject to severe disciplinary action up to and including termination. In determining whether the alleged conduct constitutes harassment, the totality of the circumstances, the nature of the harassment and the context in which the alleged incidents occurred will all be considered. The city will not retaliate against any employee who files a charge of harassment of discrimination. 
(3)  The city will not tolerate sexual harassment by any of its employees. Employees must avoid any action or conduct that could be perceived as sexual harassment; pervasive atmosphere or sexually stereotyped insults; jokes or innuendoes; or lewd and offensive remarks or behavior. At no time will any condition or any employment decision in any way be based upon consent to sexual relationships, either implicitly or explicitly. The city will not tolerate any conduct that can reasonably be perceived as creating a hostile, intimidating or offensive working environment. Participation in this behavior may be grounds for immediate termination. 
(4)  An employee who feels that he or she has been discriminated against or harassed should immediately take the following actions: 
a.  Politely but firmly, confront the person who is harassing the employee; 
b.  State clearly that you do not appreciate these actions and request that the harassment ceases immediately; 
c.  If the harassment continues and/or if an employee has concerns that employment consequences may result from the confrontation, the employee should report the matter to the employee's immediate supervisor. If circumstances prohibit this response, the employee should report the behavior to human resources, city manager, or department head or other staff, as appropriate; 
d.  State specific details of the harassing behavior and, provide details of times, dates, places and witnesses of the harassment; and 
e.  Employees have the right to circumvent the employee chain of command in selecting the person to whom a complaint of sexual harassment is made. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-23. - Americans with Disabilities Act and ADA Amendments Act. 
The city is committed to complying fully with the Americans with Disabilities (ADA) and its amendments, including: 
(1)  Ensuring equal employment opportunities for qualified persons with disabilities and making reasonable accommodations for qualified individuals, unless making the reasonable accommodation would result in undue hardship to the city. 
(2)  When asked, we will attempt to make job applications available in alternative, accessible formats, and will also give assistance in completing the application. 
(3)  We only make pre-employment inquiries regarding an applicant's ability to perform the duties of the job. 
(4)  We require post-offer medical examinations for all jobs. 
(5)  We keep medical records confidential and separate from other personnel files. 
Applicants or employees who need a reasonable accommodation in order to complete the hiring process or their job duties are to make a request of their supervisor, who will then coordinate their response with the personnel officer. 
Anyone who feels there is a concern regarding compliance with the ADA should address their concerns to their supervisor. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-24—50-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECRUITMENT, STANDARD OF CONDUCT, PAY PLAN 

Sec. 50-41. - Recruitment. 
To ensure a productive work force, only applicants who have obtained a basic education, i.e., a high school diploma or a general equivalency diploma (GED) will be considered to be hired as a full-time employee by the city. The city manager as applicable may grant a waiver or exemption to this requirement. These restrictions will not apply to part-time or temporary workers. 
Members of the immediate family (as defined in definitions) of a current city employee shall not be eligible for employment in the same department as the employee. 
The personnel officer shall use such various methods of media publicity and areas of recruitment as may be expected to bring notice of vacancies to as many qualified persons as possible and to assure obtaining well-qualified applicants. Announcements of all vacancies in the classified service shall include title of vacant position, qualification requirements, manner of making application and ending date. 
Applications for employment shall be accepted for any city position; however only applications for current vacancies will be acknowledged and responded to with results. Applications will be retained for a period not to exceed one year. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-42. - Standard of conduct. 
The city endeavors to employ responsible individuals and believes that the majority of employees are responsible citizens who understand and respect the right and property of their fellow employees and that of the city. However, whenever groups work together reasonable rules are necessary for the orderly conduct of the operation. Employees are expected to comply with rules established by the city during the working hours. Violation of any of these rules may result in actions ranging from an oral reminder to immediate discharge: 
(1)  Habitual tardiness or absenteeism. 
(2)  Gambling during work or on city property. 
(3)  Working on personal business or projects on city time. 
(4)  Creating or contributing to unsanitary housekeeping conditions. 
(5)  Conduct which endangers you or another employee. 
(6)  Unauthorized use of city tools, equipment, or other city property. 
(7)  Failure to comply with city's safety rules. 
(8)  Gross negligence or abuse resulting in the damage of destruction of property belonging to the city or others. 
(9)  Carrying explosives or other than city authorized weapons in city vehicles or on a work site. 
(10)  Stealing or hiding any property of the city. 
(11)  Divulging confidential information to an unauthorized person or making any disclosure of confidential information regarding the city to any person, agency, publication, or communication outlet without authorization from the city. 
(12)  Malfeasance. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-43. - Open continuous applications. 
As a general policy, in order not to lose competent applicants, the personnel officer will accept applications anytime whether or not a vacancy has been announced. As a result of a single application, a candidate shall be considered for all classes of positions in which his principal qualifications might profitably be used. All applications shall be kept on active file for a period of one year. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-44. - Establishment of position classification and pay plan. 
The position classification and pay plan of the city adopted by resolution of the mayor and city council shall remain in effect until modified in accordance with provision of these policies. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-45. - Allocation of position: creation of classes. 
After the establishment of a new position has been approved, the appointing authority involved shall complete a position description governing the duties and responsibilities of each proposed new position. The city manager shall allocate the position to one of the classes in the classification plan. If a suitable class does not exist, they shall recommend the establishment of a new class and after the adoption of the new class by the mayor and city council shall allocate the position to it. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-46. - Entrance at the minimum. 
Each new employee shall be appointed at the minimum salary which has been established for the classification in which he/she is employed with the following exceptions: 
(1)  If a new employee does not meet the minimum requirements of the position and qualified applicants for the position are not available, the city manager may designate the employee as a "trainee" to be appointed at a salary below the minimum. 
(2)  The city manager shall determine that there has been a demonstrated inability to recruit at the minimum salary or that an applicant possesses exception qualifications, they may with the concurrence of the affected department head may employ the applicant at a higher rate than the minimum. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-47. - Regular salary increments. 
All regular hours earned will be in increments of the nearest quarter hour. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-48. - Remuneration. 
All nonexempt full-time employees are eligible to receive overtime pay (one and one-half times regular hourly rate) for all hours worked above the number schedule for the work period. The established work periods for city employees are as follows: 

 
Unless otherwise stated herein, employees must actually work all hours in the work period before receiving overtime pay. Nonexempt employees are eligible to receive overtime pay for hours worked when called in on weekends and holidays. 
Any employee called out to work during regularly scheduled off time will be credited with a minimum of two hours work time. In these cases, employees are eligible for overtime pay as described above. 
Exempt personnel are not eligible to receive overtime pay. The personnel officer will maintain a list of exempt positions. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-49. - Effective date of salary adjustment. 
Annual merit increases shall be effective on July 1 st following the end of the employee's probationary period. The amount of a merit increase will be determined by the employee's overall evaluation rating. The city manager shall annually establish the cost of living adjustment which will be effective on January 1 of each year. The pay plan will be adjusted according to the standard salary adjustment. 
Mayor and city council must approve special compensations and shall be effective on the date of final approval by the city council. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-50. - Salary of reclassified employees. 
An employee whose position is reclassified to a call having a higher minimum salary shall receive a salary adjustment to at least the minimum new salary. An employee whose position is reclassified to a class having a lower minimum salary shall not receive a reduction in salary as a result of the reclassification. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-51. - Salary of a promoted employee. 
The salary of an employee promoted to a position in a class having a higher minimum salary shall be equal to at the least the minimum salary for that position during the employee's probationary period. Upon successful completion of the probationary period, the employee will be granted regular status in the new position. If the employee fails to successfully complete their probationary period following promotion, they shall be reinstated in their former position in the same class of their former position, at their former pay. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-52. - Salary of a demoted employee. 
The salary of an employee demoted to a position in a class with a lower grade shall be reduced to at least five percent below their former salary. If the demotion is non-disciplinary, the department head may, if the employee's salary is comparable to other employees in the new position, elect to leave the employee's salary at the same level as their salary prior to the demotion. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-53. - Salary of part-time employees. 
The position classification and pay plan are for full-time service. An employee appointed for less than full-time service shall be paid at an hourly rate. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-54. - Pay upon termination. 
An employee who is separated from the city will receive payment for any unused annual leave and actual hours worked for the current pay period on the next scheduled pay day. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-55—50-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPOINTMENT 

Sec. 50-71. - Method of filling positions. 
Prior to advertising/interviewing for a position, the department head shall submit a "new hire form" to the city manager. The form should include job description, skills and proposed salary. Following approval by the city manager, the position can be advertised and interviewed for. When received, applications of all qualified applicants shall be forwarded to the chief of police/department head for his/her review. Following interviews, the department head/chief of police shall submit the "new hire form" naming the new hire, skills and salary to the city manager. Upon approval, the department head/chief of police may offer the job. The chief of police/department head shall then submit a copy of the completed "new hire form" to the payroll clerk and personnel officer. The personnel officer will place the "new hire form" in the applicant's personnel file. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-72. - Emergency and provisional appointments. 
The city manager may approve emergency employment for not more than 90 days and provisional employment without open evaluation when the position must be filled immediately. No such provisional employment shall continue longer than six months, nor shall successive provisional appointments be allowed. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-73—50-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROBATIONARY AND REGULAR STATUS 

Sec. 50-81. - Probationary status. 
Each applicant appointed to a position shall be designated as a probationary employee for a period of six months (police officer one year) from the date of employment, or for a period not exceeding one year if such extension is recommended by the department head and approved by the city manager. During the probationary period, close observation of conduct and capacity of all probationers shall be made by department heads, and if it is found from such observation or otherwise that probationer fails to meet all requirements satisfactorily, he/she shall be notified in writing of the reasons for such failure and dropped from the regular service. Probationary employees may not receive vacation leave accrued during their probation period if they resign or are terminated. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-82. - Regular status. 
At least 15 working days prior to the expiration of the probationary period, the department head shall notify the personnel officer in writing whether or not the employee has satisfactorily completed his probationary period. If the employee's work record or attitude is not deemed at an acceptable level to warrant recommendation for career status, the department head may recommend dismissal or extension of the probationary period for a specified period of time not to exceed six months. If a probationary employee fails to qualify for regular status at the end of an extended probationary period, their appointment shall be terminated and they shall be removed from government service. 
The city manager shall review recommendations from departments and shall approve or reject such recommendations. The effective date of regular status for original or promotional appointments shall be as designated by the department head and city manager. Never shall an employee be assumed to have attained regular status without recommendation of the appointing department and approval of the city manager. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-83—50-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL EMPLOYMENT POLICIES 

Sec. 50-91. - Hours of work. 
The city manager under advisement of the department heads respectively, shall establish hours of work per week for each position in the city. These hours will be determined by the level of service required and by the reasonable needs of the public who may need to conduct business with the various departments. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-92. - Attendance. 
Attendance at work is an essential function of all positions within the city and each employee is expected to arrive on time. All non-exempt employees shall keep daily attendance records. The department head shall compile these records and attendance shall be reported to the payroll clerk in time to post each bi-weekly pay record. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-93. - Dress code. 
Employees are expected to maintain the highest standards of personal cleanliness and present a neat, professional appearance at all times. The city manager, in consultation with department heads, shall determine inappropriate attire, which can include, but is not limited to shorts, halters, tank tops, jeans with holes, low necklines, flip flops, slippers or articles of clothing that have words, pictures, etc., that would be disruptive to a work environment. Situations in which inappropriate attire is worn and/or any exceptions to the dress code will be addressed by the employee's supervisor in consultation with the city manager. Unless otherwise announced by the city manager, every Friday employees may wear casual attire which is clean, neat and presentable. Any other casual day will be designated at the manager's discretion. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-94. - Confidentiality. 
Upon employment with the city and as a condition of continuing employment, the city requires that all employees (including temporary employees) agree to protect the confidential affairs of the city. Disclosure of confidential information is prohibited and may result in disciplinary action up to and including immediate discharge. Unauthorized disclosure of another employee's payroll or medical information may lead to action up to and including termination of the employee(s) involved. It is the city's policy not to discuss payroll, personnel or related issues with spouses of employees. Any inquiries should be made directly by the employee. 
The city also requires that employees not disclose to anyone, other than authorized city representatives, any information which has not been cleared for public disclosure, released to the news media, published in a newsletter, or otherwise approved for general distribution. No information, records, or material concerning the city may be used, released or discussed with anyone outside the office or with other employees without the authorization of the city manager, and all open records requests should be directed in accordance to the city open records policy. Violation of this policy may result in immediate discharge and may result in civil and criminal liability. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-95. - Pecuniary interests. 
No officer or employee of the city shall receive preference in the profits of any contract, service or other work performed by the city. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-96. - Gifts. 
No employee of the city shall accept any valuable gift; i.e. more than $25.00, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-97. - Political activities. 
Every employee of the city may join or affiliate with civic organizations of a partisan or political nature, attend political meetings, advocate and support the principles and policies of civic or political organizations in accordance with Federal, state and local laws. However, no employee shall: 
(1)  Engage in any political activity while at work during working hours; 
(2)  Be required to contribute to, solicit for, or act as a custodian of funds for political purposes; 
(3)  Coerce or compel contributions by any other employee of the city for political purposes; 
(4)  Use any city supplies, materials or equipment for political purposes or to aid a political candidate, party or cause; 
(5)  Wear clothing identifying his/her affiliation with the city for political purposes or to aid a political candidate, party or cause during normal business hours or any events sponsored by the city. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-98. - Smoke free environment. 
All city-owned vehicles and/or occupied buildings and stations within these buildings are designated smoke free environments. Outdoor areas have been designated for use during break, before or after working hours. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-99. - Conflict of interest. 
The city recognizes the problem of conflicts of interest in the work place and believes the city has a legitimate right to know of possible conflicts between an employee's own interest and those of the city. 
Personal activities or involvement from which personal benefit or obligation may potentially result should be avoided as it may create or appear to create a conflict with your responsibility and loyalty to the city. Conflict of interest shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Soliciting, accepting or agreeing to accept a financial benefit, other than from the city that might tend to influence the employee's performance of duties for the city of that which the employee knows or should know is offered with intent to influence the employee's performance. 
(2)  Accepting other outside employment or compensation that might reasonable induce the employee to disclose confidential information acquired in the performance of official duties. 
(3)  Accepting outside employment or compensation that might reasonably tend to impair independence of judgment in performance of the duties for the employee. 
(4)  Making any personal investment that might reasonably be expected to create a substantial conflict between the employee's private interest and duties for the city. 
(5)  Soliciting, accepting or agreeing to accept a financial benefit from another person in exchange for having performed duties as a city employee as a favor to that person. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-100. - Outside employment. 
An employee of the city is not permitted to engage in outside employment where such employment would bring the city in disrepute, reflect discredit upon the employee as an employee of the city, interfere with the performance of the employee's city duties, present a conflict of interest, result in misuse of city property or funds, or result in use of the city position for personal gain. 
Occasional and part-time outside employment, which does not constitute a conflict of interest, interfere in the performance of their normal duties, nor involve the use of city time may be permitted with the written approval of the city manager and department head. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-101. - Employee personnel records. 
The city retains employment records for all employees only in the designated administrative office. The city requires employees to keep their employment history current by submitting notice of change of address, telephone number, marital and benefit status, etc., immediately. Notice of change should be submitted in writing to the payroll clerk and city clerk. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-102. - Employment checks, references and recommendations. 
All inquiries regarding employment opportunities or about former or present employees must be referred to the city clerk. This includes unemployment claims, verification of employment, loan verification, request for disability insurance information, reference checks, etc. Should the employee wish the city to release any or all information to an outside party for such purposes as loan approvals or reference checks, the employee must first inform the city clerk in writing and sign an "authorization for release of personal data" in substantially the same form as included in this handbook. 
The confidential nature of all personnel histories cannot be over-emphasized. Unauthorized disclosure of personnel history of any other employee may result in action up to and including termination of the employee(s) involved in the disclosure. 
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed improper conduct and such employee(s) shall be subject to disciplinary action. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-103—50-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ANNUAL/VACATION-LEAVE-OTHER BENEFITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— The purpose of this policy is to inform city employees about the holidays that are currently observed by the city, annual leave, sick leave, workers compensation, COBRA, Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), bereavement leave, life insurance, leave of absence, military leave, jury duty and other benefits. 

Sec. 50-121. - Holidays. 
The city shall observe the following holidays: 

 
When a holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday will normally be observed. If it falls on Saturday, the Friday before the holiday will normally be observed. 
In order to receive pay for observed holidays an employee must not have been absent without an excused leave in advance on either the work day immediately before or after the holiday. 
Leave for other holidays observed by an employee may be arranged via request for annual leave or personal leave without pay, if submitted to and approved by the appropriate department head. 
Any employee required to work on a holiday shall be paid in either subsection (1) or (2) below: 
(1)  Employees will be paid their regular pay plus an additional eight hours of pay or: 
(2)  In lieu of the additional eight hours pay, employees will elect to substitute another day in lieu of the holiday with the approval of the department head. Day must be used within two pay periods of holiday. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-122. - Annual/vacation-leave. 
The city provides paid annual/vacation leave for all full time employees after one year of continuous employment as further defined in the following table. 

 
Annual/vacation leave may be taken as earned and accrued, subject to the prior approval of the department head or supervisor, who will schedule leave to ensure that the operational requirements of the department are being met. Annual or vacation leave taken by a department head must be approved by the city manager. 
All employees may carry over a maximum of 40 hours of vacation past the employee's anniversary date however the carry over must be used within 90 days of employee's anniversary date. Annual/vacation leave is accrued the last day of the employee's anniversary month. 
If an employee resigns, is terminated or retires, any annual/vacation leave earned and not taken, will be paid in a lump sum on the final check. 
In all cases, no employee may receive pay in lieu of vacation not taken. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 17-06, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 50-123. - Sick leave. 
The city provides eight hours of sick leave per pay month. Paid sick leave each calendar year is available to all full-time employees for periods of temporary absences due to illness or injuries. Employees may accrue a maximum of 960 sick hours. Sick leave shall not be considered as a right that an employee may use at his/her discretion, but rather a privilege. Sick leave shall be granted only for the following reasons: 
(1)  Personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes beyond the employee's control. 
(2)  Illness of an employee's spouse, child, or parent that requires the employee's personal care and attention. 
(3)  Enforced quarantine of the employee in accordance with community health regulations. 
(4)  To keep a personal medical appointment. 
Employees, who resign, separate or are involuntarily dismissed from city employment shall not be paid for accrued sick leave and shall lose all accrued sick leave credit. Payment for accumulated sick leave up to the following maximum will be made upon death or retirement from the city. Service will be as follows: 
10 years total service—240 hours 
15 years total service—480 hours 
In order to be granted sick leave with pay, an employee must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Notify their immediate supervisor not later than one hour after the beginning of the scheduled workday of the reason for absence. 
(2)  If the absence is longer than two workdays due to sickness or illness, the employee must present evidence of a medical examination or nursing visit for said sickness or illness. In the case of bodily injury when the absence is longer than two workdays the employee must present a medical certificate from a licensed physician stating when the employee is able to return to work and is physically able to perform the essential functions of the position. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 17-06, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 50-124. - Cobra. 
COBRA, or the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, is a law enacted to provide continuation of group health coverage that otherwise might be terminated. COBRA provides certain former employees, retirees, spouses, former spouses, and dependent children the right to temporary continuation of health coverage at group rates. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-125. - Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA). 
City employees are covered under FMLA. Eligible employees are those who have been employed by the city for at least 12 months and have been employed for at least 1,250 hours of service during the 12-month period immediately preceding the commencement of the leave. 
FMLA is a Federal program that permits employees to request family leave for a period of up to 12 weeks within a 12-month period. It is incumbent upon the employee to notify the employer of his/her request for family leave. Although not required, at least 30 days-notice will allow departments to better plan for this absence. Based on provided information, the employer will determine if the leave request qualifies under the Act. The city has determined that this leave will run concurrently with any accrued sick leave and/or vacation credited to the employee. 
Exigencies arising out of a covered military member's status, or notification of an impending call, or an order to active duty status, qualify for up to 12 weeks FMLA leave. In addition, up to 26 weeks of FMLA leave in a single 12-month period to care for a covered service member recovering from serious injury or illness incurred in the line of duty is also available. 
During the duration of the family and medical leave, the city will maintain the employee's health coverage under the group health plan. The employee will not accrue any sick leave or vacation credit during an unpaid family and medical leave. However, the time taken for family and medical leave will be counted for purposes of pension vesting. Upon return from family and medical leave, the employee will be restored to their original or equivalent position with equivalent pay, benefits and other employment terms. For further, and more in depth information, contact personnel officer. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-126. - Bereavement/funeral leave. 
In the event of the death of a covered family member of an employee, the employee shall be entitled to up to three consecutive business days leave with pay for the purpose of attending the funeral of a family member. Required additional days must be taken as vacation time, if available. A family member is defined as a spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, brother, sister, parents-in-law, brother or sister-in-law, foster parents or a legal guardian of the employee. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-127. - Military leave. 
Employees who become members of the Armed Forces shall be given re-employment and other rights in accordance with Federal and state law. 
Employees who are members of any reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States, including members of the Georgia National Guard and Air National Guard who are called to active duty shall be entitled to a leave of absence from their respective duties, without loss of seniority, vacation accrued, or any other rights or benefits to which they are otherwise entitled. This is for periods of military service during which they are engaged in the performance of duty or training in the service of this state, or of the United States of America. Specific criteria is detailed in 20 CFR, Part 1002; RIN 1293-AA14. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-128. - Jury duty. 
Employees, upon receipt of a summons for jury duty are required to notify their department head as soon as possible. The department head shall notify human resources and forward a copy of the jury summons to human resources. When an employee is called for jury duty, leave with pay will be authorized to allow the employee to serve. Employees will be paid the difference between their regular pay and jury pay. The employee is not to be paid regular pay in addition to jury pay. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-129. - Medical and dental insurance. 
The city offers paid medical and dental insurance for all full-time employees. For complete details of the medical plan offered, see personnel officer for options. Dependent coverage is also available at a cost to employee. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-130. - Disability and life insurance. 
The city offers both paid short term and long term disability insurance for all full-time employees. For complete details of the plans and summary of benefits, see personnel officer. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-131. - Retirement system. 
The city fully funds the employee retirement plan. Provisions for retirement system for city employees shall be as outlined in any retirement ordinance passed or amended by the governing authority. Refer questions to the personnel officer. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-132. - Workers compensation. 
Employees, injured on the job, including approved travel on city business, are protected against loss of income and medical expenses by provisions of the Georgia Workers' Compensation Act. No charge will be made against sick leave for a job related injury unless the disability continues for more than six months. After that time, a charge will be made against sick leave, vacation, and then leave without pay. To reserve rights under the law, an employee must notify the city immediately if involved in an on-the-job accident that results in personal injury. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-133. - Unpaid leave of absence. 
Employees may receive an unpaid leave of absence for good and sufficient personal reasons, (other than medical or family related leave provided under FMLA) and provided that no significant disruption to the city's activities will result. Each case will be considered individually. Requests for a leave of absence must be submitted in writing to the employee's department head and forwarded to the city manager with a recommendation with a recommendation from the department head. An employee granted leave without pay will not receive compensation or city benefits and the employee will not accrue sick leave, holidays or vacation credit while on leave without pay. Employees on a leave without pay will be required to make contributions for health, life insurance, and retirement benefits, as required and appropriate. Employees on leave without pay will not lose any employment benefits or seniority accrued before the date on which leave commenced. 
An unpaid personal leave of absence, if approved, will be granted for a minimum of one day or up to 30 days. 
Requests for a leave of absence for other than military leave should be made with the full understanding that, while the city will make every effort to have a comparable position with comparable pay for the employee when returning from leave, the city cannot guarantee that the same position will be available upon return. 
Reinstatement of the employee granted leave without pay will be dependent upon an available opening for which the employee is qualified. 
If the employee does not report to work at the end of the personal leave of absence period, it will be assumed that the employee has voluntarily resigned. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-134. - Inclement weather. 
Employees should not assume that city offices or operations are closed. We are a service operation and as such, we are obligated to the citizens to perform our duties. In the event of conditions such as freezing, flooding, etc., employee safety will be considered. If you feel it is unsafe to drive, you must contact your supervisor and notify him/her. If you cannot make it to work, you may be charged a day without pay. In the event that city offices are closed by the city manager due to inclement weather or other similar emergency, employee absence will be recorded as approved paid leave. Employees already on an approved leave during an inclement weather event may not substitute the hours for inclement weather or other similar emergency for the leave they are already approved for. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-135—50-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 50-151. - Training. 
The city recognizes the responsibility of the city to provide opportunities through training to develop skills and abilities for full performance and career advancement of its employees while being employed by the city. Periodically, the city shall provide training to its employees concerning policy and safety issues. All training shall be documented and the personnel officer shall maintain all documentation. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-152. - In-service training. 
Department heads, under the direction of the city manager, shall be responsible for fostering and promoting in-service training of employees for the purpose of improving the quality of service and to assist employees in preparing themselves for advancement. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-153. - Uniforms and equipment. 
Uniforms for the police department and public works employees and such other employees as the city manager may authorize may be furnished by the city. Equipment deemed essential to job performance may also be furnished if authorized by the city manager. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-154—50-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SEPARATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— An employee may be separated from the service of the city by any one of the eight different methods as described herein this article. 

Sec. 50-171. - Resignation. 
To resign in good standing, an employee of the city must give 14 days' notice to his/her department head of his/her intention to resign. Employees who terminate their employment other than by discharge will receive their final paycheck on the next scheduled payday provided all issued equipment owned by the city is returned. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-172. - Abandonment of position. 
An employee who, without valid reason, fails to report to work for three consecutive work days without authorized leave shall be separated from the payroll and reported as having abandoned his position. The employee is not eligible for re-employment for a period of two years and shall be considered as resigning not in good standing. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-173. - Disability. 
An employee may be separated for disability when he/she has contracted some mental or physical ailment or defect which incapacitated him/her for usefulness in the city's service. Action may be initiated by the employee, his legal representative, or the city, but in all cases it must be supported by medical evidence acceptable to the city manager. The city may require an examination at its expense, performed by a physician of its choice. 
A department head/chief of police may direct an employee under his jurisdiction to be examined by a designated physician of the city. When a disability of any kind is discovered which impairs the effectiveness of an employee or makes his continuance on the job a danger to himself/herself or others the following action shall be taken: 
(1)  If the disability is correctable, the employee shall be allowed a specified time as determined by the city manager to have it corrected. If he failed to take steps to have the disability corrected within the specified time, he/she shall be subject to disciplinary action. 
(2)  If, in the opinion of the examining physician, the disability cannot be corrected, the department head/police chief subject to the approval of the city manager shall: 
a.  Attempt to place the employee in another position which he can perform satisfactorily. If that cannot be accomplished successfully, the city manager and department head shall: 
1.  Take steps to separate the employee from the city service through retirement or lay-off. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-174. - Loss of job requirement. 
An employee who is unable to do his/her job adequately because of loss of a necessary license or other requirement may be separated by a layoff until such license or requirement is acquired. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-175. - Dismissals. 
Regular employees shall be discharged only after having been presented the reasons for the discharge, unlike the discharge of a probationary employee serving an initial probationary period (as may be extended) who may be dismissed without cause. An original report stating the reasons for the discharge shall be forwarded in a timely manner, after the effective date of the action, to the personnel officer for inclusion in the employee's file. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-176. - Retirement. 
Retirement shall be governed by policies set forth in the city retirement plan. Upon retirement the employee shall be paid for any used vacation leave accumulated and accrued sick leave if applicable. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-177. - Layoff. 
It is the policy of the city to ensure proper staffing levels to meet operational requirements, and to maintain a stable work force as a vital part of its overall employee relations objectives. However, certain economic and budgetary considerations and changes in the organization and programs of the city government may necessitate layoffs to reduce the size of its workforce. Employee(s) are to be laid off in order of the following criteria. Once a criteria is reached upon which a decision can be made, the remaining criteria are not considered. 
(1)  Availability of funding source. 
(2)  Availability of funding within the department. 
(3)  Deletion of job classification or position within the department. 
(4)  Job performance as shown on the last two performance evaluations or any such evaluation within a two-year period. 
(5)  Length of service with the city. 
When an employee possesses a critical skill essential to the efficient operation of the department, he/she may be retained in preference to a person with a higher rating. Documentation and request for such action must be presented to the personnel officer for presentation to the city manager who will make the final decision. The request shall set forth in detail the specific skills and abilities possessed by the individual and the reasons why such individual is essential to the effective operation of the department. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-178. - Death. 
An employee who dies while in the city service shall be separated effective as of the date of death. Any salary due the employee, accumulated annual leave and sick leave accrued (if applicable) shall be paid to the estate of the deceased. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-179—50-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE 

Sec. 50-191. - Disciplinary action-methods. 
It is the policy of the city that employees conduct themselves and city affairs in accordance with the highest standards of personal integrity and ethical business practices. Every employee must clearly understand that any misappropriation, misuse, or conversion of city funds or property, regardless of the value for personal use or gain will not be tolerated. An employee who violates established policies will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including immediate termination and criminal prosecution, if warranted. Disciplinary action is intended to correct or modify recurring patterns of behavior which are detrimental to the city's operations. Such action should be initiated as soon after the behavior is observed as possible. Disciplinary action should also be undertaken in private meetings when possible. It is recognized that, given the nature of the city's operations, it is not always possible to do this. However, every effort should be made to execute disciplinary action in a timely manner while respecting the integrity of the process. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-192. - Types of action. 
The following types of disciplinary action may be taken against employees violating established policies. These actions are to be taken in the sequence in which they appear below. It is recognized that some violations are so severe as to require circumvention of the established sequence. 
(1)  Reprimand defined. Reprimand is an oral or written notice of policy violation, mistakes, inefficiency or other factor which may adversely influence employee's ability to efficiently an defectively carry out his/her duties and responsibilities. 
(2)  Oral reprimand. Oral reprimands will be considered the normal means of correcting the action of employees; such reprimands will not affect the employee's privileges or status but will be recorded in his/her departments personnel file. 
(3)  Written reprimand. The employee will receive a written statement describing the problem and what must be done to correct it. The written reprimand, with reference to prior oral reprimands, if applicable will also contain a statement describing the probable consequences of not correcting the problem. The written reprimand will be given to the employee who will acknowledge receipt of same over his/her signature. If he/she feels the written reprimand to be unjust, will so state in writing, giving his/her reasons. Original acknowledgement and reply thereto, if any, will be forwarded for inclusion in the individual's official personnel file. 
(4)  Appeals from reprimands. Oral or written reprimands may be appealed through the appeal procedure prescribed in this manual, provided such appeal is instituted within ten working days of date of oral reprimand or receipt of written reprimand. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-193. - Suspension defined. 
Suspension is the temporary removal of an employee from city service for cause for a specified period of time. A suspended employee shall not receive pay during the suspension period and may accrue benefits during the suspension only as specifically provided in other parts of this rule. 
(1)  Suspension without pay. An employee may be suspended without pay for a violation of accepted policies governing performance and/or conduct. The suspension without pay shall not exceed 30 working days in one calendar year. Employees who serve suspensions without pay will not be authorized to make up lost time during the pay period in which they serve the suspension by working extra hours, overtime or by utilizing any accrued time. 
(2)  Disciplinary salary reduction. An employee's salary may be reduced up to five percent for disciplinary purposes. This does not constitute a demotion. 
(3)  Disciplinary demotion. An employee may be demoted to a lower compensation grade for disciplinary reasons if a lower position is open and if the employee is qualified to perform the work at the lower position. A disciplinary demotion must include a decrease in compensation as follows: 
a.  An employee who is demoted shall have his/her compensation reduced to a level not to exceed the maximum of the lesser range. If compensation before demotion falls within the range for the lower class, the employee's compensation shall be reduced at least to the next lower step in the new range. Compensation shall not be placed at a point higher than the employee could have reached had employment been continuous in the lower position. All compensation reductions shall be based upon quality and quantity of work as reflected by service ratings and upon other recorded measures of performance giving due consideration to length of service, and shall correspond with the steps of the approved range. Exceptions to this procedure may occur based on circumstances unrelated to the employee's performance (i.e., reorganization, shortage of funds, etc.). 
(4)  Dismissal defined. An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary reasons when all other alternatives have failed to solve the problem, or when it is necessary to remove the employee from the workplace immediately and/or permanently. 
(5)  Dismissal recommendation. When he/she determines that such action is necessary, appropriate and in the best interest of the city service, a department head will notify the city manager. The recommendation will be in writing and shall contain the reasons why it is necessary for the department head to dismiss an employee along with all necessary support and documentation. All documentation will then be forward to the personnel officer that an employee has been dismissed. 
(6)  Dismissal notification. Notification of dismissal shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons and effective date. A regular status employee shall also be informed in his/her notification that he/she has the right of appeal, pursuant to this policy. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-194—50-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - NOTIFICATION AND RESPONSE TO PROPOSAL OF ADVERSE ACTION FOR REGULAR EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 50-211. - Notification. 
The employee's immediate supervisor shall meet with the employee when facts have been alleged which, if true, would subject the employee to adverse action by the city. Should the immediate supervisor determine adverse action is appropriate based upon available information, the immediate supervisor shall submit the recommendation to his/her immediate supervisor for adverse action. If adverse action is for termination, such action may only be taken by the city manager. Proposed adverse actions affecting the city manager will be referred to mayor and council for action as deemed appropriate. If the city manager is a contract employee, the terms of the contract will apply. 
The employee's immediate supervisor or his/her immediate supervisor will give the employee written notification of the proposed adverse action within two working days of the initial meeting with the employee concerning the actions giving rise to the adverse action. For terminations, recommendations made by supervisors will be forwarded to the city manager. The notification will contain the following: 
(1)  The effective date of the action; 
(2)  The specific charges or reasons for the action; 
(3)  A statement informing the employee that a response may be made to the supervisor proposing the adverse action within two working days after receipt of the notice of proposed adverse action; and 
(4)  A warning that a failure to respond to the supervisor proposing the adverse action will result in a waiver of all further appeal rights. 
(5)  If for termination, the matter will be taken up by the city manager. If the final action is for termination, the city manager will issue a final decision. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-212. - Employee response. 
The employee, upon receipt of the notice of the proposed action, if he/she so chooses, may respond to the supervisor proposing the adverse action concerning this proposed adverse action, or to the city manager for proposed terminations. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-213. - Notice of final action. 
The supervisor proposing the adverse action, after considering the employee's response, will issue a final decision on the adverse action within two working days of receiving the employee's response, if any, and will inform the employee of the right to appeal the action. If the final action is for termination, the employee will be out-processed immediately and all pay and benefits will cease. Should the employee appeal the termination and be reinstated, the employee will be granted back pay to the date of termination. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-214. - Postponement of deadline. 
If the employee responds to the supervisor proposing the adverse action, the employee may request postponement of the deadline for the final notice by a specific number of days to conduct further investigation. If the deadline for the final notice is postponed, the effective date of the final action will be postponed by as many days. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-215. - Grievance procedures. 
It shall be the policy of the city to provide a procedure for the presentation and for the mutual adjustments of points of misunderstanding or disagreement that arise between employees and their supervisors and/or co-workers. It is also to assure employees that their problems and complaints will be considered fairly, rapidly, and without reprisal. 
A grievance is a misunderstanding, a complaint, a point of view or an opinion pertaining to employment conditions, relationships between an employee and a supervisor and/or relationships with other employees. Such misunderstandings, complaints, points of view and opinions will be considered a grievance except in cases where they relate to a personnel action arising out of position classification, pay, discipline, demotion, suspension, and dismissal. 
The following procedure is provided to govern presentation and adjustment of such disagreements. Its purpose is to determine what is right, rather than who is right. It incorporates a philosophy of management that a free discussion between employees and supervisors will always lead to a better understanding by both of the many practices, policies, procedures and agreements that affect employees and administration. 
(1)  The employee, within five working days of the events giving rise to the alleged grievance, shall notify his/her immediate supervisor, in writing, of the grievance. 
(2)  The immediate supervisor/manager shall respond in writing to the employee, addressing the grievance, within five working days of receipt of the grievance. A copy of the employee grievance and the supervisor response shall be forwarded to the personnel officer for placement in the employee's personnel file. 
(3)  If the employee is not satisfied with the supervisor/manager's response, the employee shall have five working days to present the grievance in writing to the city manager. 
(4)  The city manager, shall then make a decision, and advise the employee in writing of his/her decision within five working days after receipt of the alleged grievance from the employee. The city manager, shall have the final authority to amend, reverse or confirm the decision of the supervisor; but, in either case, shall notify the employee and the supervisor of a decision within five working days after receipt of the alleged grievance from the employee. Copies of the employee grievance and the city manager's response shall be forwarded to the personnel officer for placement in the employee's personnel file. 
(5)  Documentation concerning the grievance review may be removed from the file and destroyed after one year with the approval of the personnel officer. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-216. - Appeals defined. 
Any regular employee, except for city manager and department heads who are reprimanded, suspended, demoted or dismissed shall be given the right to appeal this action to an examining panel (hereinafter referred to as the "panel"). 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-217. - List of qualified examiners. 
The city manager and personnel officer shall select and the city council shall approve a list of city employees who shall be qualified to examine, investigate and hear appeals of aggrieved employees of the city. The list of qualified examiners shall be maintained by the city manager and the personnel officer. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-218. - Procedures for appeals. 
(a)  Within ten working days after an employee of the city has been aggrieved as defined in section 50-213, the aggrieved employee (hereinafter referred to as the "appellant," or their authorized agent, if any, shall file an appeal in writing with their supervisor/police chief and the personnel officer. 
(b)  Within five working days after an appeal has been filed, the appellant or their authorized agent, if any, shall select from the list of qualified examiners the names of five persons, a maximum of two who serve under the same department head as the appellant, from that he/she wished to serve on the panel and shall submit said names to the personnel officer. 
(c)  Within ten working days after the members of the panel have been selected, the personnel officer shall schedule a hearing before the panel and shall promptly notify all persons involved of the time and place of the hearing before the panel. The date of the hearing before the panel may be continued by agreement between the appellant or their agent, if any, and the personnel officer but, in any event, the hearing shall be held not later than 20 working days after the five members of the panel have been determined. All hearings shall be held in private sessions unless, at the time of selecting the panel, the appellant or their authorized agent, if any, makes a written request to the personnel officer that he/she desires that the hearing be open to the general public. 
(d)  At the hearing before the panel, the appellant shall have the right to be present and to be heard either personally or through counsel, to have all witnesses sworn, to call and examine witnesses on any evidence against him/her. The hearing will be recorded. 
(e)  Within five working days after a hearing before the panel, the panel shall make a decision on the employee's appeal. The personnel officer shall mail or otherwise deliver a copy of the panel's decision to the appellant. When the final decision of the panel is in favor of the appellant, said employee shall be restored to their former position and pay status and shall also be paid for salary, wages and allowances which may have been withheld or forfeited from the time of such dismissal, demotion, suspension, or reprimand. 
(f)  The appellant may, if they so choose, appeal the panel's decision within five working days of that decision with the mayor and city council. The mayor and council shall make its decision on the record in the hands of the panel unless the city, in its discretion, shall order a further evidentiary hearing as a matter or right. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be made within 20 working days of the time an appeal was filed and will be final. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-219. - Appeals for administration/department heads. 
Administration and department heads who are reprimanded, suspended, demoted, or dismissed shall have the right to appeal this action to city council. 
(1)  Procedure for appeals. 
a.  Within ten working days after an employee of the city has been aggrieved, the aggrieved employee (hereinafter referred to as the "appellant"), or their authorized agent, if any, shall file an appeal in writing to the mayor with a copy of the appeal to the personnel officer. 
b.  Within 20 working days of the appellant filing an appeal, the personnel officer shall schedule a hearing before the city council and shall promptly notify all persons involved of the time and place of the hearing. The date of the hearing may be continued by agreement between the appellant and council and the personnel officer but, in any event, the hearing shall be held not later than 20 working days. All hearings shall be held in private sessions unless, at the time of submitting the appeal, the appellant or their authorized agent, if any, makes a written request to the personnel officer that he/she desires that the hearings be open to the general public. 
c.  At the hearings before council, the appellant shall have the right to be present and to be heard either personally or through counsel, to have all witnesses sworn, to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter material and relevant to his/her appeal, and to rebut any evidence against him/her. This hearing will be recorded. 
d.  Within five working days after a hearing before the city council, council shall make a decision on the employee's appeal. The personnel officer shall mail or otherwise deliver a copy of council's decision to the appellant. When the final decision of city council is in favor of the appellant, said employee shall be restored to their former position and pay status and shall also be paid for salary, wages, and allowances which may have been withheld or forfeited from the time of such dismissal, demotion, suspension or reprimand. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-220—50-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 50-241. - Internet and electronic mail. 
This policy describes the city's guidelines with regard to Internet access and disclosure of electronic mail messages sent or received by the city employees with use of the city e-mail system. 
The city respects the individual privacy of its employees. However, employee privacy does not extend to the employee's work-related conduct or to the use of the city-provided equipment or supplies. You should be aware that the following guidelines may affect your privacy in the workplace. 
All e-mails are public information unless otherwise determined confidential in accordance with Georgia Open Records Act. 
As a condition of providing Internet access to its employees, the city places certain restrictions on workplace use of the Internet: 
(1)  To communicate with fellow employees and clients regarding matters within an employee's assigned duties; 
(2)  To acquire information related to, or designed to facilitate the performance of regular assigned duties; and 
(3)  To facilitate performance of any task or project in a manner approved by an employees' supervisor. 
Employees must comply with all software licenses, copyrights, and all other laws governing intellectual property and online activity. 
Please be advised that your use of the Internet access, provided by the city, expressly prohibits the following: 
(1)  Distribution of destructive programs (i.e., viruses and/or self-replicating code). 
(2)  Hateful, harassing, or other anti-social behavior. 
(3)  Intentional damage or interference with others (for example, hacking and distributing viruses). 
(4)  Making publicly accessible obscene files. 
(5)  Solicitation. 
(6)  Commercial usage of non-company business. 
(7)  Dissemination or printing of copyrighted materials (including articles and software) in violation of copyright laws. 
(8)  Sending, receiving, printing or otherwise disseminating proprietary data, trade secrets or other confidential information of the city in violation of company policy or proprietary agreements. 
(9)  Offensive or harassing statements or language including disparagement of others based on their race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability, religious or political beliefs. 
(10)  Sending or soliciting sexually oriented messages or images. 
(11)  Operating a business, usurping business opportunities or soliciting money for personal gain, or searching for jobs outside the city. 
(12)  Sending chain letters, gambling or engaging in any other activity in violation of the law. 
Violation of the city's Internet policy may include disciplinary action. The measure of discipline will correspond to the gravity of the offense as weighed by its potential effect on the city and fellow employees. When you connect to the Internet using the city's address designation, it should be for city business related activity. 
The electronic mail system has been installed by the city to facilitate business communications. Although each employee has an individual password to access this system, it belongs to the city and the contents of e-mail communications are accessible at all items by the city administration for any business purpose. These systems may be subject to periodic unannounced inspections, and should be treated like other shared filing systems. All system passwords and encryption keys must be available to the city administration, and your passwords or encryption keys must be available to your department head. 
All e-mail messages are company records. The contents of e-mail, property obtained for legitimate business purposes, may be disclosed within the city without your permission. Therefore, you should not assume that messages are confidential. Back-up copies of e-mail may be maintained and referenced for business and legal reasons. 
Because the city provides the electronic mail system to assist you in the performance of your job, you should use it for official city business. Incidental and occasional personal use of e-mail is permitted by the city, but these messages will be treated the same as other messages. The city reserves the right to access and disclose as necessary all messages sent over its e-mail system, without regard to content. Since your personal messages can be accessed by the city administration without prior notice, you should not use e-mail to transmit any messages you would not want read by a third party. 
Employees are prohibited from the unauthorized use of the passwords and encryption keys of other employees to gain access to the other employee's e-mail messages. 
All material downloaded from the Internet or from computers or networks must be scanned for viruses and other destructive programs before being placed onto the city's computer system. 
The city has the right, but not the duty, to monitor any and all aspects of its computer system, including, but not limited to, monitoring sites employees visit on the Internet, reviewing material downloaded or uploaded by employees, and reviewing e-mail sent and received by employees. 
Employees waive any right to privacy in anything they create, store, send, or receive on the computer or the Internet. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-242. - Employee safety. 
The city desires to provide a safe working environment for its employees. To accomplish this, the city will provide all reasonable safeguards to ensure safe working condition. The city recognizes the need to follow good safety principles, and therefore, believes that no job is so important and no order is so urgent that we cannot take time to perform our work safely. The cooperation of all city employees in observing safety rules and procedures will provide safe working conditions and accident-free performance, which will benefit both the employees and the citizens of the city. 
Department supervisors are responsible for developing and carrying out an aggressive program of safety education and training. 
Employees must comply with all occupational safety and health standards issued under the OSH Act that apply to their own actions and conduct on the job. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-243. - General guidelines. 
(a)  Ignorance of safety guidelines will not be accepted as an excuse for neglect or the use of unsafe practices in the performance of an employee's job. 
(b)  The ability/inability to perform work assignments safely shall be one factor of consideration in the selection and promotion of employees. 
(c)  The inability to perform work assignment safely is considered grounds for disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(d)  All unsafe conditions shall be corrected as soon as possible. Specific caution or instructions regarding this condition should be given to all employees working in the area until it can be corrected. 
(e)  Each individual employee is responsible for reporting the presence of any hazard or unsafe condition to his/her supervisor. 
(f)  Pranks, practical jokes are other types of horseplay are not conducive to a good safety program and will not be tolerated. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-244. - General safety. 
(a)  No smoking is permitted near or around gas pumps or any other flammable liquids. 
(b)  All work areas including vehicle cabs must be kept clean and free from all rubbish and debris. 
(c)  All materials in storage must be stored in a neat and orderly manner. 
(d)  Fire extinguishers must be maintained in all work areas and kept in working condition at all times. All employees should know the location of the fire extinguishers in their working area. 
(e)  It is required that all employees learn and follow safe work procedures in the use of tools, equipment and machinery normally used in their work. 
(f)  All guards, shields, etc., must be in place and required personal protective items in use at all times when using machines, tools or equipment. 
(g)  All tools, equipment and machinery must be kept clean and in good working condition. Regular inspection procedures should be established and followed. 
(h)  No employee should attempt to use, adjust, repair or tamper in any way, with any electrical or mechanical equipment unless he has specific authorization to do so. 
(i)  All worksites shall be properly marked and all necessary safety precautions taken. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-245. - Motor vehicle safety. 
All employees of the city must have a valid state driver's license to operate a city owned vehicle, and where required, a commercial license. 
It is the vehicle operator's responsibility to operate his/her vehicle in a safe and courteous manner, and obey all traffic laws. Seat belts must be worn at all times when operating a city vehicle. City vehicles are constantly under observation of the citizens and must be operated in a safe manner. 
Employees shall immediately report all accidents to their department head and notify the city police department to call in an outside agency. The employee shall not leave the scene of an accident until an investigation has been made. Employees involved in an accident shall be required to report for a drug and alcohol test. Failure to report an accident will result in disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
Violation citations, fines or other action taken by any police jurisdiction against any employee while driving a city vehicle shall be responsibility of the employee and may cause disciplinary action. Loss of driving privileges through citations or other action taken by any police jurisdiction against any employee must be reported immediately to their department head. 
Anyone misusing or abusing city vehicles, using a city vehicle for other than approved purposes, or taking a vehicle home when not approved by the city manager shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, including dismissal if deemed appropriate. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-246. - Job injuries. 
An employee must immediately notify his/her department head and the personnel officer of any on the job injury. The personnel officer shall then notify the city manager. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Secs. 50-247—50-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY 

Sec. 50-261. - Intent. 
The city is committed to providing a safe work environment and to fostering the well-being and health of its employees. That commitment is jeopardized when any city employee illegally uses drugs on or off the job, comes to work under the influence, possesses, distributes or sells drugs in the workplace, or abuses alcohol on the job. Therefore, the city has established the following policy: 
Any employee found to be using alcohol or illegal drugs during working hours will be terminated. 
It is violation of city policy for any employee to use, possess, sell, trade, offer for sale, or offer to buy illegal drugs or otherwise engage in the illegal use of drugs on or off the job. 
It is a violation of city policy for any employee to report to work under the influence of or while possessing in his/her body, blood or urine illegal drugs in any detectable amount. 
It is a violation of city policy for any employee to report to work under the influence of or impaired by alcohol. 
It is a violation of city policy for any employee to use prescription drugs illegally, i.e., to use prescription drugs that have not been legally obtained or in a manner or for a purpose other than as prescribed. (However, nothing in this policy precludes the appropriate use of prescribed medications.) 
Violations of this policy are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
The goal of this policy is to balance our respect for individuals with the need to maintain a safe, productive and drug-free environment. The intent of this policy is to offer a helping hand to those who need it while sending a clear message that the illegal use of drugs and the abuse of alcohol are incompatible with employment at city. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-262. - General procedures. 
An employee reporting to work visibly impaired will be deemed unable to properly perform required duties and will not be allowed to work. If possible, the employee's supervisor will first seek another supervisor's opinion to confirm the employee's status. Next, the supervisor will consult privately with the employee to determine the cause of the observation, including whether substance abuse had occurred. If, in the opinion of the supervisor, the employee is considered impaired, the employee will be sent home or to a medical facility by taxi or other safe transportation alternative-depending on the determination of the observed impairment-and accompanied by the supervisor or another employee if necessary. A drug and alcohol test may be in order. An impaired employee will not be allowed to drive. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-263. - Prohibitions. 
Alcohol prohibitions. This policy prohibits any alcohol misuse that could affect performance of an employee's ability to function, including: 
(1)  Use while performing any job function for the city. 
(2)  Use during the four hours before performing any job function for the city. 
(3)  Reporting for work or remaining at work with an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater. [4](See note below.) 
(4)  Unauthorized possession of alcohol. This includes the possession of medicines containing alcohol (prescription or over the counter.) 
(5)  Use during eight hours following an accident, or until he/she undergoes a post-accident test. 
(6)  Refusal to take a required test. 
Documentation of this test constitutes written warning that the city's policy has been violated and the next occurrence will result in termination of employment. 
Drug prohibitions. This policy prohibits any drug use that could adversely affect employee performance including: 
(1)  Unlawful use of any controlled substance. 
(2)  Use of any over-the-counter or prescribed medication, use of which medication could be reasonably anticipated to impair the employee's ability to perform his/her job functions in a safe and competent manner. 
(3)  The intentional inhalation, consumption, or absorption of any substance that could reasonably be anticipated to impair the employee's ability to perform his/her job functions in a safe and competent manner. 
(4)  Any "positive result" on a test for controlled substances; and 
(5)  Any refusal to submit to a required test. 
All employees will inform appropriate supervision of any therapeutic drug, which may have adverse side effects, use prior to performing any job function for the city. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— An employee found to have an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04 shall not perform, nor be permitted to perform, any safety-sensitive function for at least 24 hours. Before any employee return to work, he/she must undergo a return to duty test with a result of less than 0.02. 

Sec. 50-264. - Substance prohibited/prescription medications. 
Alcohol use. Meaning the consumption of any beverage, mixture, or preparation, including any medication containing alcohol which, when consumed, causes an alcohol concentration in excess of those prescribed above. 
Controlled substances. The city will conduct urinalysis to detect the presence of the following substances: 
• Marijuana 
• Cocaine 
• Opiates 
• Amphetamines 
• Phencyclidine (PCP) 
Prescription medications. Employees taking legally prescribed medication which may adversely affect job performance issued by a licensed health care professional familiar with the employee's work-related responsibilities must report such use to their immediate supervisor, and may be required to present written evidence from the health care professional which describes the effects such medications may have on the employee's ability to perform his/her tasks. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-265. - Types of testing. 
The following types of testing will be implemented at the city as part of our substance abuse policy. 
Under all circumstances, when an employee is directed to provide either a breath or urine sample in accordance with these procedures, he/she must immediately comply as instructed. Refusal will constitute a positive result, and the employee will be immediately removed from their job function and subject to termination. 
Pre-employment drug testing. 
(1)  All job applicants for safety sensitive or fiduciary responsibilities at the city will undergo testing for the presence of illegal drugs as a condition of employment. Any applicant with a confirmed positive test will be denied employment. 
(2)  Job applicant means a person who has applied for a position and has been offered employment conditioned upon successfully passing a substance abuse test and may have begun work pending the results of the test. 
(3)  All temporary and part-time workers for the city are subject to pre-employment testing or will be obtained from temporary agencies that have a certified testing program already in place. 
(4)  Applicants will be required to submit voluntarily to a urinalysis test at a laboratory chosen by the city, and by signing a consent agreement will release the city from liability. 
(5)  If the physician, official or lab personnel have reasonable suspicion to believe that the job-applicant has tampered with the specimen, the applicant will not be considered for employment. 
(6)  The city will not discriminate against applicants for employment because of a past history of drug abuse. It is the current abuse of drugs, preventing employees from performing their jobs properly, that the city will not tolerate. 
Random testing. Each year the city will conduct random drug and alcohol tests equal to 50 percent of the total average number of employees at the city during the calendar year. All random tests will be unannounced and the dates and times will vary throughout the year. 
All employees in safety sensitive or fiduciary jobs will have their names entered into a computer and a computerized random number generator software will be utilized to ensure that every employee has an equal chance of being selected each time names are chosen for testing. 
Once notified, an employee must proceed immediately to the assigned collection site. Refusal to submit constitutes a positive result and will result in immediate termination. Once an employee is tested, their name is available for selection the next time names are chosen. This ensures that every employee is eligible to be tested each time random tests are conducted. 
Reasonable suspicion testing. The city has adopted testing practices to identify employees in safety sensitive or fiduciary positions who use illegal drugs on or off the job or who abuse alcohol on the job. It shall be a condition of employment for all employees in safety sensitive or fiduciary positions to submit to substance abuse testing under the following circumstances. 
When there is reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee is using illegal drugs or abusing alcohol. Reasonable suspicion is based on a belief that an employee is using or has used drugs or alcohol in violation of the city policy drawn from specific objective and articulable facts and reasonable inference drawn from those facts in light of experience. Among other things, such facts and inferences may be based upon, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Observable phenomena while at work such as direct observation of substance abuse or the physical symptoms or manifestations of being impaired due to substance abuse. 
(2)  Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or a significant deterioration in work performance. 
(3)  A report of substance abuse provided by a reliable and credible source. 
(4)  Evidence that an individual has tampered with any substance abuse test during his/her employment with the current employer. 
(5)  Information that an employee has caused or contributed to an accident while at work or was directly involved in an accident. 
(6)  Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs while working or while on the employer's premises or while operating the employer's vehicle, machinery, or equipment. 
(7)  Other observable phenomena such as the odor of alcohol or drugs (i.e. marijuana) emanating from the body. 
If a supervisor has reasonable suspicion that an employee may be impaired by substances, i.e. drugs or alcohol, the supervisor must promptly fill out a drug/substance incident check sheet documenting the circumstances which formed the basis of the determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing. The record must be completed within 24 hours of the observed behavior or before the result of the drug test is released, whichever is earlier. A copy of this documentation shall be given to the employee upon request and the original documentation shall be kept confidential and maintained in a file for a minimum of one year. 
The supervisor should make a reasonable effort to have a second supervisor observe the employee if possible. The supervisor should discuss the situation with the employee to try and ascertain if an impairment exists. If the supervisor feels that grounds exist for a reasonable suspicion test, the supervisor should contact the personnel officer and request a drug and alcohol test. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-266. - Post-accident testing. 
Post-accident testing is called for when an employee has caused or contributed to an on-the-job injury that results in a loss of work time, which means any period of time during which an employee stops performing the normal duties of employment and leaves the place of employment to seek care from a licensed medical provider. The city also may send employees for post-accident testing if they are involved in an on-the-job accident where personal injury or damage to city vehicles or equipment shall be subject to post-accident testing. The employee shall notify their supervisor immediately following any vehicle or equipment accident. Post-accident is defined as drug and alcohol testing. 
Drivers shall submit to a drug and alcohol test as soon as possible after an accident, if the driver is found at fault in the accident. An accident is defined as an occurrence involving a motor vehicle operating on a public road which results in: 
(1)  The death of a person, bodily injury to a person that requires immediate medical attention away from the scene of the accident, time lost from work, or to seek medical attention, disabling damage to one or more motor vehicles as a result of the accident, requiring the vehicle to be transported away from the scene by a tow truck or other vehicle. The driver may not consume alcohol for eight hours following the accident, or until the alcohol test is administered, whichever is less and must submit to a drug test within 32 hours following an accident. 
Any driver involved in an accident that requires a post-accident testing is responsible for ensuring that a specimen is collected and forwarded to a certified laboratory in a manner that conforms with 49 C.F.R. Part 40. The city shall provide drivers with the information necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
If a driver is seriously injured and cannot provide a specimen for testing, that driver shall authorize the release of hospital reports or other documents that would indicate whether there were controlled substances in the driver's system. 
• The above section only applies to those employees in safety sensitive positions. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-267. - Return to duty-follow up testing. 
Employees retained in employment who have tested positive for controlled substances shall not be allowed to return to work or to operate any company motor vehicle or equipment until they have completed a rehabilitation program prescribed by a substance abuse professional and test negative on a return-to-duty drug and alcohol test. Any employee returning to work after a positive test result shall continue in any after-care program required by the city and shall be subject to follow-up testing for a period no less than 24 months and not more than 60 months after returning to work. The tests are conducted as part of a follow-up program to treatment for drug or alcohol abuse. Advance notice of testing will not be given to the employee. 
Any employee testing positive or controlled substances shall be given the opportunity to discuss alternative medical explanations for the test results with the medical review officer (MRO) before the test results are reported to the employer. This includes an opportunity for the employee to discuss what prescribed medication the employee is taking that might influence test results. If a controlled substance is prescribed for an employee by a licensed medical practitioner who is familiar with the employee's medical history and assigned duties, such use shall be an affirmative defense to disqualification under this policy. 
Any employee refusing to submit to testing under this section of the policy shall be treated as if the employee has tested positive for a controlled substance. 
Individual test results shall not be released by the city without the employee's written authorization. Drug and alcohol test results shall be kept separate from the employee's personnel records. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-268. - Drug testing process. 
The following process will be used by the city or its agent when performing a drug test: 
(1)  All drug tests will be conducted in a manner reasonable to protect the privacy of the individual and to prevent substitution or contamination of the specimen. 
(2)  Upon notification of selection for a drug test, the employee is to proceed immediately to the collection site for testing. Failure to report to the collection site will be considered the same as a positive test and disciplinary action will be taken up to including termination. 
(3)  Upon arrival of the donor, the employee will be required to produce photo identification. 
(4)  After verifying the identity of the employee, the collection technician (CT) will explain the testing process to the donor. 
(5)  The CT will record the donor's social security number on the chain of custody form (C.O.C.). 
(6)  The CT will ask the donor to remove any garments such as an overcoat. 
(7)  The donor will be asked to wash his/her hands. 
(8)  The CT, prior to testing, treats all toilets and urinals that have standing water with a bluing agent. 
(9)  All access to water taps will be taped off to prevent their use. 
(10)  The donor is instructed to go into the collection area and produce a minimum of 45 milliliters of urine into the collection container. 
(11)  The donor should immediately bring the specimen to the CT. 
(12)  The CT will view the specimen for any discoloration or settlement. The temperature of the specimen is to be checked within four minutes of collection and the temperature will be recorded on the C.O.C. form. 
(13)  The CT is to examine the urine sample for evidence of contamination. If the collection technician has reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee has tampered with a specimen, the urine will be disposed of and the donor will be required to provide an observed sample for testing. 
(14)  The CT should pour off 30 milliliters of urine into one collection container. The balance of the urine (up to 30 milliliters) is to be poured into a second collection container. 
(15)  Both samples are to be capped and sealed and a tamper proof security seal placed over the cap of each collection container. The CT should record the temperature on the C.O.C. form. 
(16)  The donor is to initial both seals and should sign the C.O.C. form. 
(17)  The donor should wash his/her hands. The CT should also was his/her hands or wear surgical gloves. 
(18)  The CT is to complete the C.O.C. form and package the sample for shipment or for testing at the medical facility. This is to be accomplished in full view of the donor. 
(19)  The donor's portion of the test is now complete. The employee is to return to their work assignment. 
(20)  The sample will be sent to a laboratory or forwarded to the laboratory on site that is certified by the substance abuse and mental health services administration for analysis. 
(21)  When the drug test result is received from the lab, it will be stored in a secure file separate from the personnel files. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-269. - Alcohol testing process. 
The following process will be used by city or its agent when performing an alcohol test. 
(1)  All alcohol tests will be conducted in a manner to protect reasonable the privacy of the individual 
(2)  All alcohol tests will be performed utilizing an evidential breath tester (EBT) listed on the U.S. Department of Transportation conforming products list (CPL.) 
(3)  All alcohol tests will be conducted by a certified breath alcohol technician (BAT) which is trained in the use of the specific EBT used to conduct the tests at the city. 
(4)  Upon notification of selection for an alcohol test, the employee is to proceed immediately to the testing site. Failure to report to the testing site will be considered the same as a positive test and disciplinary action will be taken up to and including termination. 
(5)  When the employee arrives at the testing site, he/she will be asked to produce photo identification. 
(6)  The BAT will explain the testing process to the employee and obtain data for completing the breath alcohol testing form. The data is stored in electronic form in the notebook PC attached to the EBT then printed onto the three-part collection form. The employee will be asked to verify the printed data and sign the breath alcohol testing form prior to taking the test. 
(7)  The employee will be instructed to blow into the mouth piece of the evidentiary breath testing devise (EBT) until the sample is automatically taken by the equipment. 
(8)  The EBT will analyze the breath sample and display the result. At the same time, the information will be sent from the EBT to the attached notebook PC and registered on the breath alcohol testing form stored electronically in the PC. The EBT also records the date and time of the test. 
(9)  The test results will be printed out and the employee will be instructed to sign and date the bottom of the breath alcohol testing form. 
(10)  If the initial screening test result is less than 0.02, the test is complete and the employee may return to his/her work assignment. In accordance with police department standards, any amount of alcohol will cause a certified officer/PD employee to go home and receive disciplinary action. 
(11)  If the test result is greater than 0.02, the employee must wait 15 minutes and take a second, confirmation test. During the waiting period, the employee may not smoke, eat or drink anything. 
(12)  If the confirmation test is below 0.02, the test is complete and the employee may return to their work assignment. If the confirmation test is above 0.02, the BAT will notify the personnel officer at the city so that required actions may be taken to remove the employee from duty. 
(13)  The alcohol test result will be stored in a secured file and maintained separate from employee personnel files. 
The medical review officer (MRO) shall notify employees of the results of controlled substance testing conducted under this section of the policy, provided the results are positive. Employees shall also be advised of the controlled substance identified in any positive test. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-270. - Actions taken following a confirmed positive test. 
Any employee of the city that has a confirmed positive test for marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, opiates (including heroin) or phencyclidine (PCP) or alcohol, will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
Employees have a right, at their expense, to request a re-test utilizing the split sample obtained during the original test. If the re-test results in a negative test, the original test will be voided. An employee will not be allowed to submit another specimen for testing. 
Within five days after receipt of a confirmed positive drug test from the MRO, the employee will be notified in writing the fact that he/she tested positive. The employee will also be informed about the consequences of testing positive and the options available to the job applicant or employee. 
A job applicant or employee may request a copy of a positive test result. 
Any employee of the city that has a confirmed positive test for alcohol of 0.02—0.039 will be subject to disciplinary action. Employees with an alcohol test result of 0.04 or higher will be subject to termination. 
Any employee that tests positive for alcohol, (0.02 or higher), will be given a confirmation test for alcohol to verify that initial test results. A 15-minute deprivation period will be observed between the initial alcohol test and the confirmation test. The deprivation period will assure that any residual mouth alcohol has an opportunity to dissipate before the confirmation test is conducted. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-271. - Refusal to submit to an alcohol or drug test. 
Refusal by an employee of the city to complete and sign the breath alcohol testing form (step 2 [of section 50-269]), to provide breath, to provide an adequate amount of breath or otherwise to cooperate with the testing process in a way that prevents the completion of the test, shall be noted by the BAT (breath alcohol technician) in the remarks section of the form. The testing process shall be terminated and the BAT will immediately notify the personnel officer. The refusal to test will result in the employee's termination. 
An employee of city that refuses to provide a urine sample or otherwise to cooperate with the testing process in a way that prevents the completion of the drug test, shall be noted by the CT (collection technician) in the remarks section of the chain of custody form (C.O.C.). The testing process shall be terminated and the CT will immediately notify the personnel officer. The refusal to test will be considered a positive test and the employee will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-272. - Shy bladder situation. 
If a donor is unable to produce at least 45 milliliters in a single void, a "shy bladder" condition exists. In this case, the donor would be requested to sit in view of the CT and is given the opportunity to consume up to 40 ounces of fluid. The donor may take up to three hours to repeat the test in an attempt to produce 45 milliliters of urine. If the donor is still not able to produce an adequate sample, the donor must be evaluated by a licensed medical doctor to determine if the inability represents a refusal to be tested. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-273. - Shy lung situation. 
If a donor is unable to provide an adequate amount of breath to register a result on the EBT (evidential breath tester), the donor will be referred to a doctor for evaluation. If the doctor determines the donor is not physically impaired, the test may be considered positive and appropriate disciplinary action will be taken up to and including termination. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-274. - Policy certification. 
The city drug-free workplace program is certified by the Georgia Workers' Compensation Board in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 9, art. 11. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-275. - Statement of confidentiality. 
All information received through substance abuse testing is confidential, but may be used or received in evidence, or obtained in discovery, or disclosed in any civil or administrative proceeding when the information is relevant to the city defense, e.g., a workers' compensation hearing. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-276. - Employee assistance program. 
The city has provided, as a core benefit, an employee assistance program. Confidential counseling is available through the EAP for any employee with a substance abuse problem. If an employee has a substance abuse problem, we encourage confidential discussion of the problem with his/her immediate supervisor and the personnel officer. The supervisor and personnel officer will assist the employee with obtaining professional counseling and/or treatment through the company employee assistance program. Participation in this program will not be a mitigating factor in regards to violation of the substance abuse policy. 
If an employee acknowledges that he/she has a substance abuse problem, after being notified of his/her random selection for substance abuse testing, the employee still will be required to submit to testing consistent with this policy. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-277. - Federal Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988. 
As a condition of employment, employees must abide by the terms of this policy and must notify the city in writing of any conviction of a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring in the workplace no later than five calendar days after such conviction. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-278. - Employee education. 
Every employee of the city will receive a minimum of two hours of education per year on substance abuse and its effects on the workplace. Training sessions will be conducted twice a year. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Sec. 50-279. - Supervisor training. 
Supervisor training is critical to the overall success of the substance abuse policy at the city. The supervisor is the first line of defense in recognizing and dealing with the employee who may be affected by drugs or alcohol. 
Each supervisor will receive training in recognizing substance abuse problems and to make decision when dealing with such situations. All supervisors receive the same training as employees plus an additional two hours per year. 
( Ord. of 12-2-2013 ) 
Chapter 52 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-05, adopted November 6, 2017 , amended ch. 52, §§ 52-1—52-14, in its entirety. Former ch. 52, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, adopted September 21, 2015, . 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 74. 

Sec. 52-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Sign Code." 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter recognizes that signs perform an important function by identifying residences and businesses and facilitating the communication of information to the public. However, minimum control of signs is necessary to minimize visual clutter within the city so as to safeguard life, provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public by providing standards and regulations pertinent to the location, size, illumination, erection, maintenance and quality of materials of all signs and outdoor advertising structures; to provide protection to the general public from the use of signs that, by their size, motion, color, brightness, illumination, or their distracting demand for attention, endanger the physical and mental well-being of the pubic and create hazards to traffic. 
By enacting this chapter, the mayor and council intend to balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan; protect the public health, safety and welfare; reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; maintain the historical image of the city; protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-3. - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or other city officer or employee, designated by the city manager, in writing, to administer this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, certain words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular shall include the plural, the plural the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "person" included a firm, corporation, association, trust or partnership. The word "city" shall mean the city of Senoia, Georgia. 
(b)  Unless otherwise indicated, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
Aggregate sign area means the total of the sign areas of all signs within the classification being referenced. 
Animated sign means any sign that has moving parts or includes action, motion, changing colors, or the optical illusion of action, motion or color changes, including signs utilizing electronic ink, and signs set in motion by mechanical or electronic means or by the atmosphere, including wind-actuated elements such as flags, spinners, banners and aerial devices. Animated sign also includes signs that emit sound, smoke or other special effects. 
Area of sign, see Sign area. 
Awning and canopy sign means a sign imposed or painted upon any roof-like structure which provides either permanent or temporary shelter for adjacent walkways or entrances to a building or property. 
Banner means a sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations, applied to cloth, paper, plastic or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing, the same being characteristically hung or displayed on buildings or suspended in mid-air across streets, passageways and other areas visible to the general public. Flags and feather flags are excluded from the definition of banner. 
Bench sign means any sign attached to or painted upon a bench or other seat placed in the public view and meant to be for public use or viewing. 
Billboard means any ground sign in excess of 35 square feet in sign area or any wall sign in excess of the aggregate sign allowance for wall signs provided by this chapter. 
Changeable copy sign means any permanent sign constructed in such a manner that all or any portion of the sign area is capable of being changed either manually or by electronic means. 
Directory sign, see Shared sign. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Flag means a sign consisting of any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, logos or symbols, used as an official symbol of a government or any other entity or organization. Feather flags are excluded from the definition of flag. 
Feather flag means a sign composed of fabric, plastic or other pliable material oriented in a vertical direction and supported by a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground as its primary means of support. Also known as a "feather banner." 
Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. Flashing signs are a form of animated sign. 
Frontage building means the width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular establishment. 
Frontage road means the width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Ground sign means a permanent sign affixed directly to the ground and which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Hearing officer means an attorney appointed by the mayor and council to hear appeals under this chapter; the hearing officer may be the same person appointed under the zoning and land development code to hear other administrative matters, variances and appeals. 
Height of sign means the distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign face. 
Illuminated sign direct means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
Illuminated sign indirect means a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Illuminated sign means a sign lit in any manner by an artificial light source, whether internally or externally lit, including but not limited to neon signs and any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by artificial lighting. 
Marquee means a roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
Marquee sign means a sign painted on, attached to or hung from a marquee. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign that was legal at the time of its erection but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Planned center (office, commercial, or industrial), means a group of retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries or any other businesses planned to serve the public, the entirety of which is in common ownership or condominium ownership. 
Portable sign means a sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a stationary structure. 
Roof sign means any sign or graphic erected or maintained on a building, any portion of which extends above the lowest horizontal line of any roof. 
Shared sign means a ground sign that includes smaller panels upon which individual businesses, offices, professionals, industries or other entities located within a planned center may provide their own message. 
Sidewalk or sandwich sign means a portable sign located on the sidewalk directly outside the establishment to which it relates and formed by two sign panels hinged at the top that open into a triangular shape that form the support for the sign. 
Sign means a device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others and installed in such a manner as to be visible and/or readable to members of the general public. Signs include communications in view of the public that direct attention to a particular product, place, activity, service, person, business, institution, thought or idea. 
Sign area means and shall be computed as the entire area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame, other material, open space or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. The supports, uprights or structure on which any sign is supported shall be included in determining the sign area whenever such supports are designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the display. The sign area of painted or affixed wall signs, when composed of letters and/or graphics only, is the sum of the area of a rectangle which encloses all of the letters and/or graphics. Only one face of a double-faced sign, with parallel opposing faces 15 inches or less apart and bearing identical copy, shall be used in computing the area. 
Sign face means the part of a sign that is or can be used for communicating the message of the sign. 
Standard informational sign means a sign with a sign area not greater than six square feet and intended for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, and otherwise meeting the standards of section 52-10. 
Swinging or projecting sign means a sign projecting more than 12 inches from the outside wall or walls of any building or supports upon which it is located. 
Temporary sign, see portable sign, sidewalk or sandwich sign. 
Trailer sign means any sign which is mounted on any trailer or truck and may be moved from one location to another by means of being towed by a vehicle. Trailer signs are a form of portable sign, including where attempts to permanently affix them to the ground are made. 
Wall sign means a permanent sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 12 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign. 
Window sign means a sign that includes any letters, words, numerals, symbols or graphics located on the window and plainly visible from the exterior of the building. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-5. - Sign permit required; fee. 
(a)  Except where specifically excluded from obtaining a permit by section 52-8, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post, display, substantially change, alter or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a permit in the manner prescribed herein. The permit number shall be placed on the sign permitted. 
(b)  The city clerk shall collect a sign permit fee, which will be set by the council and kept in the office of the city clerk, prior to issuing any sign construction permit. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-6. - Sign permit application; procedure for obtaining permit. 
(a)  Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the code enforcement department on forms provided for that purpose by the city. Each application shall be accompanied by plans and drawings showing the sign area, size of supports, height, method of attachment intended for use, vertical and horizontal distances between such sign and the finished grade at site of location, and horizontal distances between such sign and controlling right-of-way lines. The application shall include a photograph or line drawing of the sign depicting precisely the size and shape of the sign face. The city manager shall have 30 days to complete a review of the application and make a determination as to whether the permit shall issue. 
(1)  The city manager shall issue a sign construction permit for each application that meets the requirements of this chapter within the time frame provided by subsection (a). After such sign is constructed and in place, the applicant shall notify the city manager within five working days that the sign is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall be issued within five working days, provided the sign has been constructed and located according to the provisions of this chapter and applicable construction and electrical codes. Final approval converts the construction permit into a sign permit without further action of the applicant or city. 
(2)  Sign applications that are incomplete, fail to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter, or which do not include payment of required fees, shall be returned to the applicant within 15 days of receipt of an application; the 30-day period for review shall recommence when a completed application is submitted. Should the city manager fail to take action within the mandated 30 days for application review, the permit shall be considered approved; provided further that issuance of a permit caused by delay in review shall not legalize any violation of this chapter or vest any rights to a sign that is prohibited in whole or in part, by this chapter. 
(3)  Any applicant who is dissatisfied by a decision of the code enforcement department may appeal such decision to the hearing officer. Such appeal must be in writing and shall be filed within ten business days of the decision being appealed. The city manager will schedule the matter for hearing within 30 days. Final decision on an appeal by a sign applicant shall be made no later than 45 days from the date of filing the appeal. Should the hearing officer fail to take action within the mandated time, the decision under appeal shall be considered overruled. 
(b)  In hearing an appeal under this section, the hearing officer shall be bound by the standards contained in this chapter. At the hearing the appellant shall have the right to introduce evidence, may testify, may be represented by counsel, and may cross-examine witnesses. The burden of supporting the decision rests with the city manager. The city clerk will record the appeal proceedings. The appellant has the right to supply a court reporter at his or her own expense, if desired. The hearing officer shall reach a decision within 14 calendar days after hearing. If no decision is made within 45 days of appeal filing, the appeal will be deemed to overrule the city manager's decision. Decisions of the hearing officer to affirm the decision of the city manager or to overrule the decision of the city manager shall be reduced to writing and be served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original decision. 
(c)  In the event an applicant whose permit has been denied or a permit holder whose permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager, such applicant or permit holder may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-7. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city. 
(1)  Animated signs. 
(2)  Flashing signs. 
(3)  Billboards. 
(4)  Roof signs. 
(5)  Direct illumination, with the exception of areas zoned industrial. 
(6)  Trailer signs. 
(7)  Search lights, laser beacons, and similar devices. 
(8)  Signs erected on a public right-of-way except signs erected by a governmental authority having official jurisdiction. 
(9)  Signs that contain or are in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal. 
(10)  Signs affixed to utility poles, trees, street markers and fence posts. 
(11)  Signs that advertise or promote illegal activities. 
(12)  Signs that are erected, located or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress and egress of any door or emergency exit. 
(13)  Signs that include profane or obscene messages. 
(14)  Signs not in good repair, in violation of codes, or containing or exhibiting broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters. 
(15)  Signs painted or erected directly onto roofs, walls, antennas or water towers. 
(16)  Feather flags. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-8. - Signs exempt from permit requirement. 
The following signs are exempt from requirements for obtaining a permit under this chapter, provided that each exempt sign shall nevertheless comply with all physical standards of this chapter, except where physical standards for such signs are provided by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices: 
(1)  Signs of a governmental body or agency erected or posted pursuant to requirements of law and meeting physical standards of such law. 
(2)  Traffic control devices meeting the standards of The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(3)  Signs erected entirely on private property as prescribed by Federal or State law or regulation and meeting the standards of such law or regulation. 
(4)  Standard informational signs. 
(5)  Building cornerstones and markers not exceeding ten square feet and permanently mounted into the wall of the building. 
(6)  Street number identification for buildings and structures meeting standards of state law and local ordinances, measuring four inches or less in height. 
(7)  Signs erected for home occupations meeting the standards of this Code and designating historic properties, districts and landmarks, not exceeding the standards for a home occupation sign. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-9. - General regulations. 
(a)  Brand names and trademarks, or a combination of brand name and trademark, shall constitute a sign and are subject to the standards of this chapter where they are placed in such a manner as to be readable from public right-of-way. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no sign shall be permitted within 25 feet of state highway right-of-way or a major thoroughfare. 
(c)  Light from indirect illumination signs shall not escape the property nor shine onto any roadway or neighboring property. 
(d)  Conforming signs may be relocated from their original business site to a new business site without a change in copy provided their placement at the new site is legal. Where change of copy is to be made, the relocated sign shall be considered a new sign and a permit shall be required. 
(e)  Exposed neon and other similar tube type illumination, bare incandescent or fluorescent lights shall not be permitted as an integral part of the sign face of any sign. Neon, fluorescent and similar tube type illumination is permitted as a light source for direct illumination signs, provided the sign face is of sufficient opacity that the light produced by the tube appears as diffused light only. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-10. - Regulations by types of signs. 
The following regulations pertain to types of signs erected within the city. Signs exempt from permit requirements nevertheless require conformance with size, height, area and all other limitations of this section and section 52-9 and 52-13. 
(1)  Ground signs are permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts provided no ground sign shall have a height greater than six feet above the centerline of the nearest public street. If topography does not allow six feet above the centerline of the nearest public road to be achieved, the sign shall not exceed six feet in height as measured from the base of the sign. No ground sign shall have an area greater than 35 square feet. No ground sign shall be located within ten feet of a street right-of-way or within 30 feet of any other sign. There is a limit of one ground sign per platted lot per street frontage. All ground signs must be shown on a landscape plan and must have a planted landscaped bed that has a width of at least half the height of the sign surrounding the ground sign. The sign and landscaping must be permanently maintained and protected by curbing from vehicular incursion. Changeable copy is permitted to be included on a ground sign provided the changeable copy portion of the sign does not exceed 60 percent of the sign area. 
(2)  Wall signs are permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts. The aggregate sign area of all wall signs on a building shall not exceed 20 percent of the square footage of each side of the building where the building is in a single tenancy or 20 percent of the square footage of each portion of the façade devoted to the tenant in the case of a multi-tenant building. Awning and canopy signs as well as marquee signs may be utilized in addition to, or in lieu of wall signs, provided the overall aggregate sign area of all such signs does not exceed 20 percent of the square footage provided herein. Owners of planned centers shall design sign allocations for each unit within a building so as to provide for signs for each tenant in keeping with the overall regulations prescribed herein. One sign per structure may utilize changeable copy as a portion of a wall sign provided such changeable copy does not exceed 60 percent of the sign area. 
(3)  Shared signs are permitted in areas in which a planned center, whether office, commercial or industrial in nature, has been approved by the zoning authority of the city. Such signs shall allocate space for the center and shall not exceed 60 square feet, provided further, that each tenant located in such center shall be permitted a panel on the shared sign not to exceed eight square feet in area. A theatre within a planned center may erect one sign not exceeding 50 square feet in sign area, provided further no theatre sign shall be permitted within 50 feet of any other ground, freestanding, or shared sign. 
(4)  Window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of window area. 
(5)  Banners are permitted for up to 30 days no more than three times during any calendar year for each applicant within a commercial or industrial zoning district. Banners require a permit and payment of a permit fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. No banner shall exceed 35 square feet in sign area. Banners are to be erected flat against the building to which they relate and shall be secured on all four corners. One banner may be erected across city streets per special noncommercial event open to the general public subject to securing a permit from the mayor and council. Such banner shall not exceed the 30 day limitation provided to commercial and industrial properties and shall be removed within 48 hours of the completion of the event to which it relates. All banners shall be maintained in an orderly fashion. No tattered or faded copy is allowed. All banners must be secured on all four sides. Failure to comply with these standards shall result in the banner being removed immediately from public right-of-way by the city or order to remove the banner immediately from private property. 
(6)  Standard informational signs are permitted for each parcel in commercial or industrial zoning districts up to an aggregate of 12 square feet per parcel. No permit is required. In commercial and industrial zoning districts, standard informational signs may be erected through use of a stake or metal frame inserted into the ground, provided that no more than three standard informational signs may be erected per parcel at any one time. In commercial and industrial districts, standard informational signs may also be placed within windows of the property, provided that no more than one such standard informational sign shall appear in any window. All standard informational signs shall be maintained in good condition, free from tears, faded or illegible copy or other defects, and installed squarely in relation to the right-of-way. All standard informational signs shall be erected only on private property and only with permission of the property owner. 
(7)  Standard informational signs are permitted for each parcel in residential zoning districts up to an aggregate of 24 square feet per parcel. Each standard informational sign shall be secured in the ground by stake or metal frame. No permit is required. All standard informational signs shall be maintained in good condition, free from tears, faded or illegible copy or other defects, and installed squarely in relation to the right-of-way. All standard informational signs shall be erected on private property and only with the permission of the property owner. 
(8)  Sidewalk or sandwich signs are permitted on properties in the commercial zoning districts of the city subject to the following restrictions. All sidewalk or sandwich signs shall be placed on the sidewalk directly in front of the premises to which they relate and within six feet of the primary entrance to the property. Only one such sign per premises is allowed. Sidewalk or sandwich signs shall only be used where at least five feet of unobstructed sidewalk is available for pedestrians utilizing the sidewalk. Sidewalk or sandwich signs must be displayed only when the premises are open to business; at all other times they are to be removed to the interior of the premises. No sidewalk or sandwich sign shall exceed four feet in height or 24 inches in width. Sidewalk or sandwich signs shall be composed of wood or metal, with finished surfaces, provided that chalkboard surfacing is permitted on up to 80 percent of the sign face. 
(9)  Home occupations are permitted the use of one permanent sign, provided such sign does not exceed four square feet in sign area and provided further that only one such sign per business shall be allowed and provided further the sign does not obstruct view of street traffic. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-11. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any sign located within the city limits that was legal at the time of its erection but which does not conform with the provision hereof shall be allowed to remain in place subject to the limitations of this section. 
(1)  No increase in the size of a nonconforming sign is permitted. 
(2)  Existing signs that were legally created and which have become nonconforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this chapter due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this chapter, but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner, except as to become conforming. 
(3)  In all zoning districts the following nonconforming signs shall be prohibited and shall be removed by the owner: 
a.  Signs illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances. 
b.  Signs made of paper, cloth or non-durable materials. 
c.  Signs located in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Upon the failure to comply with any requirement of this section, the code enforcement department may cause the removal of the sign at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  Any attempt to add a new technology to an existing nonconforming sign shall negate its nonconforming status and require removal of the sign structure in its entirety. 
(d)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as electrical repairs or lettering repairs, panel changes or structure repairs (less than or equal to 25 percent of the value of the sign prior to repair) shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs (over 25 percent of the value of the signs prior to repair) or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter, provided that signs damaged by fire, vehicle accident or Act of God may be restored to their original condition. 
(e)  Each nonconforming sign shall be identified by the city within 90 days of the enactment of this chapter. 
(f)  New signs related to legally established nonconforming uses of property may be erected provided the signs comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  No new sign shall be erected upon an old foundation that is located on a public right-of-way or which would cause any part of the sign to overhang a public right-of-way. 
(h)  If a nonconforming sign is installed on or overhangs any portion of a public right-of-way, the sign and its foundation shall be removed once the commercial entity to which the sign is attached ceases. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-12. - Removal of certain signs. 
(a)  The code enforcement department shall have full authority to remove, without notice to the owners thereof, and impound for a period of five business days: 
(1)  Signs located on public rights-of-way except official signs erected by the jurisdiction controlling the right-of-way or other governmental entity pursuant to law; 
(2)  Signs located on city property that are attached to or painted on any telephone pole, light pole, telegraph pole, other than signs erected by the owner of such poles and required for identification or access; 
(3)  Signs attached to or painted on any tree, rock or other natural object located on city owned property. 
(b)  The code enforcement department may institute removal procedures after due notice for any sign that shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or is otherwise in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The code enforcement department shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as abandoned, dangerous or materially, electrically or structurally defective signs or a sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation to this chapter. 
(d)  The code enforcement department shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the sign, and specify the violation involved and that shall state that if the sign is not removed or the violation corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, not to exceed 30 days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  All notices mailed by the code enforcement department shall be sent certified mail and first-class mail. Any time period provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail or, if the first class is not returned, after three days of mailing. Alternatively, notice may also be personally hand-delivered to the sign owner, and notice shall be effective on such date of hand delivery. 
(f)  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign if different than the property owner, and the occupant of the property. If any of such persons is unknown or cannot be found, the notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. 
(g)  Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the code enforcement department ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal within ten business days after receipt of notice. 
(h)  Appeals of decisions by the code enforcement department, including but not limited to, orders to repair or demolish signs shall be taken to the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal within ten business days of the code enforcement officer's decision. The appeal hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in section 52-6(b). Any subsequent appeal shall be taken as provided in section 52-6(c). 
(i)  In the event no appeal is filed, or appeal is filed and final determination has been made, all signs for which notice of removal or notice to take corrective action has been given shall be removed or brought into compliance within the original time period specified in the notice or within five business days after final determination by the hearing officer, provided that where permanent signs are installed, the time period may be extended for up to two weeks by the code enforcement department where removal requires engagement of a sign contractor or other specialized expertise; and provided further that a sign that constitutes an imminent hazard to life may be removed by the city pursuant to subsection (k) without further delay. 
(j)  Any sign removed by the code enforcement department pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as city property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign's removal. 
(k)  When it is determined by the code enforcement department that the sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety, and contact cannot be made with the sign owner or property owner, no written notice will have to be served. In this emergency situation, the code enforcement department shall document the imminent danger and its attempt to contact the sign owner and property owner, and may correct the danger, all cost being charged to the sign owner and property owner. 
(l)  If it is necessary for the code enforcement department to remove the sign pursuant to the provisions of this section and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any materials derived in the removal, the city may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable, and shall keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost or removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Where the proceeds derived from such sale are less than the cost of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located, such lien to be collectible in the same manner as city property taxes. 
(m)  In the event any sign regulated by this chapter is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the code enforcement department may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of this chapter, requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court. 
(n)  The city may also institute action for injunctive relief or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use to correct or abate such violations. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-13. - Construction requirements. 
No sign shall be constructed in such a manner that it will hider vehicle traffic, pedestrians or block any entrances or exits from any building or sidewalks. Each sign shall be securely erected and free of any protruding nails, tacks and wire. 
No sign shall be constructed with any type material, finished letters, characters or surface that will reflect sunlight or any other type of light of such an intensity as to hinder vehicle traffic or in any way create a nuisance to the surrounding area. 
All signs containing wood in the structure or sign face and frame or any part thereof shall be pained or stained and shall be perpetually maintained. 
No wall sign or its supports shall protrude more than 12 inches from the wall on which it is mounted and shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted. 
All signs shall be constructed in such a manner and fastened in such a way as to prevent movement by wind action. 
No part of a hanging sign shall be lower than eight feet above the lowest adjacent ground level. 
No wood, metal or any other type of supports for ground or freestanding signs shall be less than four by four inches in size for each support or less than three inches in diameter if circular. 
Wood signs of less than 12-inch thickness shall be framed on the two sides attached to the supports. Supports can be considered framing if the sign is so designed with supports as part of framing on both sign face areas. 
All signs located within the historic overlay shall be of a material and size that does not detract from the architectural integrity, historic significance, and historic character of the building or its surrounding area. The sign should not significantly clash or undermine the historic atmosphere of the district. The architectural structure and color of the sign are of particular significance in determining consistency with the historic overlay. 
No signs, constructed in an area zoned commercial in the designated historic neighborhood overlay shall be made of a lightweight synthetic wall cladding (EFIS) that includes foam plastic insulation and thin synthetic coatings. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 52-14. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined according to section 1-5, in addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 11-6-2017 ) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, adopted Mar. 16, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 54, §§ 54-1—54-10, and enacted a new Ch. 54 as set out herein. The former Ch. 54 pertained to solid waste and derived from Code 1980, §§ 4-2-3—4-2-7; Ord. of 11-4-96(1)). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; burning trash, garbage, etc., § 34-1; health and sanitation, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Local solid waste management regulations, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; local comprehensive solid waste management plan, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; cost reimbursement fees and surcharges, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39; reduction of amount of solid waste generated in city, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.1; local restrictions on disposal of tires, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; local and regional solid waste management authorities, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means and includes the waste products from coal, wood and other fuels used for cooking and heating from all public and private residences and establishments. 
Building rubbish means waste material resulting from construction, remodeling, repairs and demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings and other structures, including driveways and walks, and it comprises waste and rejected matter such as excavated earth, stones, bricks, plaster, wallpaper, sheetrock and lathes, lumber, shingles, tile, concrete and waste parts occasioned by the installation or replacement of plumbing, heating systems, electrical work and roofing. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Garbage means the waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Industrial waste means solid waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants or shops and garages, such as paper, cardboard, cartons, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust, excelsior, shavings, floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, glass and other waste products. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Rubbish means a variety of combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, rubber, discarded clothing and similar materials. 
Scavenging means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and includes garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes and any other wastes in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this section. 
Standard container means and includes a durable, rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, rodent-proof, watertight plastic or metal container with handles or bails, having a tight-fitting cover, and having no more than a 30-gallon capacity. 
Waste means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
Yard rubbish means tree branches, stumps, twigs, bushes, weeds, and general yard and garden waste materials and includes stone and dirt rakings and yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-2. - Receipt of service required. 
In order to protect the public health and sanitation, to prevent the spread of contagious or infectious diseases, and to prevent the breeding of rodents, insects and other vermin, all improved residential properties (single-family and multifamily residences) within the city shall receive regular solid waste collection services from the city. All residential customers will be provided once-per-week collection of their solid waste debris. No owner of a residential property shall be exempt or relieved from payment of the monthly sanitation collection and handling fee by reason of failure or refusal to receive services as provided. Such fee shall be imposed against the property itself and payment of the fee shall be enforceable and collected as provided by law for levy and sale of in rem liens. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-3. - Waste acceptable for collection. 
Yard rubbish constitutes waste acceptable for collection by the city or its designated contractor. Garbage constitutes waste acceptable for collection by a private contractor for the city. Furniture and appliances may be picked up with prior notice for a set fee. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-4. - Waste unacceptable for collection. 
(a)  The following items constitute waste unacceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)  Dangerous materials or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics and explosives; 
(2)  Building rubbish; 
(3)  Ashes; 
(4)  Yard rubbish except as provided herein; 
(5)  Automobile and motor vehicle tires; 
(6)  All other solid waste not specifically authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  Any person responsible for waste not acceptable for collection by the city or its designated contractor shall make any arrangements as may be necessary for the collection and disposal of the unacceptable waste. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-5. - Preparation, storage of acceptable waste. 
(a)  All residential solid waste stored outside the residence pending collection shall be placed inside approved containers with lids tightly affixed. Approved containers shall be those issued by the city or its designated contractor to residential customers pursuant to this article, designed to be rolled to curbside for periodic collection. All waste must be bagged and placed inside the container. Each container shall bear a serial number and shall be registered to the assigned customer. All containers shall remain the property of the city or its designated contractor. Additionally, in the event a container is lost, stolen or intentionally damaged, the city or its designated carrier reserves the right to charge the customer the replacement cost of the container. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of each residence or business or commercial establishment shall store acceptable waste in standard containers which shall be provided by the city or its designated contractor and which shall at all times be maintained in a good state of repair. Each owner or occupant shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of waste upon the property occupied by him. 
(c)  Any acceptable waste that cannot be placed in standard containers shall be secured and placed alongside the container. 
(d)  Except when taken to the curbside for scheduled collection, containers shall be consistently located in a rear or side yard. 
(e)  Containers shall be used exclusively for the storage and transport of solid waste to the curbside. 
(f)  If it is necessary, extra containers may be obtained for an additional monthly fee, as determined by the current fee schedule in affect at the time such additional cart is provided. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-6. - Placement for collection; yard trimmings and yard rubbish. 
(a)  Customers shall place their container at curbside in front of the customer's residence not earlier than 12:00 noon on the day prior to the scheduled service. 
(b)  All containers shall be removed from the curbside and returned to a rear or side yard of the residence no later than 12:00 noon on the day following the scheduled service. 
(c)  Yard trimmings shall be placed on the street curb on pickup day. These items shall be secured in biodegradable bags of a type, size and material designed for solid waste storage and disposal. Disposable bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and loaded in such a manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. No bag that cannot be loaded by one person shall be collected. 
(d)  Fallen limbs, trees, cut limbs, cut trees and trash of this category shall be cut by the property owner into lengths of not more than four feet that will be of a size that may be handled by one person or of a size to be consumed by a chipper machine. Other trash which shall include yard wastes, weeds, grass, trimmings, leaves, brush and pine straw must be neatly piled at the curb or placed in bio-degradable bags. All trash and cuttings shall be placed as near as possible to the street or sidewalk right-of-way adjacent to the property owner's property but not so as to get into the street or block the sidewalk. At no time shall trash be placed in gutters, drains, walkways or alleys or streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-7. - Unauthorized accumulations. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within a reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice from the city shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-8. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-9. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 54-10. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings should be sorted and stored as provided herein for collecting and transporting to a site designated by the city to be chipped. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-16-2009) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Constitution reference— Street construction and maintenance, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(4). 
State Law reference— Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, etc., O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-43, 32-6-1, 36-30-10; eminent domain, O.C.G.A. tit. 22; highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. tit. 32; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; subdivisions abutting on state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; streets and sidewalks generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; contractors' bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - RULES AND REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-01, adopted Mar. 2, 2009, changed the title of Art. I from in general to rules and regulations. 

Sec. 58-1. - Sidewalk construction. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any person of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1-6) 
Sec. 58-2. - Injuring streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1-7) 
Sec. 58-3. - Parades and demonstrations; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons or organization to parade, congregate or demonstrate on public streets or property within the city without securing a proper permit from the city clerk. The permit shall bear the signature of the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 7-4-1) 
Sec. 58-4. - Sidewalk sales by vending machine prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place any type of vending machine, including but not limited to vending machines which dispense soft drinks and vending machines which dispense candy, snacks, crackers, cookies and such other items, on public sidewalks. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit temporary displays of items for retail sale on public sidewalks of the city; however, such sales may not be by the use of vending machines. 
(Ord. of 11-4-96(2)) 
Sec. 58-5. - Violent acts. 
(a)  Any person convicted by any court of a misdemeanor involving violence or convicted of any felony committed in connection with an event at a city or county recreation facility shall be excluded from city recreation property for a minimum period of two years or for the term of any sentence or probated service imposed by any court deciding a particular case, whichever is greater. 
(b)  At the conclusion of the period of exclusion as set out above, an individual excluded from city recreation property may petition the mayor and council of the city to have that individual's exclusionary status lifted. The mayor and council when considering a petition for lifting of excluded status shall consider the nature and severity of the crime committed and shall not be obligated to lift the excluding status of any individual who, in the opinion of the commission, poses a threat to the safety and health of citizens using city recreation facilities. 
(c)  Any person who petitions and his or her exclusionary status is continued by the mayor and council may petition again at the end of an additional two-year period for permission to attend and participate in city recreation events and activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall imply that the mayor and council is ever obligated to lift a person's exclusion from city recreation facilities and in appropriate cases an individual may never be allowed to attend or participate at city recreational facilities and events. 
(e)  On recommendation of the city manager or his designee, the mayor and council may, in aggravated cases, exclude a person charged with a misdemeanor involving violence or any felony from city recreation property pending the outcome of a court's determination of those charges. 
(f)  Any person excluded from city recreation property for any period of time and who is found to have trespassed on city property during that exclusion shall be banned from use of city recreation facilities for life. 
(g)  All independent leagues using city recreation facilities shall establish rules governing the conduct of players, coaches and spectators while attending or participating in recreational activities on city property in a form acceptable to the city and shall post or otherwise distribute those rules to all participants. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-03, §§ I, II, 5-4-2015 ) 
Sec. 58-6. - Uses. 
The use of outdoor recreation facilities or sports fields is prohibited when, according to the National Weather Service, the following conditions exist: 
(1)  A tornado warning or watch; 
(2)  A thunderstorm warning or watch; 
(3)  A severe weather or winter weather advisory. 
NOTE: Leagues must monitor the National Weather Service when conditions exist that may lead to the issuance of any of the above notices. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-03, §§ I, II, 5-4-2015 ) 
Sec. 58-7. - Fishing. 
Fishing is permitted in Marimac Lakes Park from May 1 through September 30, with the following restrictions: 
(1)  A valid Georgia Fishing License for those over the age of 16. 
(2)  Children under 16 must be accompanied by a licensed adult. 
(3)  There is no fee for residents and employees of the city. Non-residents must pay a permit fee of $10.00 per day or $40.00 per season at city hall. 
(4)  Fishing in Marimac Lakes Park is for recreational purposes. All fish caught in Marimac Lakes Park must be released back into the lake. 
(5)  The city reserves the right to hold special fishing events at any time. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-06, § 2, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 15-03, §§ I, II, 5-4-2015 ) 
Sec. 58-8. - Prohibited. 
The following is a list of prohibited items and activity on or about city recreation facilities, sports fields, or any surrounding areas being property of the city: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages are allowed. Alcoholic beverages will be allowed in the Stone Lodge at Marimac Lakes Park if a rental agreement has been entered into and beverages are served by a caterer licensed in accordance with section 6-52 [6-98], providing however that no glass, can or bottle is taken out of the building. Alcoholic beverage will be allowed in accordance with a special events permit as described herein. 
(2)  No littering. Waste must be placed in trash receptacles or removed from the premises. 
(3)  With the exception of fireworks displays sponsored by the city, no explosive substances, including, but not limited to, fireworks are allowed. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm on or about city recreation facilities, sports fields, or any surrounding areas in accordance with the authority vested in the city by the General Assembly in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173. The carrying of any firearm at a public gathering shall be regulated in accordance with state law. 
(5)  Pets are prohibited unless the activity is approved by the city manager. At Merrimac Lakes Park, pets are permitted, however the handler must adhere to the leash law of the city and remove all waste created by the pet. At the Seavy Street Park, pets must be on a physical leash of not more than six feet. 
(6)  Skateboards are allowed in designated areas only. 
(7)  Gambling will not be tolerated. 
(8)  No smoking allowed unless in parking lots or designated areas. 
(9)  No player, official, spectator, or coach shall engage in verbal or physical abuse for any reason. 
(10)  No fighting will be tolerated. 
(11)  No profanity will be allowed by players, coaches, or spectators. 
(12)  Rules governing storm warnings and watches will be strictly adhered. All players, coaches and spectators shall leave the field immediately in event of an electrical storm. 
(13)  In the event of severe weather, the decision will be made by the city employee present as to whether games are played. The decision by the city employee shall be final. 
(14)  Except as described herein, no admission or entry fees may be charged unless approved by city manager. All proceeds from these type fees must be applied toward event cost, with complete accounting of all fees collected and/or presented to the city clerk. 
(15)  No fees shall be charged for parking. 
(16)  All tournaments must be pre-approved by the council of the city. 
(17)  During approved tournament events, league officers or designee shall be present at all times. 
(18)  The sponsoring organization for all tournaments must be pre-approved by the council of the city. 
(19)  All vendors associated with tournaments, training, or coaching events must be pre-approved by the council of the city. 
(20)  City recreation fields and facilities shall not be used for personal profit or sales. 
(21)  No glass containers. 
(22)  No passenger boats, no passenger water crafts. 
(23)  No swimming. 
A violation of this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor in the same manner as are other ordinances of the city with a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and a maximum term of not more than six months in jail. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-03, §§ I, II, 5-4-2015 ) 
Sec. 58-9. - Schedule. 
The use of city recreation facilities and sports fields will begin no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and end at 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-03, §§ I, II, 5-4-2015 ) 
Sec. 58-10. - Independent leagues. 
All independent leagues using city recreation facilities and sports fields will comply with the following: 
(1)  Establish rules governing the conduct of players, coaches, umpires/referees, league officials, and spectators that will participate on city property. 
(2)  Before each season, meet with all coaches, league officials, and umpires/referees to discuss city regulations for the use of city facilities and sports fields. 
(3)  Before each season, conduct background checks on all coaches, umpire/referees and league officials. 
(4)  Meet with city officials prior to beginning each season for the purpose of validating that the requirements as set out above have been satisfied. 
(5)  Coordinate with and submit schedules of all league activities to the city manager, including practices, games, make-up games, work days, tournament schedules, and ceremonies that involve the use of city facilities and sports fields. 
(6)  Report any violation of city league rules, policies, or regulations to the city manager within 24 hours of occurrence with a written report by league officials within 72 hours of occurrence. 
(7)  Notify the city manager immediately of any problem with city property or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-03, §§ I, II, 5-4-2015 ) 
Sec. 58-11. - Special events permit. 
The mayor and council reserve the right to issue special events permits for public properties owned by the city. In this section a special events permit shall be required for an activity hosted by a private organization or that requires the use of equipment other than that used for catering food for the activity or that requires the closing of any roads or public places. A special events permit allows the sponsor use of the property, in accordance with the approved application, for the duration of the permit. 
(1)  At least three months prior to the event, all sponsors shall submit to the city manager the appropriate application fee set by the mayor and council and an application that contains the following: 
a.  Event title. 
b.  Sponsor of event. 
c.  Dates and times of event, set up, event start and end times and break down/clean up. 
d.  Chief officer of sponsor organization. 
e.  Contact information. 
f.  Activity description. 
g.  Estimated number of participants. 
h.  Proposed site plan that includes, but is not limited to vehicular and pedestrian ways, tents, booths, vendors, stage, sound equipment, generators, medical treatment facilities, portable restrooms and light equipment. Provision of a minimum 20-foot emergency access shall be provided. 
i.  Proposed parking plan shall be submitted with application. 
j.  Description of the proposed safety plan shall be submitted. 
k.  If an entry fee or admission is proposed, the fee shall be provided. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant desires to have exclusive use of a facility for a private event, the applicant shall pay a user fee established periodically by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Sponsor shall provide liability insurance for the event in the amount of $1,000,000.00 and name the city as an additional insured. 
(4)  The sale of alcohol shall be prohibited during the special event unless it is approved by the mayor and council and in accordance with section 6-52 [6-98], provided however that no glass containers shall be distributed. In the event that a permit is approved, the sponsor shall be required to hire a minimum of two off-duty officers and compensate said officers in accordance with the policies of the city police department. The chief of police has the authority to require more officers if he determines that it is necessary. 
(5)  Temporary signage is permitted for a special event. Prior to the event, the applicant shall submit a plan to the city manager that contains the design, size and proposed locations of the signage. 
(6)  If admission will be required for spectators, costs and anticipated distributions shall be outlined and justified by the applicant and submitted to the city manager with the permit application. 
(7)  The sponsor shall be solely responsible for pre-event preparation. Sponsor shall have no expectation of the city to prepare the site for the event. Further, sponsor shall agree to remove all equipment from the city facility within 24 hours after the event. 
(8)  If it has been determined that the event has caused a violation of an ordinance or law, or that the event endangers the participants or spectators, or threatens the peace and dignity of the community, or creates an unmanageable problem for public safety officials, the chief of police or his designee shall make every effort to resolve the issue up to and including termination of the event. 
(9)  Civic organizations registered with the city shall be permitted use of a park building on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, as scheduling permits, free of charge. However, each shall be charged a cleaning fee of $50.00. For the purpose of this section at least 50 percent of the civic organization shall be residents of the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-03, §§ I, II, 5-4-2015 ) 
Secs. 58-12—58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND ROADS 

Sec. 58-26. - General criteria for acceptance. 
No street or road shall be accepted as a public street or road in the city until the road or street shall be tested in the manner described in this article and shall meet the requirements as set out in this article. 
(Res. of 9-6-94) 
Sec. 58-27. - Responsibility for tests, test results. 
Any testing and reports of tests pursuant to this article shall be the responsibility and at the expense of the developer. All test results shall be submitted to the engineer for review and/or approval. 
(Res. of 9-6-94, § 4-1-9) 
Sec. 58-28. - Soil density test. 
(a)  Soil density tests shall be made on the subbase by an independent testing lab experienced in such work prior to the placement of any base material. Test on each street shall consist of in-place field test conducted on all fills. The number of tests and depths to which testing shall be performed will be determined by the engineer. Subbase compaction shall be 98 percent of the maximum dry density and all other fills shall be 95 percent of the maximum dry density. 
(b)  The subgrade of the roadways shall be proof rolled prior to the placement of any base material. This test shall be scheduled through the engineer's office and observed by the engineer or his representative. 
(Res. of 9-6-94, § 4-1-10) 
Sec. 58-29. - Base material and asphaltic concrete. 
(a)  Base material. The base material shall be placed and proof rolled prior to the placement of any asphalt. Core samples shall be taken of the base material at an interval of 300 feet. These cores shall be taken at the quarter points of the roadway and alternate between travel lanes. Cul-de-sacs shall be tested in a triangular pattern half way from the radius point to the edge of pavement or as directed by the engineer. Any unacceptable deficiencies shall be isolated and corrected. 
(b)  Asphaltic concrete. The mix of asphaltic concrete shall be approved by the engineer with verification of the mix furnished by the contractor. Core samples shall be taken of the in-place asphalt at an interval of 300 feet. These cores shall be taken at the quarter points of the roadway and alternate between travel lanes. Cul-de-sacs shall be tested in a triangular pattern half way from the radius point to the edge of pavement or as directed by the engineer. Any unacceptable deficiencies shall be isolated and corrected. 
(Res. of 9-6-94, § 4-1-11) 
Secs. 58-30—58-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 58-51. - Permit required; exception. 
No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city but if the work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 58-52. - Application for permit. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 58-51, shall make written application therefor. The application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 58-53. - Indemnification of city. 
Any person obtaining a permit as provided in sections 58-51 and 58-52 agrees as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 58-54. - Repair, restoration. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued after notice from the city clerk, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 58-55. - Safety precautions, barricades, lights. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under the sections of this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of the work. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1-5) 
Secs. 58-56—58-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY AND ISSUANCE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS 

Sec. 58-60. - Declaration of findings, purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of Senoia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights of way in the city as such rights of way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public works infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the state, including but not limited to article IX, section I, paragraphs II and III of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92, has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights of way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights of way as provided herein. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Codified ordinances means this Code. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights of way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right of way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights of way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right of way. 
Director means the city manager of the City of Senoia, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, signs, towers, traffic control devices and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights of way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code. 
Right(s) of way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights of way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-61. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights of way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights of way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right of way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right of way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall promptly notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. When a registration is complete, the director shall accept it and so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights of way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights of way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city codes nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right of way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights of way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right of way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city codes or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-62. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the department of public works in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right of way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by resolution of the mayor and council, as from time to time amended. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the city manager and open for public inspection and copying, without charge. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right of way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its stated expiration date, unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within twenty working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-63. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained herein. A copy of the manual shall be maintained in the offices of the city manager and open for public inspection and copying. Copies of the manual are also available on the state department of transportation's website. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy city rights of way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right of way or the right of way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right of way are changed at any time by the city or by federal or state highway authorities during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right of way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  Utilities protection. As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-64. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights of way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A Utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-65. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-66. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
(a)  Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city codes, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights of way regardless of who performs the work. No rights of way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 58-62(e). 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-67. - Penalties. 
(a)  Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(b)  Citations returnable to the municipal court of the city shall be deemed valid when served personally upon the utility's designated facilities representative, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery at the address provided. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 58-68. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the city Charter, and under the provisions of this Code to regulate the use of the rights of way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(b)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(c)  Appeal of administrative decisions. Any appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the city manager as specified in this article. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-7-2016 ) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local taxation of insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1 et seq.; revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. tit. 48; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; local taxation of rooms, lodgings or accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 

Sec. 62-26. - Levy; rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 62-27. - When due and payable. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. 
(b)  Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before December 20, but in the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city shall, within a reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by resolution of the mayor and council, after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5-12) 
State Law reference— Payment of taxes in installments, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-23. 
Sec. 62-28. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. 
(a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the procedure provided by the laws of the state governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedies. 
(b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall have priority as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-56. 
(c)  The amount due on all delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section as well as any interest or penalty thereon shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(d)  Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interests, fines or other revenue, within three calendar months and ten days after any payment is due; provided, that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the mayor and council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect but only upon finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all fi. fas. issued under this article shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law and no penalty shall be charged except in lieu of interest. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5-13) 
State Law reference— Executions and judicial sales, O.C.G.A. § 9-13-1 et seq.; interest on executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-8; tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; junked vehicles, § 38-1; law enforcement, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. tit. 40; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; authority of municipal courts to try cases involving state traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through and including 40-6-395 of the chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, codified as O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 through and including 40-6-395, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations for the city and are hereby incorporated by reference in this chapter with like effect as if recited fully. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1-1) 
Sec. 66-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 66-3. - Vehicle cover required to prevent load from dropping or shifting. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1-3) 
Sec. 66-4. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones; signs and traffic control devices; schedule on file. 
(a)  The police chief or a designee thereof, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones. 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks. 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices. 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations. 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon. 
(6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs. 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The police chief or a designee thereof is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(3)  Traffic lanes. 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) of this section, this schedule and any amendments thereto shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the mayor and council and this schedule is hereby incorporated in this section and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this chapter shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1-4) 
Sec. 66-5. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of the city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of the city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1-5) 
Sec. 66-6. - Obstructions at railroad crossings. 
The several railroad companies whose roads are in the city shall not allow any street to obstructed by any cars or other things left at any of the crossings; and if it shall become necessary in loading or unloading freight to stop longer than ten minutes, it shall be the duty of the conductor of such train or cars to uncouple his cars at the point of crossing, to allow vehicles to pass without unnecessary delay or inconvenience. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1-10) 
Secs. 66-7—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 66-31. - Obstructing free flow of traffic; creating nuisance or hazard. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle the block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1980, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 66-32. - Obedience to traffic signs, signals and markings. 
All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 8-2-3) 
Sec. 66-33. - Use of one-way streets. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated by the mayor and council, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 8-2-4) 
Sec. 66-34. - Vehicles with metal tracks or wheels. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any tracked or other vehicle having metal tracks or wheels upon the city streets. 
(Code 1980, § 8-2-5) 
Secs. 66-35—66-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED 

Sec. 66-56. - General speed limits established. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  Thirty-five miles per hour shall be the maximum speed on all streets or portions of streets within the city unless otherwise indicated by ordinance or by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 8-2-2) 
Sec. 66-57. - Speed zones established. 
(a)  On system. The following speed zones are established: 
ON-SYSTEM 

 
(b)  Off system. 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
Signs shall be erected by the city. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94; Ord. No. 797-077S, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 8-18-2008; Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 12-06, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-11, 12-3-2012) 
Secs. 66-58—66-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING 

Sec. 66-81. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1980, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 66-82. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city specifically designated by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 1980, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 66-83. - Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Code 1980, § 8-3-4) 
Sec. 66-84. - Special purpose parking zones established. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any location on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 8-3-5) 
Secs. 66-85—66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTORIZED CARTS, ELECTRIC BICYCLES AND OTHER LOW-SPEED MOTORIZED VEHICLES 

Sec. 66-101. - Findings; definitions. 
(a)  The city council finds that all streets and paved recreational paths located within the territorial boundaries of the city and under its jurisdiction are designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use by operators of motorized carts, electric bicycles, and low speed motor vehicles ("LSMV"), except as stated elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control; to include dirt bikes, four-wheelers and/or three-wheelers with the ability to travel cross-country. 
Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having only two wheels which are in tandem and either of which is more than 13 inches in diameter. 
Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles who has an established place of business in this state. 
Electric bicycle means a device with two or three wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. For such a device to be considered an electric assisted bicycle, it shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, as set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571, et seq., and shall operate in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
(1)  Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; 
(2)  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and 
(3)  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device or EPAMD means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed motor vehicle or LSMV means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be 3.05 cubic inches (50 cubic centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
Motorized cart means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour. 
Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, pocket bike, any other alternatively fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor engine, gas or electric, and is not otherwise defined in this code as a "motorized cart", "low speed motor vehicle (LSMV)" "motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "electric bicycle", motorized skateboard", "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair". 
Motorized skateboard means a self propelled device, including Segways, that has a motor, gas or electric, a deck upon which a person may ride, not equipped with a seat, and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in this Code as a motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "motorized play vehicle", "motor scooter", "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair". 
Motorized wheelchair means a self-propelled wheelchair that is used by a physically disabled person for mobility. 
Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a two-wheeled vehicle other than a motor vehicle, bicycle with helper motor or a motorized scooter and which is propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other mechanical means, is capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour, and is designed to replicate the general appearance of a motorcycle, regardless of the scale of the replication. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-102. - Registration/transfer requirements. 
(a)  Motorized carts. It shall be the duty of every owner of an electric or gasoline-powered motorized cart that is operated over the recreation paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public to register the cart with the city within ten business days of the date of purchase. Two numerical decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the city clerk's office. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. The failure to have a current registration decal on a motorized cart shall be a violation of this section and subject the owner of such cart to the penalties set forth in section. 
(1)  Registration fee. The registration fee for motorized carts shall be $12.00, and the registration shall be effective until the next regular registration period. Registration periods shall occur every five years, beginning in 2007. 
(2)  Registration deadline. If the cart is not registered within ten business days of purchase, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the registration fee; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business-day period. 
(3)  Transfers. Upon occurrence of a sale of the cart to another person who shall operate the cart over the recreation paths and streets of the city, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership at a cost of $5.00. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the $5.00 transfer charge; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business-day period. Dealers acquiring a registered cart exclusively for resale (non-rental) shall not be required to pay the transfer charge, but shall notify the city of the transfer within ten business days of receiving the cart, and of the ultimate disposition of the cart within ten business days of sale. 
(4)  Special events. Council may, at its discretion, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-city residents may bring carts as participants. 
(b)  Gasoline carts. 
(1)  Every gasoline powered motorized cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
c.  The engine and powered mechanism of every cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline powered motorized cart to operate or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interferes with its operation. 
(c)  Rental carts. Cart dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent carts to the public for use on the recreation paths and streets and those areas of the city accessible by the public. Each such establishment renting carts shall be required to register each such rental cart in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section and shall maintain a written record of each person who rents each cart. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this article to read, and must be at least 16 years of age. The registration fee and transfer fees and regulations shall be the same as those in subsections (a) and (b). 
(d)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(e)  LSMV. No LSMV shall be operated on the paved recreational paths or streets located within the territorial boundaries of the city unless it is legally registered and insured according to laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-103. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Those persons who are 21 years of age and older holding a valid photo identification may drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and streets classified on the city street system as having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less, and those areas accessible by the public of the city, without possessing a valid driver's license from the State of Georgia or other licensing jurisdiction. 
(b)  Those persons who are 15 years of age may drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible of the city by the public if he or she is accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(c)  No person under the age of 15 shall be permitted to drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city under any circumstances. 
(d)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the recreation paths, streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. Where cart paths exist, they shall be used in preference to parallel city streets. 
(e)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(f)  Motorized carts may be operated over those authorized streets, recreational paths and those areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(g)  No motorized cart shall be permitted to operate over or along State Highway 85 and State Highway 16 within the boundaries of the city except where authorized crossings are provided. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart or LSMV or any other person operating, employing, permitting the use of or otherwise directing the use of such motorized cart or LSMV to operate or permit the operator of any motorized cart or LSMV to drive over the recreational paths, streets or those areas accessible by the public in the city in violation of this article. 
(i)  LSMV. Only persons possessing a valid license issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the state may operate a LSMV on the paved recreational paths or streets located within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(j)  No LSMV shall be permitted to operate on, over or along, those portions of State Highway 85 and State Highway 16 within the boundaries of the city having a posted maximum speed limit in excess of 35 miles per hour, except where authorized crossings are provided. No LSMV shall be permitted to operate on any city street of which the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. Except as prohibited above, LSMVs shall be permitted to cross over city streets on which the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. 
(k)  No all-terrain vehicle described within this article shall be permitted to operate on any city streets, county roads or state highways located within the limits of the City of Senoia. Violations will be charged under O.C.G.A. Title 40, Chapter 7, pertaining to the operation of all-terrain vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-104. - Recreation path users—Authorized. 
Authorized users of asphalt recreation paths and sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Pedestrians; 
(2)  Non motorized vehicles; 
(3)  Roller skates, roller blades and skateboarders (daylight only); 
(4)  Registered electric-powered golf carts; 
(5)  Registered gasoline-powered golf carts; 
(6)  Emergency and authorized maintenance vehicles; 
(7)  Bicycles, traditional and electric (as defined in section 66-101); 
(8)  Electric and conventional wheelchairs; 
(9)  Electric vehicles designed to carry one person at a speed not to exceed 20 miles per hour; and 
(10)  LSMV provided that the vehicle is operated at a speed not to exceed 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-105. - Same—Prohibited uses. 
Prohibited uses of recreation paths are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles); 
(2)  Motorcycles; 
(3)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles (not to include electric bicycles); 
(4)  Minibikes and mopeds; 
(5)  Horses; 
(6)  Go-carts; 
(7)  Un-registered electric-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(8)  Un-registered gasoline-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(9)  Electric or gasoline powered scooters; 
(10)  Motorized play vehicles; 
(11)  Un-registered LSMVs; and 
(12)  All-terrain vehicles and any vehicle designed by the manufacturer to be able to travel at speeds in excess of 20 miles per hour under its own power on a flat surface, except those city-owned vehicles used for authorized purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-106. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Paths are for transportation and public recreation by users. No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the paths, streets, and areas of the city accessible by the public. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(b)  Pedestrians, skaters and permitted vehicles shall not loiter or park on recreation path. 
(c)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the recreation paths. For instance, when approaching oncoming path users, each user shall move to his right side of the path. Passing shall be on the left side of the path. All users shall stop and yield to on-coming traffic when recreation paths intersect with public streets, roads and highways. Public streets may be crossed horizontally only within designated crosswalks. 
(e)  Pedestrians should always be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by other users of the recreation paths to ensure them safe passage. Each user of the recreation paths shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of other users, and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(f)  A warning or announcement shall be given by operators of motorized carts and other users of the recreation paths, such as bicyclists and skaters, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. This warning or announcement may be verbal, but it is recommended that bicyclists and motorized cart operators equip their vehicles with an audible warning device, such as a horn or bell. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, also apply to the recreation paths. 
(h)  All litter shall be deposited in the receptacles provided along the recreation paths or retained by the path user for proper disposal. Littering on the recreation paths shall be subject to the same fines and sanctions as littering on the streets. 
(i)  All users of bicycles and electric bicycles shall wear a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation's Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling or a motorcycle helmet while operating a bicycle or an electric bicycle on the recreational paths. 
(j)  No one under the age of 15 shall operate an electric bicycle on the recreational paths. 
(k)  Seat belts on LSMVs shall be worn by all occupants at all times the vehicle is moving. 
(l)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of a motorized cart. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the motorized cart. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-107. - Motorized play vehicle; authorizations; prohibitions; disclosure requirements. 
(a)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any public street, public roadway, public sidewalk, public park, public or private parking lot, public trail, public shared multi-use path, public bicycle path, and all other public property. 
(b)  Motorized play vehicles are permitted on private residential property with the permission of the property owner. In the case of residential property commonly owned by a homeowner association, the homeowner association may regulate such usage. 
(c)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any private commercial/industrial property unless the location where the vehicles are to be operated is inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic (such as an enclosed warehouse or fenced parking lot with a locked gate). Motorized play vehicles may be operated on private commercial/industrial property meeting these restrictions with the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or the authorized agent of either. 
(d)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle on any private property in a manner causing excessive, unnecessary, or offensive noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(e)  The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor shall not authorize or knowingly permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any vendor or merchant to sell motorized play vehicles, within the city, without making disclosures required by this section. Any merchant or vendor who sells motorized play vehicles within the city shall: 
(1)  Post in a prominent place at each location where motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice, on a sign not less than 96 square inches and visible to the public, stating that operation of motorized play vehicles: 
a.  Are prohibited on any public street, public roadway, public sidewalk, public park, public parking lot, public trail, public shared multi-use path, public highway or any part of a highway, public bicycle path and all other public property in the city. 
b.  Are allowed to be used on private residential property with owner's written permission. 
c.  Are allowed to be used on private commercial/industrial property only in areas inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic and only with the written permission of the owner/agent. 
(2)  Provide a copy of such notice to each purchaser of a motorized play vehicle, either before or in connection with the purchase of a motorized play vehicle. If the purchaser is a minor, the minor's parent or legal guardian must sign a receipt of said notice. 
(3)  Any motorized play vehicle owned by a governmental entity and which is operated in the performance of authorized duties or activities is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Temporary suspension of all or part of this section may be granted by the city council for special events. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-108. - Liability. 
Each person using the recreation paths is responsible for his own actions and shall use the recreation path at his or her own risk. Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person operating a motorized cart on the recreation paths and public streets and those areas accessible by the public should verify their coverage. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 66-109. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction and, upon conviction, punished as provided in the Code of Senoia, Georgia. 
(b)  In addition to enforcing sanctions against the operator, any violation of subsections 66-103(h) and 66-106(e) shall be charged against the registered owner of the motorized cart, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of the motorized cart as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not to exceed $250.00; 
(2)  For the second offense committed within one year of conviction for a first offense, a fine of not to exceed $500.00; and 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a motorized cart, a fine of not to exceed $1,000.00, and the registered owner's motorized cart registration shall be revoked. The registered owner or immediate family member residing in the same household cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two years following the third conviction. 
(c)  Any violation by an operator of a LSMV shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia and this Code. Any violation by an owner of a LSMV shall be charged against the owner according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 74. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal water and sewage services, art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(6), (7). 
State Law reference— Dumping wastes into sewer pipeline, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; damaging or interfering with utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; blasting or excavating near utility facilities, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.; franchises, contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipal water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; disposal of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7 et seq.; state grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2; public utilities, O.C.G.A. tit. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-26. - Application for service; deposit. 
The consumer shall make application for water service, in person, at the city hall and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit for water service in an amount determined by the mayor and council. This amount shall remain on deposit in the city treasury for homeowners for a period of two years, at which time it shall be refunded. For renters, this amount shall remain on deposit in the city treasury as a guarantee for water rent. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1-3; Ord. of 10-6-80, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-96) 
Sec. 70-27. - Connection to water required before occupying building; authorized person to make connection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any building of any kind unless the same is connected with the water system of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person except an authorized employee of the city to connect with or tap any water main of the city, except with the specific authorization of the employee and under his supervision. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1-4) 
Sec. 70-28. - Connection fee. 
Each consumer subscribing to use the water service of the city shall pay a connection fee in an amount determined by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 3) 
Sec. 70-29. - Minimum charges; use at authorized location only. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for the water connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 4) 
Sec. 70-30. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 70-28, will be made for a meter five-eighths inch by three-quarters inch in size. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 5) 
Sec. 70-31. - Meters. 
(a)  Every regular consumer of water shall be supplied with a meter by the city, which meter shall be under the exclusive control of the city, for which the consumer shall deposit an amount as determined by the mayor and council and filed in the city clerk's office. This amount shall be refunded by the city if any consumer discontinues the use of city water, less all charges which may stand against that consumer. 
(b)  Water meters shall be located at the property line adjacent to a street or alleyway or at any other location as determined by the city. The person in whose name the service is rendered shall be responsible for water rents. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 70-32. - Schedule of water rates. 
The schedule of water rates and connection fees, as set from time to time by the mayor and council, shall be kept current and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 70-33. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection nor other purposes except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where the meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of human resources. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 6) 
Sec. 70-34. - Access to premises, extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water lines. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 7) 
Sec. 70-35. - Meter reading; billing; collection. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water service shall be mailed out on such day of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. The failure of water users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within 15 days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment by the 25th day of each month will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after original date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in such event the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under the agreement. 
(b)  Water service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including penalty and disconnection charges, have been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter desire to be reconnected to the water system, a reconnection charge of $25.00 shall be collected. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent the bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of the bills. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 9) 
Sec. 70-36. - Discontinuance of service for nonpayment; notice. 
The city is required to give the water user three days' notice before discontinuing service for nonpayment of bills. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1-3) 
Sec. 70-37. - Change of occupancy; notice to city. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water service or to change occupancy. The departing person shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 8) 
Sec. 70-38. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for the collection of debts. 
(c)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made, and a service charge of $25.00 paid for each meter reconnected. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 10) 
Sec. 70-39. - Complaints, adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this article. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of the consumer for a fee of $5.00; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Ord. of 10-6-80, § 11) 
Sec. 70-40. - Tampering with, removing meter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tamper or in any way meddle with any water meter box, rim cover thereto or any part of any water meter box. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1-5) 
Sec. 70-41. - Taking water from fire hydrants, city-owned mains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on and/or take water from any fire hydrant or water mains and lines owned by the city except pursuant to lawful permission from an authorized firefighter or city employee. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1-6) 
Secs. 70-42—70-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RAW WATER PROTECTION 

Sec. 70-51. - Declaration of policy. 
It is unlawful to spray, discharge or dump any substance or commit any other act which contaminates or pollutes the raw water of the city water system. Items which would be included as contaminants or pollutants would include but not be limited to those items recognized by the state environmental protection division as being harmful to consumers if contained in potable water, those items listed on EPD's toxic list, insecticides and herbicides. 
(Ord. of 8-1-88, § I) 
Sec. 70-52. - Authorization. 
The city council is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this division for the public welfare and safety. The municipal court of the city will be responsible for determining whether or not a certain act constitutes a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-1-88, § II) 
Sec. 70-53. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any police officer or other city employee designated by the city council may issue a citation to a person he reasonably believes to be in violation of this division. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, and the offense charged, and shall direct him to appear in the municipal court within five days of service of the citation. The alleged violator shall be requested to sign the citation and shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon the attempt to give it to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over 15 years of age who is a resident at the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in municipal court to make his plea within five days of service of the citation, and failure to so appear shall be a violation of this division and subject the alleged violation to being held in contempt of court. A police officer may arrest for any offense under this division where permitted by state arrest law. Such cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in municipal court before all other cases. 
(b)  A person in apparent control of the property where the violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof of facts showing apparent control by such person of the premises and proof that the violation occurred on the premises shall constitute prima facie evidence that the person committed the violation, but the person shall have the right to show that he did not commit the violation. Any person whose name is on file as owner of the property where the violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the premises shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner committed the violation, but the customer shall have the right to show that he did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children, and proof that a child committed a violation on property within the parent's control shall constitute prima facie evidence that the parent committed the violation, but the parent may be excused if he proves that he had previously directed the child with regard to this division and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(Ord. of 8-1-88, § III) 
DIVISION 3. - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, at the editor's discretion these provisions have been included as Div. 3, §§ 70-54—70-60. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 70-54. - Purpose and policy. 
The general welfare and public interest require that the water resources of Georgia be put to beneficial use to the fullest extent to which they are capable, subject to reasonable regulation in order to conserve such water resources, to protect natural systems, and to provide and maintain conditions that are conducive to the development and use of water resources. The General Assembly of Georgia has found and concluded that effective water resource management protects public health and the safety and welfare of Georgia's citizens. Water resources are to be managed in a sustainable manner so that current and future generations have access to adequate supplies of quality water that support both human needs and natural systems. All citizens have a stewardship responsibility to conserve and protect the water resources of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1(1), 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 70-55. - Goals and objectives. 
In furtherance of the state's policy to conserve water resources and demand management goals, the City of Senoia, as a permitted water system operator, adopts the following goals and objectives: 
(a)  To assure that first priority is given to providing water for human consumption and sanitation; all other purposes shall be secondary; 
(b)  To control the rate of growth and development so as to minimize the demand on existing and planned water supply sources available to the City of Senoia and its customers in order to maximize overall utilization of this limited resource; 
(c)  To reduce the upward trend of seasonal peak day demands that drive the costly expansion of water treatment, storage, and transmission facilities; 
(d)  To improve system efficiency and operations by reducing unbillable or unaccounted for water loss on the system; and 
(e)  To provide an orderly process for reducing system-wide demands during periods of drought or other emergency water shortages. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1(2), 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 70-56. - Year-round water conservation practices. 
(a)  All City of Senoia Water System (the "system") users are encouraged to exercise voluntary water conservation practices at all times of the year, regardless of drought conditions, water shortage, or emergency condition. The city may periodically provide informational guidance and conservation tips to its users. 
(b)  All newly installed or substantially improved irrigation systems, which use City of Senoia Water System water shall be equipped with automatic timers with rain or soil moisture sensors that activate to prevent operation of those systems while rain is falling and/or when soil moisture is adequate. 
(c)  Outdoor watering and non-essential outdoor water usage from the City of Senoia Water System for all homes and businesses shall follow restrictions imposed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as from time to time amended, consistent with the level of drought; Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-30, by express reference, is incorporated herein, together with the exemptions set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1(3), 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 70-57. - Drought or other water use restrictions. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-102, the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources may, from time to time, impose by permit, administrative or emergency order use restrictions on the City of Senoia Water System. 
(b)  In addition thereto and supplemental thereof, water use restrictions may be imposed whenever the City of Senoia Water System cannot supply its customers with sufficient water to protect the public health and safety without substantial reductions in water usage. Whenever it is determined, in writing, by the system's consulting engineer that the system is unable or reasonably unlikely to continue meeting its customer demand without a substantial reduction in consumption, the mayor and council, after consultation with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, shall issue an administrative order imposing water use restrictions using such criteria, if any, set forth by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1(4), 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 70-58. - Water use emergency. 
Any other circumstances, including service losses caused by failure of equipment or facilities, human error, weather, or natural disaster, which constrain the system's water production capacity to less than the current level of customer demand may constitute a water use emergency. In the event the city administrator determines reasonable cause exists to declare a water use emergency, authority is hereby delegated to the city administrator, under the criteria set forth above, to issue an administrative order imposing immediate use restrictions on all users of the city water system. Orders issued by the administrator under this section shall only restrict such non-essential uses as necessary to achieve system objectives, and may be modified, as needed, during a water use emergency to achieve the system's highest priority of providing water for human consumption and sanitation over all other water uses. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1(4), 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 70-59. - Notice of mandatory water conservation practices, water use restrictions, and/or water use emergency. 
Customers and users of the City of Senoia Water System shall be given notice of water use restrictions by the best means available, including without limitation, inclusion of a notice in monthly utility bills and/or publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the system's service area. Public service announcements through television, radio and posting on the City of Senoia's website, may also be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1(5), 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 70-60. - Enforcement of mandatory water conservation practices, water use restrictions, and water supply emergency orders. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person, firm, or corporation to use or permit the use of potable water from the City of Senoia Water System for any purpose or use restricted or prohibited by mandatory water conservation practices established by the Department of Natural Resources, by a permit, administrative or emergency order imposed by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, by an administrative order of the mayor and council imposing water use restrictions, or in a water use emergency as declared by this division. 
(b)  Violators shall be cited to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Senoia, or other court of appropriate jurisdiction within the system's customer service area, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 1-5 of this Code, or, if applicable, charged upon state warrant with committing a misdemeanor as defined by general law. 
(c)  In addition thereto, in the sole discretion of the city administrator, a water use surcharge, in an amount double the customer's most recent monthly water bill, may be imposed on any customer for a first violation of this division; and a water use surcharge, in an amount triple the customer's most recent monthly water bill, may be imposed for a second or subsequent violation of this division. For any three or more violations within any 12 month period, water service shall be discontinued to any customer of the City of Senoia Water System that willfully or systematically violates restrictions or prohibitions on water usage after written notice from the city administrator of the facts establishing such violation. When service has been discontinued under this section, service shall not be reinstated unless the customer posts a surety bond in the amount of $5,000.00, payable to the City of Senoia, conditioned on faithful adherence to all water use policies and restrictions of the system. 
(d)  The city administrator is hereby authorized, as necessary, to seek from any court of appropriate equitable jurisdiction, injunctive relief against any user of the City of Senoia Water System for summary abatement or remedying of appropriate conditions dangerous or prejudicial to the public health and safety, together with recovery of the costs and legal expenses thereof. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1(6), 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 70-61, 70-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CROSS-CONNECTION AUXILIARY INTAKES, BY-PASSES, AND INTER-CONNECTIONS TO THE CITY WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 70-63. - Definitions. 
The following definitions and terms shall apply in the interpretation of this ordinance: 
Auxiliary intake. Any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than that normally used, 
By-pass. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
Cross-connection. Any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such a manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of vales or because of ineffective check or back pressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
Director. References to the director, as used in this division, shall mean the director of the water and wastewater department of the City of Senoia. 
Inter-connection. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewerage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Person. Any person, firm, corporation, association, organization, or entity, including governmental bodies, existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
Public water supply. The system owned, operated and maintained by the City of Senoia, consisting of supply, collection, treatment, storage and distribution facilities, furnishing piped water to the public for human consumption and general use operating under permit issued by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-64. - Statutory compliance. 
The City of Senoia Public Water System operates in compliance with O.C.G.A. 12-5-170, et seq., 'The Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act", and Chapter 391-3-S-.13 of the Georgia Rules and Administrative Regulations, which pertain to safe drinking water standards. As required by its permit, it is the purpose of this division to establish an effective, ongoing program to control undesirable water uses. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-65. - Cross-connections prohibited 
That it shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, bypass, or inter-connection to be made to the City of Senoia Public Water System or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-66. - Use of private water supply or unapproved water supply. 
Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in a storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the director a sworn statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections with the public water supply. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross-connection will be permitted upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-67. - Inspections of premises with secondary water supplies. 
It shall be the duty of the director of the City of Senoia Public Water System to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are known to exist or reasonably deemed probable. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established by the director. The director or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, upon any property served by a connection to the City of Senoia Public Water System for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections. Advance notice to the owner or occupant of a property shall be given, if feasible, in the manner best calculated to apprise the owner/occupant of the director's intent. On request, the owner or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the director or inspection agent any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access when requested, shall create rebuttable presumption of the presence of unapproved cross- connections and shall constitute grounds for discontinuing public water service. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-68. - Installation of approved protective devices. 
The director, or his designated representative, shall require the installation and use of an approved protective device(s) on any public water supply service line serving premises on which a secondary water supply is used or available for use to assure that any pollutant or contaminant that may originate on the premises is contained therein. The protective device(s) shall be a reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer or a double check type backflow preventer approved by the director of water and wastewater as to manufacturer, model, and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices shall be approved by the director prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the director who shall oversee the installation. When the installation is performed by city forces, the owner/occupant of the premises is responsible for the expense of the installation labor and materials, and shall be billed for the actual expense. The owner, or occupant, has the option to have the installation performed by a private contractor, subject to the director's specifications. 
The department shall have the right to inspect and test the device or devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary by the director. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the owner/occupant of the premises. Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective device or devices. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the director shall notify, in writing, the owner/occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The director shall require the owner/occupant of the promises to make all repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of such repairs shall be borne by the owner/occupant of the premises. Those repairs shall be made by qualified personnel certified and licensed, acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-69. - Notice to disconnect unapproved water supply. 
Any person who now has cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or interconnections in violation of the provisions of this division shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to comply with the provisions of this division. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by the director and written notice given outlining specified time limits. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-70. - Required use of additional protective device(s) in certain installations. 
Where the nature of use of the water supplied to a premises by the public water supply is such that it is deemed: 
a.  Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation; 
b.  The owner/occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing demonstrate to the director that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to pose no threat to the safety of the public water supply; 
c.  The nature and mode of operation within a premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; or 
d.  There is a substantial likelihood that existing protective measures may be subverted, altered, or disconnected; 
e.  Maximum contaminate containment protection shall be provided by installation of a double detector check backflow prevention device(s), approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-71. - Notice on secondary sources. 
The drinking water supply made available to properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for human consumption or drinking water purposes and which is not supplied by the public water system shall be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
By a sign or decal affixed at or near the water outlet. The minimum acceptable sign or decal shall have black letters one inch high located on a red background. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-72. - Violations; enforcement penalties. 
Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this division shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.00; each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines, upon conviction, the director shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Secs. 70-73—70-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 2003, amended Art. III in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1980, § 9-1-8; Ord. of July 6, 1992; and Ord. No. 00-07.5, adopted Oct. 2, 2000. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-76. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  Compliance with state and federal water pollution control laws. This article sets forth uniform requirements for persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act, as amended, and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). 
The federally mandated objectives of this ordinance are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the city wastewater system. 
This article provides for the regulation of persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the city wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the operation and maintenance of the water and wastewater systems. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to the residents of the city and to all users of the city water and wastewater systems including persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city water and wastewater systems. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of water and wastewater department or his/her designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 1), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-77. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority: The Director of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
Authorized representative of the user: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain: That part of the piping of a building which collects wastewater inside the walls of the building and conveys it to outside the building wall. 
Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other point of acceptance, also called "house connection." Proper maintenance of this service line is the owner's responsibility from the building drain to the point of acceptance. At this point, the service line or "lateral" becomes the city's responsibility as it continues from this point to the sanitary sewer trunk line. 
City: The City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Cooling water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
County: Coweta County. 
City administrator: Individual designated by the mayor and council; the city administrator is responsible for general supervision of all city departments, including the city water and wastewater departments. 
Customer: Every person, firm, association, corporation, government agency, or similar organization who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using water or wastewater connections with, or sewer taps to the city wastewater system and in obtaining, having or using water or other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater through said system. The term customer shall also include illicit users of the water or wastewater systems. 
Composite: The make-up of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes. 
Director or director of water and wastewater: The person designated by the city administrator as manager of the city water and wastewater departments. Whenever director is referred to in this article, it shall mean the director or his/her designee. 
Direct discharge: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
Domestic wastewater: That wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, washing machines, dishwashers, sinks, showers and bathtubs from normal household usage. 
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent: The discharge flow of a treatment facility. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Federal Pretreatment Standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. Categorical standards appear in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
Floatable oil and grease: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by flotation from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility or sand and oil/grease interceptor. 
Flush toilet: The common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Governing body: The mayor and council of the City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grit: Matter consisting of sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that has settling velocities or specific gravities greater than those of organic putrescible solids normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Health department: The Coweta County Board of Health. 
High strength wastewater: Wastewater which contains quantities of specified constituents which exceed the quantities normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
House connection: Same as the "building sewer". 
Indirect discharge or discharge: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial customers: Persons who, on account of their particular type of business activity, discharge into the city sanitary sewerage system an unusual amount or unusual type of sewage which present special problems in sewage disposal and sewage treatment. 
Industrial user or contributor: An industry which discharges waste waters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow: Groundwater and surface water which leaks into the wastewater system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Inflow: Water that flows into the wastewater system from the surface, streams, roof drains, down spouts or other such source. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit: The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Main: The pipe, conduit or facility which conveys utility service to individual services or to other mains. 
Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Meter: Any device used to measure service rendered to a customer by the city. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit: A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Natural outlet: Any outlet, including storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, lakes or other bodies of surface water or groundwater. 
New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or c above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Nondomestic user: Any user of the city wastewater system who discharges wastewater into the wastewater system from a structure other than a residential user. 
Nondomestic wastewater: The wastewater generated from nondomestic users as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Ordinance: This Sewer Use Ordinance, as amended, including any future codification thereof by the City of Senoia. 
Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the molar concentration of hydrogen ions in solution. 
Pit privy: Shored, vertical pit in the earth used for the disposal of human or animal wastes. 
Point of acceptance: For sewer systems, the point of acceptance is the point at which the city's piping connects with the customer's piping. Commonly called the "tap". 
Pollutant: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pollution: The manmade or maninduced detrimental alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water or soil, or the products which create or cause such alteration. 
POTW treatment plant: That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Pretreatment coordinator: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the industrial pretreatment program. 
Pretreatment requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on a nondomestic user. 
Pretreatment standards or standards: Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Pretreatment or treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater treatment system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d). 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 70-91. 
Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
Public sewer: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility, in this case, the City of Senoia. 
Sanitary sewer or sewer: A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions. 
Septic tank: A subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Service connection: The point of connection of the customer's piping with the meter or service pipe owned by the city. 
Service lateral: The pipe between the utility's mains and the point of delivery and shall include all of the pipe, fittings and valves necessary to make the connection excluding the meter. 
Sewage: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, businesses, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Significant industrial user: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this article. 
State: State of Georgia. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC): A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
Standard methods: Those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, a copy of which is on file in the office of the superintendent. 
Storm drain: Sometimes termed storm sewer, it shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Storm water: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Suspended solids or total suspended solids (TSS): Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Toxic: Constituents of wastes which adversely effect the organisms involved in wastewater treatment. 
Unpolluted water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. 
User: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the city wastewater system. 
Wastewater: Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater system or city wastewater system: The total wastewater collection and disposal facilities owned and operated by the city. Also the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Water meter: Those devices, approved by the city for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water consumed by a premise or person. 
Water system or city water system: The total water distribution facilities owned and operated by the city. Also the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Watercourse: Shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 2), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-78. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 

 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 3), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-79. - Sewage and waste disposal; impoundment of surface waters. 
It shall be unlawful to use any waters of the state for the disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, or to withdraw, divert, or impound any surface waters of the state, except in such a manner as to conform to and comply with Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 4), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-80. - Connection to public water and wastewater systems required; septic tanks and individual sewage management systems; certificate of occupancy. 
In the interest of the public health, sanitation and general welfare, all buildings and structures located within the city, of every nature, use and design, intended for human occupancy, shall have a proper source of potable drinking water and sewage disposal. Buildings and structures accessible to a public water system and/or a public sanitary sewer system shall be properly connected on or into such system(s) prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. No permit for the construction of any residence, building or other facility which cannot be served by public sanitary sewer shall be issued, and no certificate for the use and occupancy for any existing residence, building or other facility which cannot be served by public sanitary sewer shall be issued, unless a septic tank or individual sewage management system permit has been issued by the Coweta County Board of Health in conformity with any state-wide minimum standards for sewage management systems and the regulations of the County Board of Health then in force and effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or permit to exist upon their property any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other facility intended for use or disposal of human excrement, and the existence thereof is hereby declared a public nuisance, abatable in accordance with the applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 5), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-81. - Duty of owner and occupant to properly operate and maintain septic tanks and other permitted individual sewage management systems. 
It shall be the duty of the property owner, and any person occupying private property under lease or by permission of the owner, on which is located a building or structure intended for human occupancy whose sole means of sewage disposal is a septic tank or individual sewage management system, to properly operate and maintain such system in good working condition, free of odor, at all times. In addition to the enforcement provisions of this article, continued violation of this section shall constitute grounds for discontinuance or revocation of any permit issued for such system and for revocation or suspension of any certificate of occupancy for the building or structure served. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 6), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-82. - Connection to public sewer required upon failure of septic tank or individual sewage management system. 
At such time as public sanitary sewer becomes accessible in those areas where existing buildings or structures intended for human occupancy are currently served by septic tanks or individual sewage management systems, upon the failure of such septic tank or individual sewage management system, use of such system shall be discontinued and no permit shall be issued for maintenance or bringing the system into compliance, and the property owner shall cause the building or structure to be connected to the public sanitary sewer system. Abandoned septic tanks and individual systems shall either be removed by the owner or filled with suitable material so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 7), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-83. - Separate building sewers required. 
A separate building sewer shall be provided for every building and structure intended for human occupancy and accessible to the public sanitary sewer system, unless for good cause shown the director issues a written permit to allow more than one building or structure to be connected on a common building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 8), 8-18-2003) 
Secs. 70-84—70-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NON-DOMESTIC (INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL) USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 70-91. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the sewer system or POTW resulting in interference; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director in accordance with section 70-103; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater 150 mg/l; 
(18)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. 
(19)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against process interference, stream standards violation, or sludge contamination. Discharges by users of the collection and treatment system are limited such that the concentrations of specific pollutants measured at the point of discharge into the collection system do not exceed concentrations specified below. 
No user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the following daily maximum shown limits (all numbers shown in milligrams per liter, mg/l): 

 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The industrial user may, however, request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. The industrial user may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 11), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-92. - Federal and state requirements. 
(a)  Any laws or regulations promulgated by the State of Georgia relative to the construction or use of wastewater facilities which are more strict than the regulations provided in the City Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations shall be enforced by the city. 
(b)  Federal pretreatment standards. 
(1)  The federal government has adopted regulations governing wastewater discharges from industries into POTWs. These federal regulations are generally referred to as the federal pretreatment standards, as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403, or the federal categorical pretreatment standards, as set forth in 40 CFR Parts 405—471. Any portion of these federal standards which are more strict than the regulations provided in the City Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations will be enforced by the city. 
(2)  It is the affirmative obligation of all industrial users regulated by the federal pretreatment standards, inclusive of the federal categorical pretreatment standards, to comply with the federal standards whether or not the industry has received notification from the city or any other jurisdiction of the existence and nature of the federal standards. 
(3)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(4)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(5)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(6)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(7)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(c)  Modifications to federal pretreatment standards. 
(1)  From time to time the federal government may alter existing federal pretreatment standards or promulgate new standards. None of the provisions contained in the City Code shall prevent the timely implementation of new or altered federal standards by the industries to whom the new or altered standards apply. Where new or altered federal standards are more strict than the standards presently being imposed by the city, the city may, without prejudice, immediately revise any industrial wastewater discharge permits to reflect the new or altered standards. If the industrial user is unable to immediately conform to the new or altered standards, a reasonable schedule for compliance shall be provided by the director. 
(2)  Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of 40 CFR Part 403 promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR Part 403, Section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 12), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-93. - Wastewater pretreatment permit application. 
All nondomestic users shall, upon the request of the director, complete and submit to the director a wastewater pretreatment permit application. The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall be on a form provided by the director and shall be used for the purpose of determining whether the industry is a "significant industrial user," issuing a permit and for other purposes. The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall include the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  Name, address and location, if different from the address. 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those shown in 70-91. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(9)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(10)  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(11)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(12)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the user or an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 14), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-94. - Sampling and testing procedures. 
(a)  Sampling procedures. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (2), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, hexavalent chromium, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(b)  Testing procedures. 
(1)  All wastewater monitoring samples required by the city shall be tested by an independent laboratory for the parameters required, with the results submitted to the city on the original laboratory report sheets. The requirement for utilization of an independent laboratory may be waived by the city when the required tests are performed by the city or other approved agency or when duplicate ("split") samples are provided to the city and the city's testing results of such duplicate samples show a reasonably good correlation with the user's in-house testing results. 
(2)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, or in accordance with any applicable EPA testing procedure of general acceptance in the chemical testing industry, provided, however, that all such analyses shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 136, which requirements shall prevail in the event of conflict. 
(3)  The cost(s) incurred for testing shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 14), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-95. - Significant industrial users. 
(a)  General. All significant industrial users (see definition of significant industrial user in section 70-77) that discharge wastewater effluent into the city wastewater system shall comply with the following: 
(b)  Sampling manhole. In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each significant industrial user shall provide and maintain, on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers, a large manhole or sampling chamber to be located outside the plant. If inside the plant fence, there shall be a gate near the sampling manhole with a key furnished to the city. There shall be ample room provided in each sampling manhole to enable convenient inspection and sampling by the city, or its agent. In certain sampling manholes where noxious fumes may accumulate, the city may require a fume exhaust system to protect the life and health of the city employees who are required to enter the sampling manhole. The fume exhaust system should extract the fumes from the bottom of the manhole and provide not less than one air change per minute. 
(c)  Discharge permit required. It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user, as determined under this article, to discharge wastewater into the city wastewater system without a city issued discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 15), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-96. - Discharge permits. 
(a)  General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the city wastewater system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the city system. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  When requested to do so by the director, all significant industrial users shall complete and file with the director an application for a permit accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set by resolution of the mayor and council, from time to time. Existing users shall apply for a discharge permit within 60 days of notification by the director that a discharge permit is required. Proposed new users shall make application not less than 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the city wastewater system. The completed wastewater pretreatment permit application described in section 70-93 will serve as application for a discharge permit. 
(2)  The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit, in writing, stating the reasons for denial. 
(3)  Any aggrieved user, whose permit application has been denied, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its denial. 
a.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of any administrative appeal. The petition shall set forth all grounds of alleged error upon which the permit denial was based. 
b.  If the director fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit denial shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
c.  Aggrieved users seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a Petition for Writ of Certiorari in the Coweta County Superior Court. 
(c)  The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's 's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(d)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits must contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
(5)  A statement of applicable sanctions for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(6)  Wastewater discharge permits may also contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(e)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a period as determined by the city, not to exceed five years, and shall bear a stated expiration date. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to apply for permit renewal a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subsection (c), above, are modified, conditions change, or other just cause exists. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days' advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation or denial. 
(1)  Procedure. When director has reason to believe that any one of the conditions enumerated in subsection (2) below exists, he shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. Said notice shall set forth the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director. The hearing date shall not be less then 15 days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail to the permittee at the address shown on the permit or at permittee's last known address. At the hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to refute the allegations set forth in the proposed permit revocation notice. 
If after the hearing the director finds that any one of the conditions hereinafter enumerated in subsection (2), below, exists, he shall have the right to suspend, revoke or deny the permit. 
(2)  Any of the following is reason for permit suspension, revocation or denial. 
a.  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 70-97; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 16), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-97. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 70-94. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 70-94. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b). 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 70-93. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Periodic compliance reports: 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 70-93. 
(2)  All other users who have been issued discharge permits are required to submit compliance reports at the intervals set forth in each user's individual permit. The compliance reports shall address the discharge parameters and all other information indicated as being necessary to report as shown in the user's permit. 
(3)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(4)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 70-94, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in subsection (a)(2)4—6. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 70-93. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 70-96. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 70-96 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 70-96 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problem, including slug loading. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director as the director may require, in writing. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (e) above. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c) and (d) above. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (1), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  All sampling and testing performed under this subsection for reporting requirements shall be conducted in accordance with section 70-94. 
(k)  Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 17), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-98. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Sampling and testing records. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 70-97 shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by section 70-96. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  The name of the person(s) who performed the analysis; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(b)  Monitoring activities and records of results. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 70-97 shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city, state, or EPA. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the permitted user, or when requested by the city, state, or EPA. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 18), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-99. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city may enter into an intergovernmental contract with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) above, the director shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intergovernmental contract, as required by subsection (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 70-91. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A requirement for new significant industrial users discharging into sewers of a contributing municipality to obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the director. 
(4)  In the event the contributing municipality has in place an industrial pretreatment program approved by EPD, a provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the director; 
(5)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the director with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(6)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(7)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(8)  A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; and 
(9)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intergovernmental contract. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 19), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-100. - Industrial pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Requirement for. All users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with the limitations and provisions contained in this article and to achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city prior to commencement of construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user of the responsibility for modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Compliance schedules. The timing of construction and operation of pretreatment facilities as required hereby shall be in accordance with the compliance schedules provided by the city as described in subsection 70-97(b); however, the city shall also have the authority to issue compliance schedules independent of the permitting process and such compliance schedules may be enforced by the city as provided in the enforcement and penalties section of this chapter. 
(c)  Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. All wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be properly and adequately maintained by the user so as to achieve the intended purpose of the facilities. 
(d)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(f)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 20), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-101. - Sand and oil/grease interceptors. 
(a)  Requirement for. 
(1)  Installation requirements for new food service facilities. All proposed or newly remodeled food service facilities inside the city's wastewater service area shall be required to install an approved, properly operated and maintained grease interceptor. All interceptor units shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility building unless the user can demonstrate to the director that an outdoor interceptor would not be feasible. All interceptor units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the director. 
(2)  Requirements for existing food service facilities. All existing food service facilities inside the city's wastewater service area are expected to conduct their operations in such a manner that grease is captured on the user's premises and then properly disposed. Existing food service facilities will be handled according to conditions described in the city's grease management program. 
(3)  All users whose wastewater stream is associated with unusually large quantities or grit, sand or gravel shall be required to install a sand trap. All car/truck wash systems shall be required to install a grit trap. Design and installation shall be approved by the director. 
(4)  The requirements of this article section shall not apply to private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  Design criteria. 
(1)  Interceptor sizing. Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,500 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,500 gallons. If the calculated capacity using one of the following formulas exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following methods and grease interceptor size shall be the larger of the two results. 
a.  Interceptor Capacity (gallons) = (S) x (25) x (Hr/12) 
S = Number of Seats 
Hr = Maximum hours of daily operation (include preparation & clean up) 
b.  Interceptor Capacity (gallons) = (Sum of fixture flows) x (20) 

 
(2)  Under-sink or in-line grease interceptor requirements shall meet plumbing and drainage institute standard PDI-G101: 

 
Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the costs to provide additional measures if required by the director. City reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the user at this expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and as according to the city's grease management program. 
(2)  In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the director. The frequency of removal shall be in accordance with the city's grease management program. 
(d)  Proper disposal of collected materials. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's employees must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 21), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-102. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Protection against. Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Additionally, any person or industry which handles hazardous wastes, any priority pollutant as shown on the EPA list, or any prohibited materials shall, upon the request of the city, provide proof of protection from accidental discharge of hazardous wastes, priority pollutants, or prohibited materials. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facilities. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 90 days after the effective date of this article. Construction shall be completed within 180 days of approval of plans by the city. No significant industrial user who commences contribution to the city wastewater system after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures and facilities (if required) have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Notification required. Notification of accidental discharge shall be in accordance with subsection 70-97(f). 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 70-97 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 22), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-103. - Hauled wastewater and transportation of commercial wastes. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director, and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate any section of this ordinance or any other requirements established b the city. The director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. A fee for disposal of septic tank waste shall be charged according to a schedule recommended by the director and adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners, as from time to time revised. 
(b)  Only transporters of commercial waste registered with the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia of Natural Resources shall be authorized to remove and transport commercial wastes from generators within the jurisdiction of the city POTW. Before removing any commercial waste from a generator within the city's jurisdiction, a copy of the transporter's registration shall be filed with the director. The director may require generators of commercial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits in accordance with section 70-96. The director also may prohibit or condition the disposal of hauled commercial waste, subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Commercial waste haulers shall discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Commercial waste haulers must provide to the director, or make available at his request, a waste-tracking form for every load removed from a generator within the city's jurisdiction. The form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the commercial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of generator(s) of commercial waste, and volume and characteristics of commercial waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 23), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-104. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Bypass. For the purposes of this section, 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the pretreatment coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) above. 
(e)  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d) above. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 24), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-105. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by future amendment to this article or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 25), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-106. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 26), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-107. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as "trade secrets" under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. To the extent allowed by law, when requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 27), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-108. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
Industrial wastewater pretreatment system operators. 
Operators of industrial wastewater pretreatment systems must comply with State of Georgia licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 28), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-109. - High strength wastewater surcharge. 
(a)  Establishment of surcharge. Users discharging "high strength" wastewater into the city wastewater system may be assessed a monetary surcharge, in addition to the normally required sewer use charges, in an amount to be calculated as shown below. A "high strength" wastewater is defined as wastewater which contains the below shown parameters in excess of the below shown monthly average concentrations: 
(1)  Five day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) of 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l), not to exceed a maximum of 500 mg/l. 
(2)  Chemical oxygen demand (COD) of 500 milligrams per liter (mg/l), not to exceed a maximum of 1,000 mg/l. 
(3)  Total ammonia nitrogen (NH3+NH4) of 30 mg/l, not to exceed a maximum of 45 mg/l. 
(4)  Total phosphorus of 15 mg/l, not to exceed a maximum of 25 mg/l. 
(5)  Floatable oil and grease of 100 mg/l, not to exceed a maximum of 150 mg/l. 
The above parameters shall be determined by the utilization of the sampling and testing procedures as provided in section 70-94. 
The amount of the surcharge, which may be charged and assessed against all users discharging high strength wastewater into the city wastewater system, shall reflect the cost incurred by the city in handling the excess oxygen demand, ammonia, total phosphorus, and floatable oil and grease. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of charges for maintenance and operation of the wastewater treatment facilities including depreciation and other incidental expenses. 
(b)  Formula. When the concentrations of the surcharged parameters shown above exceed the values of the constituents as set forth in subsection (a), above, the excess concentrations may be subject to a surcharge in the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: 
Surcharge $/month = P x G x 8.34 x C 
Where: 
"P" is the excess monthly average concentration in mg/l of the parameter (BOD5, etc.) being evaluated; i.e. the actual concentration less the allowable concentration listed in paragraph (a) would be the excess. The maximum concentration shown in paragraph (a) above shall not be exceeded. 
"G" is equal to the user's monthly wastewater flow in millions of gallons. 
"8.34" is a conversion factor. 
"C" is equal to the unit cost in dollars per pound ($/lb) for the treatment of the surcharged parameters. This value shall be established by the director based on actual wastewater treatment costs which shall be revised from time to time as necessary. 
(c)  Quantitative measurement of surchargeable parameters. The measurement of the surcharge parameters (BOD5, COD, ammonia, total inorganic phosphates, or floatable oil and grease) shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Monitoring to determine surcharge shall be conducted by the industrial user as specified in the user's permit except that frequency of testing for surchargeable parameters shall be a minimum of two tests per month. If the permit requires more frequent testing, then the average of all test results will be used to calculate the surcharge. If the permit requires less frequent testing for compliance purposes, then testing frequency will be increased to twice per month. 
(2)  The city may sample the user as often as desired at the city's expense. The city will split the sample with the industrial user at the user's request. 
(d)  Billing procedure. Wastewater surcharges as provided for in this section will be included on the user's regular water and sewer bill or on a separate wastewater surcharge bill. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 29), 8-18-2003) 
Secs. 70-110—70-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 70-121. - Enforcement. 
(a)  General. The failure of any person to comply with any provision contained in this article shall be a violation which shall be enforced in accordance with the penalties and provisions as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Inspections. The director shall have the right to direct and conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out his duties as described in this article. For this purpose, the director and his authorized employees and representatives, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter at reasonable times on any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the conditions relating to pollution and to inspect the operating records of any sewage system, waste treatment work, or other sewage disposal method. Upon refusal of the right of entry, the director may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant, upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(c)  Significant noncompliance. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 41), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-122. - Notice of violation. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or consent order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director shall serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without a notice of violation first being issued. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 42), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-123. - Consent orders. 
The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified in the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as binding contracts under Georgia law and shall be judicially enforceable by petition for specific performance. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 43), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-124. - Injunctive relief. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the Coweta County Superior Court, through the city attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains the further violation and/or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, consent order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 44), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-125. - Termination of discharge. 
Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
Such user shall be notified, in writing, of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered a reasonable opportunity to show cause before the director why the proposed action should not be taken. The decision of the director, after notice and opportunity for hearing, shall be deemed a final action by the City of Senoia. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. Aggrieved users may seek judicial review by petitioning the Superior Court of Coweta County for Writ of Certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 45), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-126. - Emergency suspensions. 
The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after oral notice to the user, whenever, in the director's sole discretion, such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 70-125 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of a termination hearing under section 70-125. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 46), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-127. - Civil liability. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or consent order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation, but shall not exceed $25,000.00 cumulatively. The director shall cause a citation to be issued to the violator to appear before the municipal court of the city to show cause why such penalty should not be imposed. 
(b)  In addition to any monetary fine imposed, the director may seek restitution of reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of penalty to be imposed, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions voluntarily undertaken by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  In lieu of the provisions of subsections (a) through (c) above, the director may, in his sole discretion, elect to file a complaint for civil liability in the State Court of Coweta County, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-51. In those cases where the violator has been cited to municipal court and refuses to waive the right to trial by jury, the municipal court may bind the case over to the state or superior court under this section. 
(e)  Conviction in the municipal court under this section shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 47), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-128. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or consent order issued hereunder, or any order of the municipal court issued under section 70-127, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The director shall apply for a state warrant for violation of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-53(a), returnable to the State Court of Coweta County. 
(b)  The director shall seek the issuance of state warrants for any person violating any of the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-53 (b) through (d), returnable to the appropriate state courts of criminal jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 48), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-129. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 49), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-130. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as defined in section 70-121. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 50), 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 70-131. - Notification delivery of enforcement actions. 
Written notice personally delivered or placed in the U.S. mail by certified mail to the person's last known address, as shown in city utility billing records, shall be deemed sufficient notice for all enforcement actions in this article. Such notice(s) may be personally served on the user or any authorized representative of the user. With respect to ordinance violations regarding nonpayment of amounts due under this article, only notice mailed to the person's last known address, by regular U.S. mail, of the amount owed and the date upon which payment is due shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(§ 51), 8-18-2003) 
Secs. 70-132—70-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 70-140. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted for the purpose of establishing the stormwater utility and stormwater user fee system and other provisions relating thereto. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-141. - Findings of fact. 
The mayor and city council make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The city is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, article IX, section II, paragraph III, and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management service systems and facilities throughout the corporate boundaries of the City of Senoia (hereinafter "the city" or "Senoia") and to collect fees for provision of those services. 
(2)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, the city is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the state and its city charter to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city limits. 
(3)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff can result in: 
a.  Erosion of lands, which could threaten businesses, residences, and other structures with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within, and downstream of, the city; 
b.  Adverse impacts to the city's sanitary sewer system operations thereby increasing the potential for infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system; 
c.  Potential degradation of the quality of both surface water and ground water resources. 
(4)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the city in concert with the management of other water resources within the city. In order to do so, the city must have both a stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding strategy for its stormwater management program operation and drainage-related capital improvement needs. 
(5)  The city is required under the Federal Clean Water Act, federal and state environmental regulations and the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter "NPDES") phase II stormwater permit for small MS4's, to provide a comprehensive stormwater management program (SWMP) for the enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) into the state or United States' waters to the maximum extent practicable. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater user fee charge upon improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4, or receive stormwater services from the city, either directly or indirectly, whether or not the property is private or public in nature. 
(6)  Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the city's NPDES phase II stormwater permit; the city's NPDES wastewater permit; the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP); the Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan; the city's watershed assessment and watershed protection plan; and other applicable state and federal water resources related regulations as well as other identified stormwater management program needs will affect the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities above what is currently being spent for stormwater quality management, drainage system maintenance, flood plain management, capital drainage projects and other stormwater management program activities. 
(7)  The city desires to implement a storm water management program to address storm water runoff quality and quantity and to mitigate the impacts of pollution and flooding which may impact the public MS4, private property and downstream receiving waters of the state and/or United States. 
(8)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city's stormwater management system and the funding of necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services provided by the city's stormwater management program and the demand imposed by improved property on the city's drainage system and stormwater management program. 
(9)  The stormwater management program assessment and financial analysis performed by the city's consultant properly assesses and defines the city's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy. 
(10)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned stormwater program assessment and financial analysis, it is appropriate that the city authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of storm water management services, systems, and facilities within the city in concert with other water resources management programs. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved/developed properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(11)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management system and service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the incorporated areas of the city is appropriate given the present and future needs of the city. 
(12)  The stormwater management services rendered may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners and/or tenants of improved properties in proportion to the demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management systems and facilities which result in services to such properties and the owners and/or tenants thereof. The fair and equitable apportionment of costs via the stormwater user fee charge correlates to the stormwater management services provided to that property and the runoff demand that the property imposes on the public drainage system and the city stormwater management program. 
(13)  Stormwater management needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service to customers and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways although the benefits may be indirect or immeasurable. 
(14)  A stormwater management program provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city. The imposition of a stormwater user fee charge is the most equitable means to allocate the costs to users of the stormwater management services and to generate revenue to implement the defined level of service for the city's stormwater management program. 
(15)  The presence and amount of impervious surfaces on each improved property is the most important factor influencing the stormwater runoff contribution of that property; the corresponding demand the property imposes on the stormwater management program; and the cost of providing stormwater management services to that property by the city. Therefore, the amount of impervious surface on each property is the most significant parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge; and the city deems it appropriate to impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public drainage system whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(16)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based primarily on the amount of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Stormwater utility user fee charges may be designed with specific modifiers to further enhance customer equity, as well as customer understanding of the user fee charge rate structure, while at the same time minimizing the city's customer account management and maintenance efforts. 
(17)  Stormwater utility user fee charges may be supplemented by other funding which addresses specific needs, including, but not limited to, special district service and connection fees, general fund allocations, revenue bonds, loans, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes (SPLOST) and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council. 
(18)  The existence of privately owned and properly maintained on-site stormwater control facilities, activities or assets which reduce, or otherwise mitigate, the impact of a particular property on the city's stormwater management program, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property in the form of a credit, and such credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater utility. Credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the reduction and mitigation of the stormwater runoff impacts from the property. 
(19)  It is required that the revenue proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, systems or facilities, together with any other supplemental revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems or facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes. Such user fee revenue proceeds, and other supplemental revenues, shall be deposited into the city stormwater utility enterprise fund and held in trust. The user fee proceeds and other supplemental revenues shall remain in the enterprise fund, and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital improvements, facilities, equipment, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments, debt service payments, or other indebtedness related to the stormwater management program. 
(20)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of the city hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility, as the best available means of addressing the foregoing stormwater management program needs and priorities. By means of this article, the city will enact a stormwater user fee rate structure and a procedure for the establishment of a user fee charge billing rate related to the provision of stormwater management services. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means and refers to the Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, codified at 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto, and the Georgia counterpart thereof implementing the Clean Water Act for enforcement within the state. 
Credit means a reduction in the amount of a customer's stormwater user fee charge in recognition of a customer's efforts to mitigate the stormwater runoff impact that developed property has on the city stormwater management services and systems, and/or the efforts of a customer to offset the city's cost for implementation of stormwater management program related activities. 
Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefitting from the services provided by the city's stormwater management program and the stormwater utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the stormwater utility's administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the stormwater management systems for the handling and disposal of stormwater runoff from private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities, and activities. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a structure, regardless of the type or method of construction, which contains one or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and cooking facilities, designed for occupancy by a one or more person(s) regardless of relationship, living as a single-family unit. 
Enterprise fund means a fund used to account for operations that are financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprises where the intent of the governing authority is that the cost of providing services to the public on a continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily through user charges. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the stormwater user fee charge billing unit increment related to the median horizontal impervious surface area footprint of 4,400 square feet for a typical single family dwelling unit within the city. 
Fiduciary fund means a trust or agency fund used to account for assets held by a local government in a trustee capacity. 
Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater runoff collects, remains, diverts, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's topography, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater characteristics, the parcel's on-site operations, the parcel's stormwater controls, the parcel's antecedent moisture as well as the parcel's geologic and hydro-geologic characteristics. 
Impervious area shall mean and have the same definition as impervious surface. 
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development and causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered/undeveloped natural condition. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, awnings and other fabric coverings, and other surfaces such as compacted soil and gravel, which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development . 
Improved property (or developed property) means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 500 square feet of impervious and/or partially impervious surfaces. 
Manufactured home park means a common development (with a single property owner or entity) of more than one factory-built or pre-fabricated housing structures that have been partially or entirely assembled at another location and moved into the development. 
Multi-family residential (MFR) property means developed property containing more than two dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. MFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for non-residential purposes and as defined herein or vacant/undeveloped property. 
Non-single family residential (NSFR) property shall mean a developed parcel of land that consists of various non-residential land uses including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Multi-family, commercial (including mixed commercial & residential), office/institutional, public, transportation, industrial, manufacturing and storage buildings and facilities; 
(2)  Parking lots, parks, public and private schools, universities and hospitals; 
(3)  Streets, roads, water and wastewater treatment plants; and 
(4)  Any other form of use not specifically defined as a single family residential property (SFR). 
Non-single family residential (NSFR) customer shall mean a utility customer whose property meets the definition of NSFR whether such customer is the owner of the parcel or a tenant of the owner. 
Parcel shall mean a designated parcel or tract, established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Partial impervious surface shall mean those areas which allow for limited infiltration of rainfall and surface water runoff into the soil in the manner that is more similar to natural conditions than "impervious surface" as defined above. Partial impervious surfaces influence and affect stormwater runoff such that the runoff is collected, concentrated and/or flows in a manner that is materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. Common partial impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, compacted gravel and/or compacted soils. 
Private stormwater management systems and facilities shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, for which operation and maintenance is the responsibility of the owner or successor or assignee thereof, and which have not been conveyed or dedicated to the city for future maintenance. 
Public stormwater management systems and facilities (or the city's municipal separate storm sewer system) shall mean that portion of the drainage system consisting of natural and/or man-made structures, within the political boundaries of the city which channel or convey storm water from its point of collection to a point of discharge, owned by the city, over which the city has a legal right of access, have been formally dedicated to and accepted by the city for maintenance, or over which the city exercises dominion and control. 
Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the city. 
Single-family residential (SFR) property means developed property containing one residential structure with no more than two dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. Improved property may be classified as SFR even if supplemental accessory structures are present such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in significant additional amounts of impervious surfaces, as determined by the governing body or its designee. SFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for non-residential purposes and as defined herein; manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes; residential condominium developments with more than two units; or vacant/undeveloped property. 
Single-family residential (SFR) customer means a utility customer of the city residing in a dwelling unit whether such customer is the owner of the dwelling unit or a tenant of the owner of the dwelling unit. 
Stormwater management services mean all water quality and water quantity related services provided by the city which relate to the following: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated portions of the city; 
(2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; and 
(5)  Compliance with applicable state and federal stormwater management regulations and permit requirements; 
(6)  Other services as deemed appropriate by the city. 
Stormwater management systems and facilities mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, public streets, curbs and gutters, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey, detain, retain, treat or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater utility manager means the person appointed by the city manager to administer the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge for the provision of stormwater management services imposed pursuant to this article. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners and/or tenants of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, post-construction maintenance and inspection of existing facilities, on-site stormwater control systems, special service and connection fees, and other stormwater management related services provided by the city for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the existence and/or installation of 500 square feet or less of impervious surface. 
User is defined as any person who uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives stormwater management services from the city. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-143. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the city stormwater utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated area of the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management systems and facilities and stormwater management program services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding generated by the stormwater utility user fee charge to the operation of the stormwater management program and stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, other rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the mayor and city council from time to time, and other funds that may be allocated to the stormwater utility. Such fund shall be both an enterprise fund and a fiduciary fund, consistent with the definitions within this article. 
(c)  All revenues and receipts generated from the storm water user fee charges shall be segregated and placed into the stormwater utility enterprise fund in trust, and be expended solely for stormwater management purposes; provided, however, such fund may also pay a reasonable allocation of costs provided to the stormwater utility by the city's general fund, or other utilities of the city, in order to account for application overhead costs. Stormwater utility user fee charge revenue shall be used only for the operating expenses and/or capital investments of the stormwater utility. However, other forms of revenue and/or financial resources, not accounted for in the stormwater utility user fee revenue, may be allocated as deemed appropriate by the city, to provide supplemental funding to the stormwater management program and stormwater management services. 
(d)  Under the supervision and oversight of the city manager, the city shall place responsibility with the stormwater utility manager for operation, maintenance and regulation of the stormwater utility and stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated, or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-144. - Stormwater utility service area. 
There shall be one stormwater utility service area in the city which shall encompass the municipal boundaries of the city. The city has established that all developed parcels within the municipal boundaries receive stormwater management program services from the city. Improved/developed properties within the defined service area will receive a stormwater user fee charge bill because they contribute stormwater runoff to the public drainage system, are directly or indirectly connected to the city's drainage system, and/or receive stormwater management services from the city to varying degrees. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-145. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. 
The drainage system within the city consists of natural and/or man-made structures, within the political boundaries of the city which channel or convey storm water from its point of collection to a point of discharge. The city, owns or has legal access to certain segments of this system which (1) are located within public streets and street rights-of-way owned or controlled by the city; (2) are subject to written easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other legal provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of such systems and facilities; or (3) are located on public lands owned by the city or to which the city has been granted adequate access by the public owner for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of such systems and facilities. Operation and maintenance of storm water systems and facilities which are located on private property for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of the systems and facilities by the city, or public property not owned or controlled by the city, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the United States of America, the state, and the NPDES permit held by the city. 
As defined for purposes of its NPDES permit, the MS4 owned and operated by the city may entail a more expansive system than that of the drainage system above described in order to recognize the city's evolving role as a regulator under the comprehensive stormwater management program, implemented pursuant to its NPDES permit, which is designed to reduce pollutants flowing into our federal and state waters to the maximum extent practicable, through public awareness and education, local permitting, inspection, and enforcement. 
(1)  The stormwater utility shall provide stormwater management services for existing and proposed public stormwater management systems and facilities as defined in this article, subject to funding availability and policy considerations made in the best interest of the public health, safety, general welfare, and the environment. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for providing stormwater management services to private stormwater management systems and facilities, acceptance of which conforms to policies established by the stormwater utility. Consideration of available funding and allocation of otherwise limited public resources shall at all times be within the sole determination of the mayor and council. 
(2)  The stormwater utility may provide periodic inspection, testing, or engineering assessment of privately owned stormwater management systems and facilities to ascertain that said facilities are functioning as designed and approved. After notice to the property owner, the stormwater utility may provide for remedial maintenance of said private facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. In cases where such remedial maintenance is required to be performed by the city, the city shall have the right to bill the owner of said private facility for the costs of such maintenance, and impose a lien against the property to enforce collection. 
(3)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any person or entity, or to any specific property within or outside the municipal boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents arising out of any alleged negligence, failure to act, or breach of duty or relationship. 
(4)  If any development permit, plan approval, inspection, or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any land disturbance, construction, or other regulated activity upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory code, ordinance, regulation, or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, negligent construction of permitted system or facility, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its mayor and city council members, officers, employees or agents. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-146. - Stormwater utility customer classes. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall establish specified customer classes within the service area to reflect differences in impervious surface and stormwater runoff characteristics; stormwater management program services provided by the city to the stormwater utility customers; and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the city stormwater management program and drainage system components. All publicly owned developed properties, other than streets or roads, are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties. The stormwater utility classes will encompass all developed and undeveloped properties within the city and are defined as follows: 
(1)  The single family residential (SFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as SFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(2)  The non-single family residential (NSFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as NSFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(3)  The undeveloped class shall consist of properties classified as undeveloped per the applicable definition. 
(b)  Documentation pertaining to the stormwater utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater utility manager for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-147. - Stormwater user fee charges. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service area shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services by the city. 
(b)  The basis for calculation of the stormwater user fee charge for developed properties within the city is established in this article. The city shall assign or determine the customer class, amount of impervious area and other pertinent factors as may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the costs to deliver stormwater management services and to calculate the stormwater user fee charges for developed properties in the city. 
(c)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a reasonable connection, or rational nexus, to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the city as defined herein. 
(d)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by public and private property owners and/or tenants which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities, or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(e)  The stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue on or about June 1, 2016 and be billed to customers in arrears each monthly billing cycle thereafter. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-148. - Stormwater user fee charge billing rates. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall impose a stormwater user fee charge on all developed properties within the service area in accordance with the provisions of this article. The stormwater utility shall apportion the cost of delivering stormwater services to all developed properties based on the demand the property places on the city's stormwater management program, the stormwater services provided by the city and the benefits derived by the property as a result of the provision of services. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall establish by resolution the stormwater user fee charge rates, and the billing rates may be modified by the mayor and city council from time to time to meet the financial and operational needs of the stormwater utility. A current schedule of said rates shall be on file in the office of the city clerk, for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of the city to establish rates that are fair, equitable and reasonable, and which, together with other funding sources available to the city stormwater utility for services, systems, and/or facilities related to stormwater management are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management program, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other stormwater utility related costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  Stormwater user fee charges shall be based upon the total number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) associated with developed properties within the city. Each ERU shall correspond to 4,400 square feet of impervious surface. 
(d)  Gravel and compacted soil driveways, parking areas, and roads on developed property will be considered partial impervious surface and included in the customer's ERU calculation because of the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. However, the total surface area associated with these materials will be calculated at 85 percent of the total ERUs to reflect the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. 
(e)  Calculation of user fee charges. The periodic stormwater user fee charges imposed on all developed properties shall be calculated by multiplying the stormwater user fee billing rate (per ERU) times the number of ERUs for each customer account. The number of ERUs that will be utilized to calculate the user fee charge for each customer account shall be in general accordance with the following: 
(1)  SFR customer class. Each SFR customer account shall be charged one ERU per month unless the conditions outlined below applies. 
a.  If two customer accounts are assigned to a SFR property (i.e. a duplex) then each customer account on that parcel will be charged one-half ERU per month for billing purposes. 
(2)  NSFR customer class. Each NSFR customer shall be charged one ERU for each 4,400 square feet, or increment thereof, of impervious surface located on the property to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. Fractional ERUs will be rounded to one decimal place to establish the number of ERUs for billing each month. 
(3)  Undeveloped land customer class. Undeveloped land shall be assigned zero ERUs and will not receive a stormwater user fee bill. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-148. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no developed public or private property located in the incorporated area of the city, containing more than 500 square feet of impervious surface, shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. The stormwater utility user fee charge is not a tax and no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion, disability, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management program services and facilities. 
(b)  Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels which contain 500 square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces or partial impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(2)  Linear railroad rights-of-way (i.e. tracks, rails, rail bed) outside of the defined rail yard limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by the rail road company associated with rights-of-way and drainage conveyance systems. However, railroad stations, rail yards, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad operations shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(3)  The city streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. The stormwater utility shall not charge the city a user fee charge for the impervious surface associated with city's streets and other impervious surfaces within the rights-of-way of the city's municipal street system. This exemption is granted in consideration of the city allowing the stormwater utility to utilize the city's existing streets, curbs, gutters, drainage ways and ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural and man-made, within and owned by the city which controls, diverts, and conveys surface water for the purposes of collecting, diverting, transporting and controlling surface runoff and storm waters. All other developed property owned by the city shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(4)  The county roads and rights-of-way on the county road system located within the city limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges inasmuch as the county has legal responsibility to perform all drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities with respect to such roads and rights-of-way. This exemption is in recognition of the drainage system maintenance and capital construction responsibilities undertaken by the county. All other developed property owned by the county that is within the service area shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(5)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) highways, federal interstates, and rights-of-way on the state highway system within the city limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance, NPDES stormwater permit regulatory compliance, and capital construction activities undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way road and drainage conveyance systems. However, offices, maintenance buildings, and/or other developed property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(6)  Publicly owned developed property of the federal and state governments, their departments, agencies, boards, commissions, and authorities, shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges under this article. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-149. - Stormwater user fee charge credits. 
(a)  The stormwater utility manager may grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the city stormwater utility credit manual (credit manual), which is incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. Copies of the credit manual will be maintained by and made available from the stormwater utility manager. 
(1)  Customers may apply for credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(2)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based upon meeting all technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. 
(3)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance, including proper future maintenance of the stormwater management systems and facilities with design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the customer. The stormwater utility manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual or this article. 
(4)  In order to obtain a credit, the customer must make application to the city on forms provided by the stormwater utility manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format described in the credit manual. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to review and approval of a stormwater utility credit application by the city. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater utility manager, he shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is received to approve the credit in whole, approve the credit in part, or deny the credit. The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. Credits applied for by the customer and approved in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-150. - Stormwater user fee charge billing; delinquencies and collections; and adjustments. 
(a)  Billing. The city shall bill the property owner or utility customer account holder, as identified from city public utility billing database information, tax digest and other public records of the county, and the entity receiving the bill shall be obligated to pay the applicable stormwater user fee charge in a similar manner to other city utility services (i.e. water, sewer, sanitation, etc.). 
(1)  Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue on or about June 1, 2016, and shall be billed in arrears on the customer's monthly public utility bill thereafter beginning in the July 2016 billing cycle. 
(2)  The stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected on a combined utility bill and collected along with other city utility services. If and when the account is closed or becomes delinquent, the bills for unpaid previous service as well as for current and future service shall be reverted to the property owner. 
(3)  Customers that do not have another utility service shall receive a utility bill with stormwater user fees only or shall be billed via another method and frequency established by the city. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to bill the stormwater user fee charge to either the property owner or the utility customer account holder (i.e. the tenant) as described herein. 
a.  The city shall have the authority to bill the property owner's tenant for the stormwater user fee charge in situations where the tenant has opened an account with the city for public utility services, however, the property owner shall remain ultimately liable for payment of the stormwater user fee charge imposed on the property and the utility accounts associated with that property. 
b.  The city shall reserve the right to bill the landlord or property owner for stormwater services where accurate and equitable apportionment of the user fee charges to multiple tenant accounts on a parcel is not practical as determined by the city, and/or to facilitate efficient billing and collection of customer stormwater user fee charges from multiple tenants. 
(5)  Frequency of the billing of stormwater user fee charges shall be specified by the mayor and city council. 
(6)  Failure of the customer to receive a utility bill or a stormwater user fee charge shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the property owner of each developed property subject to stormwater user fee charges shall be ultimately obligated to pay stormwater user fee charges and any interest on delinquent stormwater user fee charge payments. 
(7)  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of developed property, the stormwater utility may back bill for a period of up to three years, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any delinquency charges during the back billed period. 
(b)  Delinquencies and collections. 
(1)  The stormwater utility user fee charge shall be billed and collected as an integral part of the city's billing for other utility services and the customer may not elect to separate such fee from the remainder of the utility bill for nonpayment. If the customer fails to include payment of the stormwater utility user fee charge portion of the utility bill when the utility bill is paid, or otherwise separates the stormwater utility user fee charge from the remainder of the bill for nonpayment, the entire billing will be in default notwithstanding any other payment made towards the bill, and, in addition to all other remedies which the city may have for nonpayment, any or all other utility services, including water service, may be terminated on the date printed on the bill in accordance with the procedures established in this Code for such termination. Acceptance and retention by the city of any portion of the utility bill shall not constitute a waiver of the foregoing provisions. 
(2)  A late charge will accrue on the unpaid balance of any stormwater user fee charge which has been due and payable for 30 days or more as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 7-4-16 and in accordance with city policy for other utilities. In addition, all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, will be added. 
(3)  Unpaid stormwater service fees may also be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by state law to collect on any civil judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner or the property. 
(4)  In the event of non-payment and service cut-off, the customer must pay the bill in full, the late payment charge, a cut-off charge if applicable, and pay a deposit if it was either waived, previously refunded, or was used to make the payment, late payment charge, and/or the cut-off charge. The city manager is authorized to work out a payment plan for customers that demonstrate the ability to pay. Such a payment plan can only be entered into once in a 12-month period. Failure to meet any payment date of a payment plan shall terminate the payment plan, and the city reserves the right to discontinue utility services to that customer account. 
(c)  Adjustments. The stormwater utility manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. 
(1)  If a customer believes his stormwater user fee charge amount is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge for the account at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater utility manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an adjustment request by the city. 
(2)  Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide accurate impervious area and other supplemental information to the stormwater utility manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer or as otherwise allowed by the stormwater utility manager. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the stormwater utility manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the customer's adjustment request. 
(3)  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater utility manager, the stormwater utility manager shall within 30 calendar days render a written decision. 
(4)  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater utility manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater user fee charge for the account is correct. 
(5)  The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
(6)  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater user fee charge bill. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 70-151. - Appeals and hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal to the city manager may be taken by any customer aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater utility manager. The appeal shall be taken within 30 calendar days of the decision of the stormwater utility manager by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the stormwater utility manager shall forthwith transmit to the city manager all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearings. The city manager shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The city manager shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the stormwater utility manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the stormwater utility manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner or customer, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may petition the superior court of the county for a writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-15-2016 ) 
Chapter 74 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-05, adopted Dec. 3, 2007, superceded Chapter 74 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 74 pertained to similar material. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Purpose of definitions. 
For the purpose of interpreting this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, and company as well as individual. The word "lot" includes the word "plot." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The words used or occupied as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied. The word maps, zoning map, or Senoia Zoning Map means the official zoning map of Senoia, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure or use: A use or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building located on the same lot with such principal use or building. A garage is not considered an accessory structure. 
Amateur radio service antenna structure: A tower and antenna for radio transmission and reception, which is maintained by a licensed amateur radio operator as an accessory structure. 
Apartment development: A development of multifamily dwelling units developed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Automotive: All self-propelled vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, boats, motorcycles and motor homes; also accessory trailers. 
Basement: An area below the first floor, having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground, used for storage, garages for use of occupants of the building, janitor or security guard quarters or other utilities common to the rest of the building. A basement used for any one or more of the above purposes shall not be counted as a story. 
Bed and breakfast: A private residence offering short-term lodging to paying guests. Service of meals shall be limited to breakfast and served only to guests or residents. The owner/operator shall be in permanent residence and when located within a residential area, operation shall be an accessory use and must not alter the character of the premises with respect to the zoning district in which it is located. Thus, in any single-family residential district, a bed and breakfast establishment must maintain the appearance and character of a single-family dwelling. The operation of a bed and breakfast shall not adversely affect either the lifestyle of adjacent property owners, exterior architectural or environmental features of a property or landscape. 
Bedroom: A room within a dwelling unit, which is normally used to provide sleeping accommodations for residents of the unit regardless of its daytime use. 
Boardinghouse and lodging house: A building other than a motel or hotel, where, for compensation, which may include cash, services or similar reimbursement, lodging for not more than 20 persons is provided. 
Buffer: A portion of a lot set aside for open space and visual screening purposes, pursuant to applicable provisions of this article, to separate different use districts, or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, good, or materials of any kind. 
Building accessory: A building which is clearly incidental to, and is customarily found in connection with and is located on the same lot as the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
Building setback line: The minimum horizontal distance allowed between the existing or future street right-of-way line and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof except the projections of unenclosed porches, steps, eaves, gutter and similar fixtures as permitted by this article. 
City: The City of Senoia, Georgia. 
Child care facility: A building or portion of a building where care and supervision is provided of persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. This facility serves 19 or more persons and is licensed by the State of Georgia; for children, the outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence of not less than four feet in height in the rear yard only. For the purposes of this article the term "Child Care" shall include but is not limited to the terms "day care," "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school" and "pre-school." 
Child care home, facility: A customary home occupation which provides, for six or less persons who are not residents of the premises; care and supervision by a registered adult resident of Georgia for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Church: A structure built for the religious worship. 
Cluster housing subdivision: A residential subdivision of at least ten acres established pursuant to the provision of this article. 
Collector street: Those streets designated as such on official maps or in resolutions or ordinances of the city. 
Community development subdivision: A development, which may encompass residential, neighborhood shopping and office-institution uses established in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Comprehensive plan: A comprehensive, long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region that generally includes inventory and analytic sections leading to recommendations for the community's future economic development, housing, community services, natural resources, population, historic resources, land use, and transportation, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these locations. 
Conditional zoning: The imposition of conditions in the grant of a rezoning application which are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this article and which are related to the promotion of the pubic health, safety, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use, height, setbacks and other non-use requirements, physical improvements to the property and infrastructure serving the property. 
Condominium: Individual ownership units in a multi-family structure, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds, in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article and the Georgia Condominium Act, O.C.G.A. §44-3-70 et seq. 
Construction vehicle: Any vehicle (other than a passenger vehicle, a pickup or panel truck) whose primary purpose is use in land development and construction including, but not limited to, earth-moving equipment and dump trucks. 
County: Coweta County, Georgia. 
Conventional construction: A dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site; and which is constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code, and meeting the following development standards: 
(1)  The home has a minimum width in excess of 24 feet. 
(2)  The pitch of the dwelling unit's roof has a minimum vertical rise of four feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, except that any such dwelling unit for which a building permit was applied prior to the adoption of this article may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this article with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the aforesaid building permit. 
Density: As used in residential categories of the comprehensive land use plan, means the number of dwelling units permitted per acre or other specified area of land. 
Department: The department charged with enforcement of the provision in which the term appears. When appropriate "department" includes the department head or the designated thereof. 
Development permit: A permit that authorizes the use, construction thereon or alteration of any property within the incorporated limits of the city. 
Dwelling, multiple-family or multifamily: A building designed for and containing four or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building designed for and containing one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, two-family or duplex: A building designed for and containing two dwelling units. 
Dwelling, three-family or triplex: A building designed for and containing three dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit: A house or other structure or a portion of any building or structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Dwelling, vertical mixed use: A vertical mixed use building contains a mix of residential and commercial uses. Typically, commercial uses (i.e. retail shops, restaurants, offices) are located on the ground floor, while residential units are located on upper levels. 
Family: One or more person occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities. Families related by blood, marriage or law may have two cooking facilities in a single-family dwelling unit when approved in accordance with provisions of this article. 
Fast food restaurant: An eating establishment in which food is prepared and served to the public over a counter or through a drive-in window. This use may also provide a patron area with tables and seating as a service to customers. 
Floodplain: That area threatened by possible flood under normal to severe circumstances as shown on the most current Flood Insurance Rate Map, published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or structure from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. 
Frontage: The distance for which the boundary line of a lot and a street right-of-way line are coincident. 
Greenspace: An area of undeveloped, open space that comprises that portion of a conservation subdivision reserved for permanent protection. Uses of greenspace are restricted in perpetuity through the recording of an approved legal instrument. 
Home occupation: Any business or occupational use customarily conducted within a principal dwelling or accessory building and carried on by the occupant thereof; provided that, such use shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the heated floor space; provided, further, that such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling as a residence and does not change the character thereof or reveal from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than a residence; provided, further, that there is no display, no stock and trade, and no mechanical equipment used except as such is commonly used for purely domestic household purposes. Such permissible occupations, include, in general, such personal services as furnished by a musician, artist, seamstress, cook or laundress, but shall not include such uses as barber shops, beauty parlors, tea rooms, tourist homes, animal hospitals, professional offices, wholesale, retail or manufacturing business. 
Hotel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for at least twenty-one transient guests and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Industrialized home: A home manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto. State approved buildings meet the state building and construction codes and bear an insignia of approval issued by the commissioner, and meeting the following standards: 
(1)  The home has a minimum width in excess of 24 feet. 
(2)  The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of four feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in conventional residential construction, except that any such home for which a building permit was applied prior to the adoption of this article may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this article with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the aforesaid building permit. 
Junkyard: Any use on private property involving the parking, storage or disassembly of junked vehicles, or wrecked or non-operable automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap iron and other metals, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old refrigerators and other household appliances, and used brick, wood or other building materials. These uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or part of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in addition to or accessory to other uses of the premises. 
Kennel: Any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litter of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes; provided, however, nothing herein shall apply to structures designed and used for the containment of pigeons. 
Landfill: A disposal site where solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Lot corner: A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. When the frontage on one street exceeds the frontage of the other, the one with the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. However, the orientation of buildings and frontage to which street numbers are assigned shall be at the option of the developer. 
Lot coverage: The percentage of a lot, which may be covered with buildings or structures, excluding walks, drives and other similar uses, and recreational facilities, which are accessory to a permitted use. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Lot parcel: A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership, legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot width: The distance from one side lot line to the other side lot line measured at the minimum building setback line. 
Low density residential: The comprehensive land use plan category which includes, but is not limited to, the following use: single-family detached residential development. 
Major thoroughfare: Those streets designated as such on official maps or in resolutions or ordinances of the city. 
Manufactured home, class A: A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), and meeting the following development standards: 
(1)  Minimum width in excess of 24 feet. 
(2)  The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of four feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in conventional residential construction, except that any such home for which a building permit was applied prior to the adoption of this article may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this article with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the aforesaid building permit. 
(3)  The exterior siding consisting of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, or masonry. The exterior siding shall be comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction. 
(4)  A curtain wall, solid except for required ventilation and access and constructed of masonry, is installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. Such a wall shall have a minimum thickness of four inches. 
(5)  The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 
(6)  All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
(7)  Landings of the requisite composition and size as per Section 1113 of the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International, with said provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as part of this requirement. 
(8)  Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
Manufactured home, class B: A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), but does not satisfy the criteria necessary to qualify the unit as a class A manufactured home. All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
Motel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made primarily direct from an exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby. 
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act: The national building code for all manufactured homes built since June 15, 1976, written and administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; also know as the HUD Code. 
Nonconforming building: A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this zoning ordinance, but fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Nonconforming use: A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance, but fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Nonresidential development: All commercial, office, institutional, industrial and similar lands and uses. 
Office professional: The land use category, which includes, but is not limited to, the following uses: Less intensive office and professional center land uses including low-rise office parks, single office buildings and houses converted to office uses, characterized by buildings that are three stories in height or less. 
Open space: That portion of a lot, including yards, established pursuant to the requirements of this article as open space, which is open and unobstructed from its lower level to the sky, with the exception of natural foliage or accessory recreational facilities or walkways, which is accessible to all persons occupying a building on the lot and is not part of the roof of any portion of any building. 
Parking lot: Any area designed for temporary accommodation of motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating condition, whether for a fee or as a service. 
Parking space: An area of not less than nine feet wide by 18 feet deep, the exclusive purpose of which is the parking of a vehicle. 
Permitted use: A use by right, which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Personal care home: Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage and is either licensed or otherwise approved by the department of human resources pursuant to the provision of O.C.G.A. § 31-7-12. 
Planned center, shopping, office, institutional or industrial: Any planned concentration of at least three business establishments which also provides planned and shared parking, access and service. 
Planned manufactured home community: A lot used or intended for use as a residential area occupied by manufactured homes; and conforming to an approved development plan with appropriate and adequate community services, recreation facilities, utilities, streets, and sidewalks provided by the developer; where the resident owns or rents the manufactured home and rents the manufactured home space. All manufactured homes located within a manufactured home community must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq., and all manufactured home communities shall be designed in accordance with the applicable provision[s] of this chapter. 
Planned shopping development: A commercial development of at least 40,000 square feet on a site of not less than four acres developed in accordance with the provision of this article. 
Public and institutional: Refers to the comprehensive plan land use element category which includes, but is not limited to, the following uses: government-owned facilities and institutions which are anticipated to remain in public use, including government offices and facilities, public hospitals and health care facilities, public schools, public colleges, public educational research lands, public park lands, and both public and private cemeteries. 
Residential district: Any district or use, the primary purpose of which is for residential dwelling units. 
Restaurant: A facility serving meals to the general public for a profit. 
Restaurant, drive-in: Any restaurant where the primary activity is directed to the motoring public by providing curb, carry-out, pickup and other related services. 
SBCCI: Southern Building Code Congress International 
School: Structure built for educational purposes. 
Self-storage facility: A building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and secured compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of customers' goods or wares. 
Single-family attached dwelling: A dwelling unit on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot by a common party wall. 
Single-family attached subdivision: A subdivision development of single- family attached or other dwellings developed in accordance with the provision of this article. 
Single-family detached dwelling: A dwelling unit on an individual lot unattached to another dwelling unit. 
Site-built home: See definition of conventional construction. 
State: The State of Georgia. 
Stick-built home: See definition of conventional construction 
Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Each floor or level in a multistory building used for parking, excluding a basement, shall be classified as a story. 
Street, future right-of-way line: The right-of-way line, which has been projected and established as being required for any street, existing or future, under the transportation and thoroughfare plan of the city or designated as such on official maps or in resolutions or ordinances of the city. 
Street-private: Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular access within a development which is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the city, and which is not maintained by the city. 
Street, right-of-way line: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, condemnation or purchase and occupied and intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, multi-use trail, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade tree or other special use. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to, tennis courts, fences, swimming pools and buildings. 
Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of sale, legacy or building development; it includes all divisions of land involving a new street to which the public has access (whether public or private) or a change in an existing street, and includes, where appropriate to context, the process of subdividing or the land subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of this article. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
Transportation/communications-utilities: Refers to the comprehensive land use plan category which includes, but is not limited to, the following uses: public, semipublic and private land uses which provide transportation, communications or utility land uses. 
Yard: That area of a lot between the principal building and adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. The minimum required width or depth of a yard shall be determined as the horizontal distance between lot or street lines and minimum setback lines as established by this article. 
Yard-front: A yard extending across the total width of a lot between side lot lines and being that area between the street lines and that line established by the front wall or walls of the principal structure projected to intersect the side lot lines. 
Yard-rear: A yard extending across the total width of a lot between side lot lines and being that area between the lot lines and being that area between the rear lot line and that line or lines established by the rear wall or walls of the principal structure projected to intersect the side lot lines. 
Yard-side: Extending the total depth of a lot between the front and rear yards and the area between the sideline and lines of the sidewall or walls of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.2, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 15-04, § 4, 8-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 74-3. - Purpose of districts. 
The various use districts, which are created by this article, are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To prevent flooding of improved property. 
(2)  To prevent overcrowding of schools and other public facilities. 
(3)  To achieve such timing, density and distribution of land development and use as will prevent overloading systems for providing water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, sanitation, police and fire protection and other public services. 
(4)  To achieve such density, distribution and design of land development and use as will protect and preserve the design capacity of the streets and roads within the city and prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards. 
(5)  To encourage such distribution of population, land development and use as will facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of public services and facilities. 
(6)  To achieve such density, design and distribution of housing as will protect and enhance residential property values, facilitate economic and adequate provision of housing and secure decent housing for every citizen. 
(7)  To secure such accessibility, design and density of land development and use as will reduce fire hazards and fire loses. 
(8)  To promote the continued and safe operation of general-purpose airports within the city. 
(9)  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. 
(10)  To encourage greater efficiency and economy of land development. 
(11)  To preserve the city's natural beauty and encourage architecturally pleasing development. 
(12)  To improve the quality of life through protection of the city's total environment including, but not limited to, the prevention of air, water and noise pollution. 
(13)  To preserve the existing historical character of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-4. - Purpose of the comprehensive plan. 
The comprehensive plan, which is adopted by resolution by the City Council of the City of Senoia, has the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To control, guide and direct growth and development in the city. 
(2)  To protect, preserve and enhance the city's cultural, environmental, economic and social resources. 
(3)  To identify current land uses in order to assist the city in making budgetary, utilities and other resource allocations. 
(4)  To enable the city to predict future land uses for planning purposes. 
(5)  To stabilize the land use and development expectations of the citizens of the city. 
(6)  To assist the city in fulfilling its statutory and other legal obligations. 
(7)  To provide a public document which will serve as a means of general information on land use and development for the citizens of the city and other interested parties. 
(8)  To serve as official policy for the City of Senoia regarding land use decisions. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-5. - Establishment, adoption of comprehensive plan. 
By this section, the comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the city council is established as the official policy of the city concerning proposed land uses under which the incorporated areas of the city are divided into land use categories. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-6. - The comprehensive plan distinguished from zoning. 
The comprehensive plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the city, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-7. - Land use element update. 
The land use element of the comprehensive plan shall be updated once each year. This update will be used to identify current uses of land, emerging growth patterns and any significant change in land use policy as identified by the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. This update shall also be used a policy in the city's consideration of proposed amendments to the zoning map or to the text of the zoning ordinance. All amendments to the City of Senoia Comprehensive Plan will be in accordance with the Minimum Planning Standards and Procedures of the Georgia Planning Act. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.7, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-8. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall apply in all areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-9. - Compliance. 
No land, building or structure shall be used, no building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged or altered except in conformity with this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-10. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained in violation of any provision of this article, as amended, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of any provision of this article, as amended, or any person does anything prohibited by this article, as amended, shall, upon conviction of such violation, be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided by law. Each day that a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Upon such violation, the city shall issue a citation for violation of this article requiring a presence of the violator in the city's municipal court. The city may also in such cases institute a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or other appropriate relief to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.10, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-11. - Penalties. 
Any person who is convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine for each separate offense in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or for confinement not to exceed 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 1, § 1.11, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-12—74-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 74-23. - Establishment of planning commission. 
The Senoia Planning Commission is hereby established. Said commission shall consist of not less than three and not more than five members appointed by the city council. If it is determined as necessary by the city council, an alternate may be appointed to serve on the planning commission. The alternate shall serve on the commission as a regular member; however, the alternate may only cast a vote in the absence of another member. The city council shall appoint the members for two-year terms each. Any vacancy in the membership of the commission for an un-expired term shall be filled by the city council. Members shall be removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 2, § 2.1, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 74-24. - Proceeding of the planning commission. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a secretary from its members who shall serve a one year term beginning January 1 of each year. Officers may succeed themselves in office. The commission shall adopt such rules and bylaws as deemed appropriate. Meetings shall be held regularly once a month and may be held at such other times as the commission may determine. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating each such fact, and shall keep record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 2, § 2.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-25. - Power and duties of the planning commission. 
The planning commission shall review amendments to this article as provided in article III herein. Additionally, the planning commission shall act as counselor to the city council by planning and foreseeing future growth and changes in the city and shall perform any other duties and responsibilities as may be delegated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 2, § 2.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-26. - Oath of office. 
A new commission member will take an oath of office at a city council meeting prior to serving in the commission. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 2, § 2.4, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-27—74-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 74-38. - Initiation of amendments. 
Each application to amend this article, the official zoning map, the grant of a conditional use permit or to amend zoning conditions shall be filed with the city clerk. An application to amend the text of the zoning ordinance may be initiated by the planning commission or submitted to the planning commission by the City Council of Senoia, or by any person owning property in the city. An application for the grant of a conditional use permit may be initiated by an individual property owner or his authorized agent, the planning commission, or be submitted to the planning commission by the city council. Unless initiated by the city council, all applications to amend the official zoning map or for grant of a conditional use permit must be submitted by the owner or his authorized agent and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee set by the city council. Such authorization of property ownership shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application for an amendment to the zoning map affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 24 months, said interval to begin with the date of final decision by the city council. The 24 month interval shall not apply to applications initiated by the city council or the planning commission, except for amendments to the zoning map which were defeated by the city council, in which case the interval required for the subsequent application shall be at least six months. However, an application to alter conditions of rezoning may be submitted at any time. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-39. - Amendment to zoning conditions. 
An application to amend zoning conditions imposed by the city council shall follow the same procedures required by article III for amendment to the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-40. - Application for amendments. 
Each application to amend this article, the official zoning map, the grant of a conditional use permit or to amend zoning conditions shall be filed with the city clerk. (See Appendix A) 
Editor's note— Appendix A is not setout herein but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
(a)  Text amendment applications shall include: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Current provisions of text to be affected by amendment. 
(3)  Proposed wording of text change. 
(4)  Reason for amendment request. 
(b)  Map amendment and conditional use permit applications shall include the following: 
(1)  A legal description of the tract(s) to be rezoned, including the street address and subdivision, if any, or area in which tract is located. 
(2)  Seven copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s); floodplain and flood hazard areas; unusual topographical features; current zoning of subject tract(s) and all adjacent properties; and existing structures. This plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor, whose seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
(3)  When any applicant or his attorney has made a campaign contribution aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application; and when said contribution was made within two years immediately proceeding the filing of the application for the rezoning action, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and; 
b.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each contribution. 
The disclosure required by this section shall be filed within ten days after an application for the rezoning action is first filed. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any, together with a written notarized statement from the owner(s) authorizing the agent, if any, to seek rezoning on behalf of the owner(s). 
(5)  A letter of intent indicating specifically how the property is to be used. 
(6)  A completed application form for rezoning request. 
(c)  Applications shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted annually by the city council, which shall provide that each application shall be submitted at least 45 days prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the city council. The city shall set application fees for an application to amend the official zoning map. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the city council. 
(d)  An application shall not be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this article shall have first appeared, except in accordance with section 74-40. 
(e)  An applicant shall file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application. If such conditions or alterations or changes thereto are proposed by an applicant and have not been filed as required by this paragraph, the city council, at the time of the public hearing on the application, may defer any action on such application to a specific meeting date. At the hearing, during which the deferral is granted, the city council shall specify the date of the hearing before the city council and this action shall constitute public notice of such hearings and no additional notices shall be required prior to the hearings so scheduled by the city council. The date designated for action of the application shall be set at a time, which will allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-41. - Public notification. 
Legal notice: Due notice of public hearings is required by the planning commission and city council pursuant to this section's division (3.4). Due notice shall be published in the city's legal organ (newspaper) at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing. Notification shall include the time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
Letters to property owners: As to any application to amend the official zoning map or the comprehensive land use plan or both, the city clerk shall give notification of the requested application by certified mail to all abutting property owners as shown by county tax records. Said notice shall be sent to the address of said owner, which is on file with the county tax office. Such notification shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the planning commission public meeting and shall include a description of the application and the date, time and place of the public meeting. Deposit of said notice in the U.S. mail shall satisfy the city's obligation to notify said landowners. If the application is initiated by the city or one of its agents or commissions the affected landowner shall be notified as set out above. 
If the application is for rezoning of property, the notice described above is required with additional information, which is as follows: location of property, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification. Also, a two-sided legible sign shall be placed approximately perpendicular to the road(s) in a conspicuous location on the subject property containing the following information: date, time and place of public hearing, present zoning classification and proposed zoning classification. The sign(s) shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-42. - Planning commission action. 
(a)  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for an amendment. Notice of the planning commission public hearing shall be published in the legal organ of the county. The planning commission's recommendation shall be submitted to the city council and shall be a public record. If the amendment is to change the official zoning map, the planning commission may recommend approval or denial of the application or may recommend changes to applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this article be served and the health, public safety and general welfare of the City of Senoia secured. 
(b)  The planning commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its public hearings, which are consistent with state law and are appropriate to its responsibilities. Such rules and regulations shall be published and available to the public. The planning commission may also adopt conflict of interest rules to ensure that no member is entitled to rule on a matter in which such member has an interest either directly or indirectly. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-43. - Rules and procedures for public hearing and meetings. 
(1)  Any member of the planning commission or citizen of Senoia shall talk to the chairman when addressing any issues. 
(2)  The planning commission members will not read citizen's letters or express individual citizen's opinion during a meeting. The only exception to this rule is when a citizen can prove hardship of being unable to attend. Citizens are welcome to attend and address the commission of their concerns or issues. 
(3)  The applicant, applicant's designated representative or applicant's agent must be present at the public hearing. If none of the above is present, the application will not be discussed and will be continued to the next public hearing. 
(4)  The zoning administrator will present the background of the application. 
(5)  The applicant shall be heard for a limit of ten minutes. 
(6)  Commission members will question the applicant with any questions they may have at that time. 
(7)  Owners of adjacent property shall be heard for a limit of five minutes each. 
(8)  Proponents and opponents shall be heard for a limit of three minutes per speaker or longer at the discretion of the chairman of the planning commission. 
(9)  Applicant will be allowed to rebut any negative comments for a limit of five minutes. 
(10)  After all public comments having been heard, the pubic comment portion of the hearing will be closed. 
(11)  The members will discuss the application. Members will be allowed to ask questions to anyone present at the hearing. 
(12)  Upon a motion and a second by members, the commission will recommend action to be taken upon the application. 
(13)  The planning commission, within 30 days from the date of the hearing, will make a recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.6, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 74-44. - Action by the city council. 
Before taking action on a proposed amendment and after receipt of the planning commission recommendation, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment. So that the purpose of this article will be served, and the health, public safety and general welfare of the city is secured, the city council may approve or deny the application, reduce the land for which the application is made, change the district or land use category from that requested by the applicant, impose zoning conditions as a part of the amendment, or allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with respect to the 24 month limitation of this article. At a public hearing, action by the city council to defer or continue the pubic hearing on a proposed amendment shall include a statement of the date, time and place of the deferred or continued public hearing at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the deferred or continued hearing on the application, and no further public notice shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.7, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-45. - Zoning of property to be annexed into the city. 
When the application to zone property affects property to be annexed into the city, the city may begin procedures required by this article for an amendment to the official zoning maps at any time on or after the date of the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county under H.B. 489. The public hearings required by this article shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the city. In addition to the other notice requirements in this article, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of Coweta County, a notice of the pubic hearings as required under provision of this article and shall place a sign on the property when required by this article, and shall otherwise comply with the procedures required under O.C.G.A. Chapter § 36-66. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-46. - Standards governing the exercise of the zoning power of the City of Senoia. 
Except for consideration of an application for a conditional use permit. 
(1)  The existing land uses and zoning classification of nearby property. 
(2)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purpose. 
(3)  The extent to which the property values of the subject property are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(4)  The relative gain to the pubic, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner 
(5)  Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
(6)  Whether the proposed zoning will be a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
(7)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
(8)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the land use element of the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing street, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
(10)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(11)  Whether the subject property contains jurisdictional wetlands of the United States. If so, the applicant will be required to document permit approval for the proposed development from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers before any formal action can be taken on the zoning proposal. 
(12)  Whether the subject property may be large enough to qualify as a development of regional impact. If so, then an application for review must be filed with the regional commission. 
If, after a rezoning has been approved, development of the property has not been initiated within 12 months of the rezoning-the property will automatically be reviewed by the planning commission for the purposes of initiating a new application to rezone it back to its original zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.9, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 74-47. - Standards governing consideration of application for conditional use permits for the City of Senoia. 
(a)  The existing land uses and zoning classification of nearby property; 
(b)  The suitability of the subject property for the conditionally permitted use; 
(c)  The extent, if any, to which the property values of adjacent and nearby property will be diminished by the grant of a conditional use; 
(d)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the application for a conditional use permit; 
(e)  Whether there are adequate buffers and access to or egress from the property so as not to unduly compound traffic congestion within the area; 
(f)  Whether there are other conditions, such as lighting, location of structures, parking, or other considerations necessary for protection of surrounding and nearby property owners. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 3, § 3.10, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-48—74-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 74-58. - Definition. 
A lawful use of or vested right to use any building, structure, or land existing at the time of the adoption of this article or the adoption of any amendment thereto may be continued subject to the restrictions contained in this article, even though such use does not conform with the regulations of this article except that: 
(1)  A non-conforming use of structure shall not be changed to another non-conforming use. 
(2)  A non-conforming use or structure shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the area of use or the size of the structure as it existed on the date of the adoption of this article or the adoption of any amendments thereto; 
(3)  The non-conforming use or structure shall not be re-established after discontinuance of its use for six consecutive months, regardless of intent or expectation to commence or abandon such non-conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 4, § 4.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-59. - Intended non-conforming use. 
Any intended non-conforming use for which a vested right was acquired prior to the adoption of this article or the adoption of an amendment there to shall be prohibited unless such use is actually commenced within six months of the adoption of this article or the adoption of an amendment thereto regardless of the intent or expectation to commence or abandon such on-conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 4, § 4.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-60. - Alteration of non-conforming use. 
A non-conforming use or structure shall not be rebuilt or altered or repaired except as provided herein: 
(1)  If the structure is altered or repaired, said alterations or repairs shall be in conformity with the building codes in force at the time of said alterations or repairs; provided, however, that said alteration or repair shall not extend or enlarge the structure being altered or repaired. 
(2)  If the structure's floor area is damaged 50 percent or more, the structure cannot be rebuilt as to the non-conforming use. However, if the actual owner of the structure may rebuild regardless of the amount of destruction. The structure must conform to the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 4, § 4.3, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-61—74-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 74-71. - Establishment of districts. 
In order to implement the intent of this article, the incorporated area of the City of Senoia is divided into the following districts: 

 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 12-04, Art. 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 18-06 , § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 74-72. - Single-family residential—R40. 
A single-family residential district allowing no more than one principal dwelling unit per acre. The purpose of this district is to accommodate low-density single family residential development. Minimum lot size in this district is one acre. This district may be served by individual water and septic system provided, the regulations in Article 12.5 and 12.6 are followed by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-73. - Single-family residential—R40C (see article VII). 
A single-family residential district providing an opportunity for flexibility in lot design and building arrangement not afforded by the R-40 subdivision district, allowing buildings and other improvements to be sited as a direct response to site conditions. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-74. - Multi-family residential—MR. 
Multi-family residential district allowing two units per acre for two family dwellings and no more than four units per acre for all others. Multi-family residential is allowed only where water and sewer are provided. The purpose of this district is to accommodate high-density development. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-75. - Historic neighborhood overlay. 
This overlay provides protection for the City of Senoia's historic neighborhoods from incompatible development and to advance long term plans for these areas. In the event regulations in the overlay and regulations for the underlying district are in conflict the more stringent shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-76. - Office institutional—OI. 
This district is for offices, institutions and limited commercial activities not involving the sale, storage or processing of merchandise unless otherwise permitted. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-77. - General commercial. 
The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and encourage the proper grouping and development of uses which include a wide variety of sales and services that will best accommodate the needs of the city and the traveling pubic in order to reduce highway traffic congestion, traffic hazards and blight along the highways of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-78. - Historic town center—HT. 
The purpose of this district shall be to accommodate development, which will include a wide variety of sales and services, which locate in the city's historical central business district. This district is described as any lot with frontage on Baggarly Way, Main Street or Barnes Street from Johnson Street to Morgan Street. Permitted uses shall comply with section 74-99 and overlay regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-7, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 74-79. - General industry—GI. 
The purpose of this district shall be to provide areas for light and heavy industrial uses. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-80. - Watershed protection—WP. 
This district designed as an overlay zone is intended to provide protection for the City of Senoia's drinking water supply. An overlay provides regulations for the delineated zone plus any regulations pertaining to the underlying zone. This district delineated on official zoning map and permitted uses are in accordance with underlying district and overlay regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-81. - Parks and recreation—PR. 
(a)  This district is designed to be a public park and open space district. Such parks and open space may be owned and/or operated by the city or the county and intended for public use. All improvements within these districts must be consistent with the approved park master plan (when it occurs) for the site of the city comprehensive plan. Land set aside as open space and placed under a conservation easement may also be classified in this district. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Library, meeting hall, athletic facilities, museum and public non-commercial picnic areas and campgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-10, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-82. - Intown infill redevelopment—IIR. 
An intown infill redevelopment district would create a special set of standards for some of Senoia's challenging redevelopment sites that are targeted for infill redevelopment. While mayor and council, the historic preservation commission, and the planning commission will provide oversight and guidance to the redevelopment of these properties, the intent is to allow greater flexibility and where appropriate, more compact development, to facilitate the redevelopment of these sites. Specific areas within the city in need of redevelopment under this proposed ordinance are the "old gin site," public housing, the Brantley Institute/Old Public Works site, and the Burn Pit property. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.1-11, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-83. - Zoning district map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the "Official Zoning Map, City of Senoia." The official zoning map of the city, and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this article and have the same force and effect as if the official zoning map of the city, and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described in this article. The official zoning map of the city, as adopted, shall be attested by the city clerk, dated the same date as the adoption of this article, and shall be maintained for public inspection in the city clerk's office. Maintenance of the official zoning map of the city, shall be performed by the zoning administrator who shall make the actual changes to the official zoning map of the city, as amendments are made by the city council. All changes shall be made to the official zoning map of the city, within 48 hours of the final decision of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-84. - District boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Senoia," the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street right-of-way, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed or riverbed, such centerlines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated, as approximately following platted lot lines shall be interpreted as following such lines. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the corporate limit lines, then such corporate limit lines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
(4)  Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as being set back from the centerline of a street right-of-way, road, highway, railroad, stream or river, and parallel thereto, then such district boundaries, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be interpreted as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, road, highway, railroad, stream or river as being parallel thereto. 
(5)  In case any further uncertainty exists, the city council shall determine the location of boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 5, § 5.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-85. - Residential Historic District—RH. 
The purpose of this district shall be to accommodate residential development located within the city's historical neighborhood overlay. This district is delineated on official zoning map and permitted uses are in accordance with residential (R40). This zoning shall only apply to areas of the district that require no additional public infrastructure. Minimum lot size varies based on the minimum lot width at set back line. The minimum size of the primary dwelling shall be based on the average of the primary structures immediately adjacent and on the same size of the road. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, Art. 1, 11-5-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-04, Art. 1, adopted November 5, 2012, was not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, those provisions have been included as § 74-85. 
Sec. 74-86. - Entertainment overlay district—EOD. 
Purpose. The purpose of the entertainment overlay district (EOD) is to encourage development in close proximity to each other, entertainment uses and complementary uses while preserving rights under the existing district designation. The aim is to promote a vibrant district within the city where residents can enjoy their leisure time close to home. 
An entertainment overlay district ("EOD") is hereby established within the City of Senoia with the boundary lines and to include property fronting Barnes St. to Baggarly Way and property south of Johnson and north of Travis that is zoned historical town center (HT). 
The EOD shall be indicated on the zoning map with the base district symbol followed by a slash and the EOD district symbol (i.e., HT/EOD). 
( Ord. No. 18-06 , § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Secs. 74-87—74-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 74-96. - District, lot area, yard and height standards. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zoning district shall be met as indicated in supplemental regulations and Table 6.1: zoning district area yard and height requirements. 

 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 6, § 6.1, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-04, Art. 2, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 8-3-2015 ; Ord. No. 18-08 , § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 74-97. - Appearance standards. 
Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings including site built housing, industrialized housing, and manufactured homes. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that such development shall meet or exceed the appearance standards as shown on table 6.2: appearance standards for single-family detached dwellings. 
Table 6.2 Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings 

 
Notes: 
(1)  The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the building inspector. 
(2)  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or vinyl lap or other material of like appearance. 
(3)  Permanent foundation shall meet the requirements of standard building code. For manufactured homes, a masonry curtain wall un-pierced except for the required ventilation and access must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to ground level. 
(4)  For manufactured homes, a landing area is required and its width and length must be greater than or equal to the width of the entrance doorway. 
(5)  Manufactured homes are required to remove all towing devices. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 6, § 6.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-98. - Permitted uses. 
No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purpose permitted in Table 6.4. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. A principal use denoted by the letter "C," is permitted only if a conditional use permit is granted by the city council. For uses not included on this list, where the enforcement officer is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the city council for interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 6, § 6.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-99. - Permitted uses. 

 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 6, § 6.4, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-3-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 17-11, § 1, 1-8-2018 ) 
Secs. 74-100—74-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - R-40 CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DISTRICT Adopted December 1, 2003 

Sec. 74-111. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-40 conservation subdivision district (R-40C) is: 
(a)  Provide opportunities for flexibility in lot design and building arrangement not afforded by the R-40 traditional subdivision district, fostering the location of buildings and other improvements to accommodate site conditions, with street, blocks and lot layout sensitive to environmental constraints; 
(b)  Provide a more varied, innovative and efficient land development pattern; 
(c)  Promote new development compatible with existing uses, architecture, landscapes and local character; 
(d)  Provide standards reflecting the varying circumstances and interests of individual landowners, and the distinctive characteristics of their properties; 
(e)  Preserve unique and sensitive landscapes and site features by locating new building lots outside of such areas; 
(f)  Foster clustering of dwellings and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils to reduce the amount of paved surfaces and utilities; 
(g)  Minimize erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation; 
(h)  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(i)  Conserve scenic vistas from encroachment by development; 
(j)  Reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of dwelling with direct access to and views of greenspace; 
(k)  Retain and protect greenspace within residential developments for aesthetic, watershed protection and nonstructural stormwater management purposes; 
(l)  Promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community, and 
(m)  Provide a means to attain the goals and objectives of the City of Senoia Comprehensive Plan relative to orderly growth, enhancement of environmental resources and preservation of rural character. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-112. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicants shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City of Senoia Zoning and Land Development Ordinances. 
(b)  Development of a conservation subdivision is available in the R-40(C) zoning district as a use by right. 
(c)  A public, community or individual potable water system shall serve all R-40 conservation subdivision district developments. 
(d)  Conservation subdivision district development shall be served by public sewer. 
(e)  The proposed development will be generally consistent with the goals and objectives of the City of Senoia Comprehensive Plan. 
(f)  The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or, if in multiple ownership, shall be developed according to a single plan with common legal authority and responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-113. - Area and bulk requirements under the R-40 conservation subdivision district. 
(a)  Density of development. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed shall be the gross total acreage multiplied by 0.9. 
(1)  In addition to the maximum permitted number of lots or dwellings otherwise permitted within this district, applicant may contribute to elements specifically mentioned as goals and objectives in the City of Senoia Comprehensive Plan, including but not limited to street connectivity and greenways. A density bonus shall be determined by increasing the density factor. Such bonuses shall be subject to the approval of mayor and council. 
(b)  Minimum floor area of principal structures. The minimum floor area for single-family detached structures within this district shall be 2,000 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum restricted greenspace. Designated restricted greenspace shall comprise no less that 40 percent of the gross tract acreage and shall comply with all standards and criteria for greenspace contained in this article. 
(d)  Minimum lot and yard areas. No minimum lot area is prescribed, rather, the following lot and yard area regulations shall apply to any principal residential structure or any other building: 
(1)  Siting of principal dwellings located on laterally adjacent lots shall maintain a minimum separation of 20 feet, at any point. Siting of all buildings located on lots adjacent to the rear shall maintain a minimum separation of 50 feet measured perpendicularly from the rear wall of any residential structure to any point on any other building not accessory to such residential structure. 
(2)  Minimum separation between accessory buildings and the principal structures to which they are accessory at any point shall not be less than that prescribed by applicable provisions of the Georgia Statewide Minimum Construction Codes; minimum separation between accessory buildings and any other buildings shall comply with subsection 1. 
(3)  No exterior windows, doors, or other openings shall be permitted in any portion of any principal or accessory structure located less than five feet from any lot line. 
(4)  Where any portion of any principal or accessory structure is located less than five feet from any lot line, a perpetual easement providing for maintenance of such structure, and measuring no less than five feet in width from the affected walls shall be provided on the adjacent lot(s). This provision shall not apply to lot line(s) that separate two-family or multifamily dwelling units on the interior of the same principal structure. 
(5)  The building setback from the right-of-way of any street shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
(6)  All proposed dwellings shall be sited as to be setback a minimum of 50 feet from the perimeter boundary of the tract. Existing dwellings and dwellings resulting from the conversion of existing structures shall be exempt from this standard. 
(7)  While conformance to these area and bulk regulations is not dependent upon any specific minimum lot area or dimensions, applicants shall be required to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the mayor and council that any lots established under the provisions of this section are of appropriate size and shape relative to the following factors: 
a.  Establishment of suitable private yard areas for all residences; and 
b.  Management of any adjacent greenspace areas. 
(8)  In submission of subdivision and/or land development plans, applicant shall indicate the maximum feasible building envelope for each lot created in compliance with these area and bulk requirements. The setbacks and separation distances between building envelopes on adjacent lots must meet the provisions of subsections 1—4, above. Such plans shall indicate where the provisions of subsections 3 and 4 apply. 
(e)  Maximum tract coverage—15 percent of gross tract area. Applicant shall calculate total permitted structure coverage in square feet and shall indicate on the conceptual plan the maximum coverage in square feet that will be assigned to each lot or parcel that will result from the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-114. - Special provisions for conservation of historic resources. 
Historic resources shall be preserved to the greatest degree practical through incorporation into development plans and design. Such resources shall include historic structures, ruins or sites, historic road or other transportation traces, paths and trails and any other historic landscape features. 
(a)  Density bonus. In addition to the maximum permitted number of lots or dwellings otherwise permitted within this district, applicant may establish dwelling units on lots through renovation or adaptive reuse of structures listed in the state or national register of historic places, determined by the state department of natural resources to be eligible for such listing or designated by the City of Senoia as historic in accordance with Historical Preservation Ordinance. Such bonuses shall be subject to compliance with the standards of subsection b., below. Except where physically infeasible due to location and/or structural characteristics, all such dwellings must comply with the requirements of this district. 
(b)  Standards for historic resources. Applicant shall comply with the following standards where renovation or reuse of any structure is proposed in order to develop dwelling units in addition to the maximum otherwise permitted. 
(1)  Construction plans for rehabilitation, alteration or enlargement of any historic structure shall be in substantial compliance with the Historic Neighborhood Ordinance. 
(2)  Applicant shall demonstrate preservation of sufficient landscaped or buffer area surrounding historic structures to retain the integrity of the historical landscape setting. Applicant may demonstrate mitigation of impacts to historical landscape setting through introduction of vegetation or other screening in harmony with such landscape setting and through retention of view lines, which visually link historic structures to their landscape setting. 
(3)  Facilities and equipment for heating and air conditioning, trash collection and compaction and other structural elements inconsistent with historical architectural themes shall be concealed architecturally or otherwise screened from view. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-115. - Greenspace protection standards. 
In utilizing the R-40 conservation subdivision district, the proposed design shall limit disturbance of all greenspace identified in the required conservation plan submitted in accordance with section 74-118(a) of this article. 
(a)  Applicant shall demonstrate maximum conservation of scenic views from public roads and neighboring residential properties, utilizing existing vegetation, structures or topography or providing landscaping to screen the proposed development from view. At its sole discretion, mayor and council may reduce screening requirements where applicant submits individual building plans with sufficient detail to demonstrate, in terms of how buildings may be viewed from public roads or neighboring residential properties, reasonable maintenance of the tract's traditional rural character. Distance from public roads or neighboring residential properties may also be considered as a mitigating factor in review of building plans. 
(b)  Applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state and/or federal regulation of streams and wetlands. Copies of all documentation concerning any proposed activity requiring submission of a wetlands delineation report, stream or wetland encroachment permit, or mitigation plan to the Georgia Department of Environmental Protection and/or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall be submitted to the City of Senoia at the time of submission to the agency or agencies having jurisdiction. Receipt of such documentation shall not be a prerequisite for plan approval; however, approval shall be conditioned upon ultimate demonstration of compliance with all applicable regulation(s). 
(c)  Existing stands of trees and individual trees having a DBH of eight inches (8") or greater and other significant natural features, including streams, ridge lines, steep slopes, peaks and rock outcroppings, shall be inventoried. Such features shall be preserved to the greatest feasible degree. Removal or disturbance of such landscape features shall not occur on more than 25 percent of the total area they occupy, except where mayor and council are satisfied that overall community planning and greenspace protection objectives are best served through allowance of additional disturbance. For the purposes for this section, the extent of area occupied by any tree or tree mass shall be measured from the outermost drip line of such tree or stands of trees. 
(d)  Inappropriate alteration of the natural terrain shall be prohibited. Developers of conservation subdivisions shall achieve a lot and street layout and grading plan that minimizes such alteration. All plans shall be subject to approval of the city engineer who shall offer alternate layouts at the sole expense of the developer in instances in which such public objectives are not met. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-116. - Standards for designation and use of greenspace. 
(a)  Location. The location and layout of greenspace shall be configured to promote adherence to resource protection standards established above, and shall further conform to the following criteria: 
(1)  The greenspace shall be a minimum of 40 percent of the gross tract acreage. 
(2)  A minimum of 75 percent of greenspace shall be in a contiguous tract; interconnections having a width of less than 50 feet shall not be considered contiguous for the purpose of compliance with this standard. 
(3)  A natural or landscaped buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 60 feet along arterials and major collectors and 25 feet along minor collectors shall be provided. 
(b)  Characteristics. No portion of greenspace shall be credited toward the minimum greenspace area where such greenspace is characterized as follows: 
(1)  Encompassed within the right-of-way or anticipated greenspace of any public or private street; 
(2)  Located within 25 feet of any structure, except structures devoted to permitted open space uses; 
(3)  Less than 50 feet in the narrowest dimension at any point, except public recreational trail or providing access to greenspace or common areas; 
(4)  Occupied by any utility easement or anticipated utility easement; above-ground utility rights-of-way may be included within greenspace; however, may not be credited as greenspace. Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  Occupied by storm water management facilities; 
(6)  Encompasses bodies of open water exceeding 5,000 square feet in contiguous area. 
(7)  Encompasses impervious surfaces exceeding 2,000 square feet in contiguous area. 
(c)  Mandatory greenspace designation. The following lands are considered "primary conservation areas" and shall be encompassed within greenspace, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city administrator that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article. These lands shall receive a 100 percent credit toward the total acreage of greenspace: 
(1)  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
(2)  Buffer zones having a minimum width of 75 feet along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
(3)  Slopes greater than 25 percent and having a minimum contiguous area of 5,000 square feet; 
(4)  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(5)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
(6)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
The following lands are considered "secondary conservation areas" and shall be encompassed within greenspace to the maximum feasible extent. These lands shall receive a 50 percent credit toward the total acreage of greenspace: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests having a minimum contiguous area of one acre; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 8 inch DBH; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands having a minimum contiguous area of five acres; and, 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(d)  Greenspace uses. The following uses may be established in greenspace: 
(1)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, crop or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are followed to minimize environmental impacts, that such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas and provided further that such uses are subject to submission of a conservation plan approved by the City Council of Senoia; 
(2)  Woodlands, meadows, wetlands, wildlife habitats, game preserves or similar conservation use deemed appropriate by mayor and council; 
(3)  Public, common or private park or passive recreation area; 
(4)  Active recreation areas, provided that such areas comprise no more than 10 percent of the total greenspace and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces; 
(5)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided such facilities are made of porous paving materials; 
(6)  Natural, archeological or historical resource conservation areas; 
(7)  Land application of wastewater, including individual systems, where permitted and where mayor and council are satisfied that adequate provision(s) for long term management and maintenance of the wastewater system are guaranteed; 
(8)  Non-structural stormwater management installations; 
(9)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; 
(10)  Structures clearly accessory to greenspace uses; and 
(11)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
The following uses are prohibited in greenspace: 
1.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
2.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
3.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Interconnection. Greenspace shall be interconnected with greenspace on abutting tracts wherever possible. Provisions for pedestrian pathways for general public use to create linked systems within Senoia shall be encouraged. No such interconnection shall have a dimension of less than 50 linear feet. 
A minimum of 75 percent of the greenspace shall be in a contiguous tract. Greenspace should adjoin any neighboring areas of greenspace, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future greenspace. 
(f)  Easements. Subject to provisions for designating minimum required greenspace as stipulated in this article, utilities may be located entirely or partially within easements encroaching upon designated greenspace areas. Where utility facilities are so located, the appropriate parties shall establish easements satisfactory to mayor and council or the utility provider for the purpose of accessing and maintaining such facilities. 
(g)  Development restriction. Except to provide for permitted greenspace uses, designated greenspace shall be legally restricted from further subdivision or development by deed restriction, conservation easement or other legal agreement in a form acceptable to mayor and council, upon advice of the city attorney, and duly recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Coweta County. 
(h)  Multi-phased development designation. Where development under the R-40 conservation subdivision district is permitted to occur in two or more development phases, a proportionate amount of designated greenspace shall be permanently recorded with each phase. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-117. - Standards for ownership of greenspace. 
(a)  Ownership. Subject to permanent conservation restrictions in accordance with section 74-116(e) above, legal title to designated greenspace may be held by an incorporated homeowner's association, a land trust or any conservation organization or similar entity recognized by the city. 
(b)  Offer of dedication. The city may, but shall not be required to, accept dedication in the form of fee simple ownership of greenspace provided that each of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  Such land is publicly accessible unless the city determines otherwise; 
(2)  No cost of acquisition other than costs incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance and recording fees are assessed to the city; and 
(3)  The city agrees to, and has access to, maintain such lands. 
(4)  The property is zoned as a PR zoning district. 
Where the city accepts dedication of greenspace that contains improvements, mayor and council may require the posting of financial security, either in the form of a commercial surety bond or unqualified letter of credit (UCC format), to ensure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements for a term not to exceed 12 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The amount of financial security shall not exceed 50 percent of the actual cost of installation of said improvements. 
(c)  Homeowner's association. A homeowner's association may hold title to the greenspace and associated facilities in common ownership. The association shall be formed and operated under the following provisions: 
(1)  The developer shall provide a certificate of incorporation for the association from the Georgia Secretary of State, including bylaws and methods for financing the cost of maintaining the greenspace. 
(2)  The association shall be financially subsidized by the developer until at least 75 percent of the lots within the development have been sold. 
(3)  Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all purchasers of lots in the development and their successors or assigns. The conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to homeowners shall be identified. 
(4)  The association shall be responsible for securing and maintaining comprehensive liability insurance on greenspace land, naming the City of Senoia as an additional insured; proof of coverage shall be filed with the city, upon written request. 
(5)  All members of the association shall equitably share the costs of maintaining greenspace. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws. Association dues shall be structured to provide for both annual operating costs and to cover projected long-range costs relating to the repair and maintenance of any capital facilities. 
(6)  In the event of a proposed transfer of ownership or maintenance of greenspace by the association to another entity permitted by this article, notice of such action shall be given to all members of the association. The consent of the city is required to effect any such transfer. 
(7)  The association shall maintain or hire adequate staff to administer common facilities and property and maintain the greenspace in perpetuity. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 7, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-118. - Greenspace management provisions. 
(a)  Greenspace management plan. Any application for rezoning to the R-40 conservation subdivision district shall include a long term plan for management of the greenspace that is to be created as part of the development. Such plan shall include maintenance and management of any wastewater disposal, water supply, storm-water management or any other common facilities which may be located within or adjacent to greenspace. Such a plan shall also include a narrative describing: 
(1)  The manner in which the greenspace and any facilities included therein will be owned and by whom the greenspace will be managed and maintained; 
(2)  The conservation, land management and agricultural techniques and practices that will be used to conserve and perpetually protect the greenspace, including conservation plan(s) approved by mayor and council; 
(3)  The professional and personnel resources that will be necessary to maintain and manage the property; 
(4)  The planned nature of public or private access to the greenspace; and 
(5)  The funding source that will be available for such perpetual management, preservation and maintenance. 
The greenspace management plan shall be recorded in Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Coweta County together with the final subdivision plat. The applicant shall provide a draft of the greenspace management plan with sufficient detail to demonstrate feasible compliance with the provisions of this article with the filing of the preliminary plat submission. Mayor and council may require that appropriate management contracts be established as evidence of the ability to adhere to the provisions of the approved management plan as a condition of approval. The greenspace management plan shall contain a provision that prohibits any amendment without written application to, and approval of, mayor and council to allow for changing circumstances inherent to the perpetual management of land. Approval of such application by mayor and council shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, provided the proposed amendment is feasible and consistent with the purposes of preservation of greenspace as set forth in this article and provided further that the plan for such amendment avoids the likelihood that the obligation for management and maintenance of the land may become a responsibility of the city without the consent of mayor and council. 
(b)  Provisions for maintenance of greenspace upon default. 
(1)  In the event the legal entity holding title to greenspace shall, at any time after establishment of a development containing designated greenspace, fail to maintain such land in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the greenspace management plan, the city may serve written notice upon the owner of record, setting forth the manner in which the owner of record has failed to maintain the greenspace land in reasonable condition. 
(2)  Failure to adequately maintain the greenspace in accordance with the approved greenspace management plan constitutes a violation of this zoning ordinance. The zoning administrator is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant of any violation, directing the owner to remedy the same within 20 calendar days. 
(3)  Upon default by any entity responsible for maintenance of greenspace and/or associated facilities, where such maintenance is required under the terms of an approved greenspace management plan, any subdivision and/or land development plan for the property, zoning approval for the property, or under any applicable requirement of any city ordinances, permits, approvals or where such maintenance is otherwise necessary to abate a nuisance, emergency, hazard or other condition threatening persons, property, public health, safety or welfare, the city may, but shall not be obligated to, upon 20 calendar days (or lesser time period in instances of emergency) written notice to the entity responsible to perform the necessary maintenance and otherwise remedy the condition set forth in the city's notice, enter upon the greenspace, accessing the same through any other lands of such entity as may be necessary to correct the condition provided in the city's notice. Within 30 calendar days, the responsible entity shall pay any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with such action upon written demand by the city. Upon failure of the responsible entity to pay such costs by the time required, there shall be added interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum as well as costs incurred by the city in collection of same. The city may also lien other property of the entity, if any, for the full amount due, plus interest, and foreclose such lien in the same manner as liens for taxes, or make demand upon any bond or letter of credit held in favor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-119. - Greenspace performance bond. 
Where intended as common or public amenities, all landscapes improvements, plantings, access ways, and recreational facilities within designated greenspace shall be provided by the developer. A performance bond or other security shall be required to cover costs of installation of such improvements in the greenspace. The performance bond or other security shall be in the same form and adhere to the same conditions as otherwise required for proposed improvements in the land development ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-120. - Application and approval procedures. 
(a)  Pre-application procedures. To promote better communication and avoid unnecessary expense in the design of acceptable subdivision proposals, each developer is encouraged to meet with the zoning administrator and planning commission prior to filing an application for rezoning to the R-40 conservation subdivision district. 
(b)  Application requirements. The application for rezoning to the conservation subdivision district shall include a conceptual plat as outlined in the Land Development Ordinance for the City of Senoia. In the event any portion of the land development ordinance is inconsistent with this article, the more stringent regulation shall apply. 
(c)  The following additional information shall also be included in the application: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours depicting a maximum interval of 10 feet; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas identified by type, as described in section 74-116 of this article; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of greenspace; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(d)  All ordinances and Code sections, or parts thereof, in conflict with the foregoing are expressly repealed. 
(e)  Except as modified herein, The Code of Senoia, Georgia, is hereby reaffirmed and restated. The codifier is hereby granted editorial license to include this amendment in future supplements of said Code by appropriate section, division, article or chapter. 
(f)  This article shall become effective immediately upon adoption on second and final reading. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7, § 10, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-121—74-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIIA. - INTOWN INFILL REDEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 74-132. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the IIR district is to foster redevelopment in and around historic downtown Senoia. The district is conceived as a walkable environment encompassing a wide range of housing types intended to attract a broad spectrum of residents. As the town center is a finite space, varied residential development that is denser than development characterizing surrounding neighborhoods is encouraged, including multifamily, condominium, townhouse and loft development. For similar reasons, commercial intensification is also encouraged. Pedestrian character is expected to dominate the town center and public parks linked by broad sidewalks and paths on private development are planned to encourage walking. Architectural character is seen as an essential complement to the mix of uses and pedestrian amenities in bolstering a town center already known as a commercial destination. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-133. - Development characteristics. 
Development characteristics include "build to" lines designed to create walkable streetscapes and defined pedestrian spaces/settings, vertical mixed use to fully integrate dwellings with office and retail uses characteristic of historic downtowns and small, dispersed parking to de-emphasize cars. Human scale development as to both residential and commercial building mass is planned to achieve a pleasant neighborhood setting. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-134. - Geography. 
The focus of the IIR district is those areas and adjoining lots designated in the Senoia Comprehensive Plan for in-town redevelopment, including the Gin Site, Brantley Institute/Old Public Works Building, Burn Pit Area and Senoia Public Housing. These areas are designated on the future development map. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-135. - Site plan approval. 
All development proposed shall be subject to site plan review by the historic preservation commission and planning commission. Such plans shall define the form and density of the development. Mayor and council shall approve final site plans upon a finding that the plan conforms to the objectives of the comprehensive plan, the standards of the Historic Downtown Senoia District and the land development ordinance. For developments that are to be subdivided, such approval shall be considered as approval of the conceptual plat. Preliminary and final plats shall be completed according to the land development ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-136. - Architectural design. 
Architectural styles and materials for commercial development shall conform to the downtown design guidebook adopted by the City of Senoia. Residential development shall be in accordance with the guidelines adopted by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-137. - Permitted uses. 
The underlying zoning shall control the use of property, except that vertical mixed use, that is, residential and commercial in a common building, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-138. - Buffering and on-site amenity areas. 
Minimum buffer widths when adjoining residential uses at the periphery of the district, 15-foot buffer would be an absolute minimum. For locations where general commercial and multifamily adjoins single-family detached, a 50 feet buffer shall be required. 
All designs shall utilize pocket parks that comprise of no less than ten percent of the gross tract acreage. Further, no unit shall be more than 400 feet from a park. Where distances greater than 400 feet are proposed, it shall be considered if the review committees are convinced that the distance requirement sufficiently off-set by the expansiveness of the park and its abundance of improvement amenities. When single-family residential is proposed with ½ acre lot or greater, this standard shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-139. - Appropriate (or tailored) density. 
The overall project density shall be determined by a site plan that is appropriate for the neighborhood in which the development is being proposed. In no case shall the density exceed six units per acre for single family detached development, 12 units per acre for townhouse development and a maximum of 24 units per acre for condominium and apartment development. No maximum shall be imposed on loft or vertical mixed use development as building height will control scale and density. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-140. - Maximum commercial building mass. 
Maximum floor area in a retail or office building shall be 20,000 square feet or the largest floor area in the downtown as of the date of adoption of this article. The maximum floor area of a grocery store shall not exceed 30,000 square feet. Incentives for vertical mixed use shall include building bulk bonuses such as a 50 percent increase in building floor area. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-141. - Building height. 
Maximum height for single family dwellings shall be 35 feet as measured from the natural grade at the front corners of the dwelling to the ridgeline. Maximum height for all other buildings shall be 45 feet, except that no building having a height greater than 35 feet shall be established within 25 feet of a single family detached dwelling at the periphery of the Historic Downtown Senoia District. An increase in building height of one foot shall be permitted for every two feet above the 25-foot distance from such single family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-142. - Minimum greenspace ratio. 
The minimum greenspace ratio for mixed use developments shall be 15 percent. Developments that are solely commercial in character shall achieve a greenspace of 25 percent and residential development featuring only a single dwelling type shall achieve a greenspace ratio of 20 percent. Developments that feature a minimum of two dwelling types shall achieve a greenspace ratio of ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-143. - Parking. 
On street parking is encouraged throughout the redevelopment. Developers are encouraged to create small, dispersed lots that are well landscaped and link to destinations through broad, well-lit sidewalks and ample landscaping and pedestrian amenities. Parking requirements are relaxed and shared parking as well as leased parking by owners of "satellite" lots on which parking may be the primary use is permitted. The parking ratio for retail uses shall be one space for each 300 square feet of floor area available to the public, one space for every 250 square feet of office floor area and one space for every five seats in a restaurant. Off-street parking requirements for other permitted uses are found in Table I. Off-site parking may be used to fulfill parking requirements subject to a written lease agreement, a location within 800 feet of the proposed use and linked by a lighted sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 7A, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-144—74-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-155. - Definition. 
The watershed protection district shall overlay other zoning districts so that all land lying with the watershed protection districts shall also be included in the underlying district(s). Each parcel of land within the watershed protection district shall be subject to the provision, regulations and restrictions of the watershed protection district and its underlying district(s). In the event of a conflict or discrepancy between the requirements of the watershed protection overlay and the underlying district(s), the more stringent shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 8, § 8.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-156. - Findings of fact. 
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City of Senoia it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter storm-water runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, storm-water runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicants, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplied, making water treatment more complicated, expensive and rendering water resources unusable. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic water materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 8, § 1.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-157. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the water supply watershed protection district regulation is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply for the City of Senoia. Also, to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediments to the water supply, and maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 8, § 1.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-158. - District delineation. 
The protected water supply watershed districts are hereby designated, and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the public water supply intake or water supply reservoir. The ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes define the boundaries of these districts. These districts shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Protection District Overlay Map of the City of Senoia Official Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 8, § 8.4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-159. - Permitted uses. 
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this article except for those listed in prohibited uses below are permitted in the water supply watershed protection district, subject to the following conditions and standards: 
(1)  Natural buffer requirements. 
a.  Within a seven mile radius upstream of the public water intakes, a natural buffer, 100 feet wide shall be maintained on both sides of the stream, measured from the stream banks. Similarly, outside the seven mile radius, a natural buffer of 50 feet shall be maintained on both sides of the stream. 
b.  A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the boundary of any existing or future water supply reservoir. 
(2)  Impervious surface limitations. 
a.  No more than 25 percent of the land area of any parcel or lot on which new development is placed may be covered by impervious surface within a designated water supply watershed protection district. 
b.  Within a seven mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150 foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream bank. 
c.  Outside a seven mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75 foot setback area on both sides of the stream, as measured from the stream bank. 
d.  Septic tanks and the drain fields of septic tanks are prohibited in the setback areas of b. and c. above. Amended June 5, 2000 
(3)  Exemption. 
The following uses are exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback requirements if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
a.  Utilities. 
1.  Utilities shall be located as far as reasonably possible from the stream bank and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
2.  Utilities shall be installed and maintained without changing the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as much as possible. 
b.  Forestry and agricultural activities. 
1.  Agriculture activities involving the planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
2.  Silviculture activities must conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
Sec. 74-160. - Site plan requirements. 
Except for the exemptions listed below all forms of development within the watershed protection district shall be required to have a site plan submitted and approved according to this article before any rezoning requests or building permits may be approved or any land disturbing activity may take place. Each site plan submitted shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan drawn to a scale and showing all planned improvements including width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, road water courses, drainage ways, water wastewater, and storm-water facilities and utility installations. 
(2)  Location, dimensions, and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or body of water. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(6)  Any facility in the process of expanding shall provide location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous of toxic waste. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. § 8.6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-161. - Exemptions from site plan requirement. 
(a)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(b)  Construction of minor structures such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 8, § 8.7, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-162. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  All sanitary landfills with or without synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(b)  Any facility using hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 8, § 8.8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-163. - Activity compliance. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm-water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction, or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the City of Senoia Building Official. Minor changes such as realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 8, § 8.9, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-164—74-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR OVERLAY Highway 85 and Highway 16 Commercial Overlay City of Senoia, Georgia 

Sec. 74-178. - Introduction. 
Senoia Georgia is a small, enclave community with a recognized, historic town center. Senoia's early neighborhoods form a significant national register historic district. These historic assets lend character and an identity to the city and, together with Newnan, Senoia is one of only a few Southside communities with a sense of place. 
Senoia lies along two regional arterials, Highway 85 and Highway 16, which form an important gateway to the community and is located within reasonable commuting distance of the Atlanta airport and major employment centers in the region. Downtown Senoia is the location of a station on the planned commuter rail line. At the doorstep of burgeoning Peachtree City in Fayette County, Senoia is poised for substantial residential and commercial growth. 
Senoia seeks a commercial development model that will prevent creation of the all too familiar "strip commercial corridors" characterizing many undesirable commercial corridors. 
The Senoia City Council tasked the city administrator with developing the regulatory tools necessary to preserving the historic character of the community while accommodating projected growth. The city administrator consulted with the Senoia Planning Commission that serves as the historic preservation commission in framing the underlying concepts influencing this Highway 85 and Highway 16 commercial overlay. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § A, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-179. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the overlay is to establish architectural design and site development standards for regulation of development and construction on Highway 85 and Highway 16 in the City of Senoia. Residential growth in Senoia is expected to propel commercial growth along these arterials. The city seeks standards that will ensure development of architecturally appealing and functional commercial settings. It is the express legislative intent of this overlay that strip or single lot, commercial development will undermine the objectives sought through adoption and implementation of this overlay. 
These standards are intended to give direction to both owners and potential developers of property encompassed by the overlay. The further purpose is to ensure quality development and preserve and enhance Senoia's historic character and small town charm. The City of Senoia Comprehensive Plan projects an increase in population from an estimated 3,059 residents in 2006 to 7,800 in 2026. An expansion in commercial services will be needed to serve this market as well as the commuter market on Highway 85 and Highway 16. The overlay is intended to encourage development consistent with the City of Senoia Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § B, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-180. - Applicability. 
The standards and requirements of this Highway 85 and Highway 16 commercial overlay shall apply to all commercial properties within the geography depicted on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Senoia. These standards shall apply to all new construction and shall apply to the affected portions of any redevelopment site or refurbished building where such renovation exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value within the overlay. 
Whenever the standards of the overlay impose a more restrictive standard than the provisions of any other ordinance, statute or covenant, the standards of the overlay shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § C, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-181. - Geography. 
The general boundary of the Highway 85 and Highway 16 commercial overlay shall be defined by those properties having frontage on Highway 85, between Seavy Street and the southern city limits, and/or on Highway 16, between Dead Oak Creek and the eastern city limits, to a depth of 1,000 feet. In no case shall these standards apply to that portion of Highway 85 properties also having frontage on an existing city street that comprises a depth of 300 feet on the lesser street frontage. The actual overlay zoning boundary shall be as approved by the mayor and city council and as subsequently designated on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § D, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 12-05, Arts. 1, 2, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 74-182. - Definitions. 
Brick: A durable fired clay product having nominal dimensions of no less or greater than two and one quarter inches by three and one half inches by eight inches used as a permanent exterior finish material in building construction. 
Canopy Tree: Any tree of greater or equal height and crown spread than surrounding trees; canopy trees typically reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. Examples include beech, hickory, maple, oak, pecan, pine and sycamore. 
Cornice: In classical architecture, the ornamental molding at the top of a wall, typically under the eaves, is divided into three parts: the architrave below, the frieze in the middle and the cornice above. Informally, the term cornice is used to describe all three of these moldings. 
Facade: That portion of any exterior elevation on a building extending from grade to the top of a parapet wall, or eaves and comprising the entire width of the building elevation. 
Greenspace: A natural area that does not comprise any portion of a required yard and is intended to afford an amenity to the public and contains no structures other than incidental pedestrian furnishings. 
Interparcel access: A private, vehicular way adequate to convey vehicular traffic from the subject property to adjacent properties in an unimpeded manner. 
Loading area: Space logically and conveniently located for pickup and delivery service, scaled to the vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles at all times. 
Lot of record: A parcel of land the subdivision of which has been legally recorded with the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Coweta County, except that any subdivision of land recorded after date of adoption of the land development ordinance shall have been approved by the City of Senoia according to procedures defined in the land development ordinance. 
Overlay: A zoning tool that is established by ordinance to prescribe regulations that supplement, and are to be applied in combination with, those of the original, underlying zoning. 
Parapet: That portion of a wall that extends above the roofline. 
Portico: A colonnade or covered entrance, especially in classical styles of architecture; usually, a covered entrance of the building that is supported by columns. 
Primary facade: The building elevation that faces a street providing principal access to the lot and conveying traffic within and throughout the development. Such streets may be comprised of Highway 85, Highway 16 and the secondary access streets. 
Secondary access road: A subordinate street intended to provide vehicle access to individual properties and designed to minimize the number of driveways directly accessing either Highway 16 or Highway 85. 
Secondary facade: The building elevation that faces a street providing access to the lot from the primary access street. 
Understory tree: Any tree or woody plant of lesser height and crown spread than surrounding trees. Understory species generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet. Examples include cherry, crab apple, dogwood, magnolia, pear, redbud, holly, sassafras, and red cedar. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § E, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-183. - Permitted uses. 
All uses of property that are permitted on a lot according to the underlying and primary zoning district, except those uses expressly excluded in section 74-184 of this article, are permitted in the Highway 85 and Highway 16 commercial overlay. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § F, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-184. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses shall be prohibited within the Highway 85 and Highway 16 commercial overlay: 
(1)  Automobile and truck sales; 
(2)  Automobile body repair shop; 
(3)  Billiard hall; 
(4)  Boat storage; 
(5)  Boat sales, service and repair; 
(6)  Builder supplies and storage; 
(7)  Bus station; 
(8)  Contractor equipment—Materials storage; 
(9)  Equipment rental—Industrial; 
(10)  Flea market; 
(11)  Group personal care home; 
(12)  Junk yard or salvage yard; 
(13)  Machine shop, fabrication, welding sales, etc.; 
(14)  Manufacturing facility; 
(15)  Mini-warehouse; 
(16)  Recycling center or collection station; 
(17)  Heavy equipment repair; 
(18)  Rooming or boarding house; 
(19)  Truck terminal; 
(20)  Wrecker services; 
(21)  Pawn shops, including title pawn; 
(22)  Check cashing outlets. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § G, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 12-05, Arts. 3, 4, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 74-185. - Development regulations. 
(a)  Streetscape. A streetscape plan for all development in the overlay shall be subject to approval by mayor and city council. Front yard landscaping areas shall be as provided herein along the entire property frontage, except where driveways or other openings may be required. Landscaping shall utilize fences, berms, walls, sidewalks, trees and other such methods subject to approval by mayor and city council. 
The streetscape plan shall accommodate an undisturbed, natural buffer along the frontage of Highway 85 as provided herein. All development on Highway 16 and any secondary road shall maintain a landscaped buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 25 feet along all property lines abutting these roadways. 
(b)  Underground utilities. All on site utilities shall be located underground. 
(c)  Site development. Mass grading of a site shall be prohibited and all clearing shall be subject to this article. Projects to be developed in phases shall be issued land disturbance permits for only those phases or portions of phases to be built within a subsequent 12-month period. 
(d)  Site inspection. All required silt fence and tree protection fencing shall be installed and inspected before land disturbance commences. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § H, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-186. - Design requirements. 
(a)  Transportation infrastructure. A primary objective of the overlay as concerns Highway 85 is establishment of a "secondary road network." Such a network is intended to minimize disruption of traffic flow on Highway 85 and to provide opportunities for provision of abundant landscaping characterizing the overlay. Platting of properties being developed within the overlay shall afford construction and dedication of such a network either through provision of single loaded building sites to the rear of the secondary road or by platting of building sites along Highway 85. In either case, a 40-foot landscaped buffer or, at the developer's option, a 30-foot buffer with berming having a minimum height of four feet, shall be maintained adjacent to the Highway 85 right-of-way, encroached upon only by public streets and sidewalks. 
(1)  It is encouraged that each site plan submitted for any development within the overlay provide for present or future dedication of right-of-way as previous platting may accommodate for construction of public roads. Such roads shall provide access to property interior to the development. Approval of any site plan for development along the proposed secondary access road shall be conditioned upon agreement of the developer of the property to fully fund the cost of construction of such proposed public road along that development's frontage. The site plan shall consider the alignment of such secondary road on adjacent parcels and shall cooperate with the city in design and layout of an efficient and economical secondary road network. 
(2)  Upon a finding by the city engineer that a development poses inordinate traffic impacts, the applicant shall prepare a professional traffic study according to the standard traffic methodology. In addition to the general standards of the methodology, the traffic study shall include weekend traffic generation and impact analysis. The traffic study shall also evaluate all intersections nearest to the site, or any area designated by the city engineer. 
(b)  Interparcel access. Interparcel vehicle access between all contiguous office and commercial lots is encouraged. 
(c)  Access. All building lots along Highway 85 shall be accessed from a city road; direct access from Highway 85 shall be as determined by GDOT. No building lot shall have direct access from Highway 85 or Highway 16 unless specifically approved by the city. 
(1)  No new driveway shall be permitted to provide ingress or egress to property on Highway 85 following adoption of this overlay, except for the purpose of serving existing lots of record. Access to Highway 16 shall be controlled by limiting the number of curb cuts, which shall not exceed two for the first 200 feet of frontage, with 24 feet being the maximum curb cut width. The number of such cuts may be increased by one for each additional 150 feet of road frontage on Highway 16. 
(d)  Street width. Where secondary roads are approved, the combined pavement and curb and gutter width of undivided streets within the overlay shall not exceed 24 feet. 
(e)  Parking. Unless a parking courtyard design can be achieved, off-street parking shall be uniformly distributed across the building site. In the case of freestanding buildings or shopping centers that do not have a street along the front and rear of the property, the area between the front of the building and the right-of-way shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the required parking and limited to a maximum of one double row of parking. A maximum of 50 percent of off-street parking shall be located to the sides of the building, with the remaining parking located to the rear of the building. 
(1)  Development tracts having no public right-of-way to the rear of the site and accommodating truck loading areas to the rear of the principal building shall be exempt from these requirements; however, parking located between the front of the building and the right-of-way shall be limited to a maximum of 50 percent of the required parking. 
(2)  No parking or service areas shall be permitted within 50 feet of the property line of an adjoining residential zoning lot. Parking and service areas shall be separated from adjoining residential zoning lots using a suitable landscaped screen across the entire width of this 50-foot buffer, which may be provided in combination with a fence or wall. Installation of such fence or wall shall not be a substitute for plant materials distributed appropriately across the entire buffer. Such screening shall achieve a reasonable visual separation between the properties, subject to approval by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § I, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-187. - Parking. 
A minimum of one parking space for every 300 square feet of commercial floor area available to the public shall be provided on all retail developments within the overlay. Any parking area re-construction involving an area equal to or greater than 50 percent of the paved surface shall trigger compliance with this article. Resurfacing shall not be deemed re-construction. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-188. - Building design. 
(a)  Architecture and building materials. Buildings shall be designed to depict the appearance of 19th and 20th century architectural styles found in downtown Senoia. These styles consist primarily of brick facades having parapets and flat roofs. 
Architectural design of all office and commercial structures shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Building facades shall consist of architectural treatments of brick, stone, concrete stucco in combination with glass and metal as support and trim components, only. Metal sided or portable buildings, vinyl siding and aluminum siding shall be prohibited. Synthetic stucco cementitious siding or natural wood shall also be prohibited as a primary exterior finish material, provided that accent features not exceeding ten percent of the building facade may consist of synthetic stucco, cementitious materials or natural wood. 
(2)  Buildings shall have flat roofs with a parapet wall; mansard roof styles shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Architectural design of all commercial buildings shall comply with the following additional standards: 
a.  Facades of multiple tenant buildings shall be varied in depth, parapet height or building materials to produce an appearance of multiple tenant occupancy. Two and three story is encouraged, and a minimum facade height of 24 feet shall be achieved. 
b.  A distinctive architectural entry feature shall be provided for individual tenant entrances for commercial spaces exceeding 10,000 square feet of leasable area. 
c.  All exterior walls visible from roadways or parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material and color or varying facade such as trellises, false windows or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings, or storefront along every 150 linear feet of such wall. 
d.  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual relief. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at a minimum rate of every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or such features shall be one foot, and may be provided as height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
e.  Building design shall include minimum one-foot deep cornices, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings a minimum of ten feet. 
f.  Building design shall include a minimum one-foot high contrasting base, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings a minimum of ten feet. Building facade materials shall be combined only horizontally, with the heavier, more substantial materials placed below the lighter. 
g.  Windows. Blank, windowless walls are prohibited along primary and secondary facades. Street level storefronts shall consist of display windows comprising a minimum of 60 and a maximum of 80 percent of the primary and secondary facades. All other building stories shall have windows that equal a minimum of 30 percent and maximum of 60 percent of the total facade, with each story being calculated independently. Mirrored glass with a reflection index of greater than 20 percent is prohibited. 
h.  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district within 150 feet as viewed from five feet above ground level. Roof screens and parapet walls shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance. 
(b)  Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be constructed with the same materials as the principal structure and shall match the predominant facade colors and rooflines. Banding and roofing materials of accessory structures, which shall include, but not be limited to gasoline sales canopies, shall also match the materials and colors of the predominant facade. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § J, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 12-05, Arts. 5, 6, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 74-189. - Site design. 
Building setback. A minimum front and side yard setback shall correspond to the size of the buffer requirement in all commercial development. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § K, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-190. - Utilities. 
All new utility lines shall be located underground. All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened on all sides by an opaque wall. Such screening shall be identical to the exterior finish materials of the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-191. - Landscaping. 
(a)  All developments shall to the extent practical provide entryway berming for the purpose of shielding parking areas, loading docks, dumpsters, and similar areas from view by employing the following methods, in order of preference: 
• Preservation of natural land forms, trees and other landscape elements. 
• Landscaped berms with asymmetrical groupings of plant materials, including trees and shrubs which are long lived, and indigenous to Senoia and this part of Georgia and 50 percent of which shall be evergreen species. 
• Landscaped berms with linear, open form fences. 
(b)  Buildings shall incorporate live plant materials as foundation plantings. 
(c)  Any site furnishings such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. 
(d)  A landscape buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 20 feet and an average horizontal dimension of 25 feet shall be provided along all property lines abutting roadways. A landscape buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 15 feet shall be provided along all other property lines, except that a 50-foot landscaped buffer shall be established along all abutting residential properties. 
(e)  A minimum of eight percent of the parking lot shall be landscaped. Landscaped areas shall be protected by raised curbs or fixed wheel stops and shall have a minimum area of 120 square feet and minimum dimension of six feet. No parking space shall be located more than 100 feet from a canopy tree. 
(f)  One canopy tree shall be planted for every 250 square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be planted at a ratio of three for every one tree. 
(g)  A minimum of 20 percent of all existing trees having a diameter of 12 inches or greater shall be retained. This requirement shall be in addition to the standards of any required landscape area; however, such retention may be achieved through tree preservation within such areas. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-192. - Detention facilities. 
Detention ponds or retention areas shall be designed to blend with adjacent landscaped areas to the greatest possible extent. Such stormwater facilities may be located within a buffer; however, when located adjacent to the perimeter of the building site, fenced ponds shall not be located in a front yard or within 50 feet of a property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-193. - Signs. 
(a)  Developments shall be limited to one freestanding monument sign per public street frontage. Developments having in excess of 500 feet of frontage on a single road may erect one additional monument sign for each such additional 500 linear feet of frontage. Individual buildings or business storefronts, for placement of wall signs, shall also be limited to one sign per street frontage. Wall signs shall be limited to one non-illuminated wall sign per individual business having maximum dimensions of three feet in height and a maximum total area of 24 square feet. 
(b)  Signs shall be monument style having a maximum height of eight feet and maximum area of 64 square feet; construction materials shall match those of the principal building. Specific dimensional requirements for signs shall be as specified in the Senoia Sign Ordinance. 
(c)  Sign illumination shall be indirect and shall not exceed 75 foot-candles. 
(d)  Lettering on signs shall be limited to 18 inches by 18 inches. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-194. - Loading areas. 
(a)  Loading docks and loading areas shall be located or screened so as to be concealed from view from neighboring streets and properties. No loading dock shall be located between the primary or secondary facade of any building and a public street. 
(b)  All loading docks shall be screened from view of any street or residentially zoned lot by a continuous planting of evergreen shrubs. Shrubs shall be moderately growing, be a minimum height of six feet at time of planting, and reach a height of eight feet within two years of planting. 
(c)  Commercial properties that adjoin a residential zoning lot to the rear shall enclose loading areas using a masonry wall constructed of materials and exterior finishes identical to the side elevations and having a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-195. - Outdoor storage. 
(a)  No unenclosed, outside storage shall be permitted. Such enclosure as will permit unroofed, outside storage shall be comprised of walls having a minimum height of six feet, but in no case less than the height of equipment, materials, merchandise or other goods to be stored or exceeding ten feet in height. These walls shall be identical in exterior finish materials to the walls of the primary or secondary facade of the principal structure. Fencing, with or without typical fence screening materials, shall not be considered as a screening wall. Chain link fencing is prohibited. 
(b)  Outdoor display of merchandise shall be permitted provided such display is located adjacent to the principal structure and conforms to the setbacks for the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-196. - Pedestrian improvements. 
(a)  All developments shall provide sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet along all frontages of the lot that abut a public street. 
(b)  Continuous on site sidewalks having a minimum width of four feet shall be provided from the public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance of all buildings on the site. Such sidewalks shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades along the building facade within 30 feet of all customer entrances. Sidewalks shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, street crossings, building and store entrances. 
(c)  Sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet shall be provided along the full length of the building facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. 
(d)  All buildings shall provide direct pedestrian access from on-site parking areas as well as the public sidewalk. 
(e)  All on site sidewalks shall be distinguished from vehicular surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-197. - Lighting design. 
(a)  Streetlights shall be provided along all public rights-of-way utilizing decorative light poles and fixtures consistent with the design adopted by the City of Senoia for the overlay. The light source shall be high-pressure sodium. Streetlights shall be staggered, 150 feet on-center, along both sides of the roadway. This standard shall not apply to Highway 85 or Highway 16. 
(b)  Lighting in parking areas shall provide area lighting sufficient to achieve a minimum illumination of 2.4 foot-candles of light as measured at grade level and recommended in the IESNA Lighting Handbook. 
(c)  All building entrances, walks and vehicular access shall be lit. 
The following lighting guidelines shall apply: 
• Walk and access lighting: 120-Volt Halogen 20 to 50 Watts. 
• Architectural and landscape lighting: 120-Volt Halogen 50 to 100 Watts. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-198. - Dumpsters. 
Dumpsters shall be screened from view on all four sides. Screening shall consist of three solid walls of brick, stone or stucco construction, a minimum of six feet in height, and the fourth wall shall be comprised of opaque metal or wooden gates. The gate opening shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. All dumpsters shall be equipped with lids. The pad of the gated dumpster enclosure shall be concrete pad and all dumpster approaches shall also be concrete and have a minimum length of ten feet. Dumpster shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residential zoning district or use, and the Highway 85 or Highway 16 right-of-way, but may otherwise be located within any required building setback. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-199. - Greenspace requirements. 
All developments shall reserve a minimum of 20 percent of the gross lot area as greenspace. Greenspace shall be strategically located for the beneficial use of customers and employees. No more than 50 percent of required greenspace shall be located within a 100-year floodplain, wetlands or utility easement. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § L, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-200. - Plan review procedures. 
(a)  Application procedures. All applicants for new development, occupational tax permit, and/or construction permits that expand the use or building footprint shall apply for plan approval through the city administrator. Application forms available from the city must be submitted, together with a scaled site plan depicting the proposed improvements. 
Applications shall be filed with the city administrator 30 days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which the development is to be considered as reflected on the calendar provided with all application forms. No construction or site work of any kind shall be permitted prior to approval of plans and specifications by planning commission. 
(b)  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for rezoning, development permits or building permits of property within the overlay, the applicant shall confer with city administrator for the purpose of reviewing the proposal and to obtain information about development standards and ordinances affecting property within the overlay. 
(c)  Site plan requirement. Any application for rezoning in the Highway 85 and Highway 16 commercial overlay shall be accompanied by a site plan as provided below. A narrative containing the following information shall also be provided: 
• A description of the character of the development, including a summary of floor area by use, number and types of commercial spaces, total lot area and square footage allocation for parking, landscaping and greenspace. 
• A development and construction schedule indicating major milestones in the proposed development. 
• Projects to be developed in phases shall provide a general statement of the proposed development schedule by phase. 
• Any agreements, provisions and covenants that govern the use, maintenance and protection of the development and any common or greenspace areas. 
•  A professional traffic study may be required for projects expected to generate more than 500 vehicle trips per day. 
A "design book" that will depict and guide architectural style, scale and materials to be used in the development shall also be produced by the applicant. The front, rear and side elevations and perspective drawings of all structures to be built must be included in the design book. 
(d)  Application requirements. Applications for development under this article shall be accompanied by a scaled site plan of not greater than one inch equals 50 feet depicting: 
(1)  Lot size and dimensions; 
(2)  Proposed project, including use, building footprint, height, materials and front, rear and side building elevations; 
(3)  Pedestrian circulation; 
(4)  Vehicular access and parking facilities; loading facilities; 
(5)  Buffers, greenspace and landscaping; 
(6)  Site lighting; 
(7)  Furnishings; 
(8)  Proposed signs; 
(9)  Dumpsters; and 
(10)  Adjoining uses and zoning. 
Information concerning the latter shall indicate the architectural relationship of the proposed project or improvement to the surrounding context and shall be in the form of sketches or photographs. 
(e)  Review procedures. The city administrator and planning commission shall review all applications regulated under this article. Such review shall ensure proposal consistency with the purposes of this article and conformance to the standards contained herein. Site plan review by the city administrator and planning commission shall precede any action by mayor and council. The findings and recommendations of the city administrator and planning commission shall be provided to mayor and council, which may incorporate such findings and recommendations in their consideration of the proposal. Planning commission shall be empowered to issue non-binding approvals or denials of site development, construction or alteration matters. All applications require final action by the mayor and council. 
Applications proposing construction or site work that, in the opinion of planning commission, do not comply with the standards of this article shall be presented to the mayor and council as nonconforming and planning commission shall recommend denial to the mayor and council. 
Applications that may be approved by mayor and council shall be forwarded to the city administrator and the necessary permits issued. Should the applicant be unable or unwilling to comply with the recommended changes suggested to reach compliance with this article, no permits shall be issued. All recommended changes shall comply with the standards set out herein. 
The findings of planning commission shall comprise only non-binding recommendations to mayor and council, and the governing body shall be empowered to approve or deny the application based on those recommendations and application of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § M, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-201. - Legal description. 
(See official zoning map). 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 9, § N, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-202—74-212. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CELL TOWER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-213. - Definitions. 
Alternative tower structure: Shall mean man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna: Shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
FAA: Shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC: Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission 
Height: Shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Tower: Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, etc. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-214. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article are to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; 
(2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the city is minimal; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way to minimize the adverse visual impact to the city; 
(5)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the city quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-215. - Aesthetics. 
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas governed by this article. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping which will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color or colors that is identical to, or is closely comparable with, the supporting structure and/or surrounding area so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the city council may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design, which would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-216. - General. 
(a)  Height limitations. The height limitations set forth in this section of the zoning ordinance as applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antenna. Towers and antenna shall be governed by the special use permit procedures set forth therein. 
(b)  Tower height threshold. These standards shall only be applicable to antenna and towers in excess of 35 feet in height. 
(c)  The city council may consider for approval a site plan specific request, which is in substantial conformance with the requirements listed herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-217. - Conditional use permit. 
Conditional use permit shall be required for all television, land mobile, communication, microwave, radio transmission antennae and towers. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-218. - Requirements. 
(a)  All towers and antennae in excess of 70 feet must be set back a distance equal to the full height of the tower from the property line. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application for a tower, the applicant shall provide a site plan and information regarding topography, coverage zone, and tower height requirements. 
(c)  Shared usage of towers and antennae facilities is encouraged, and towers should be designed to accommodate such uses. 
(d)  Accessory structures shall be limited to usage associated with operation of the antennae or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. 
(e)  All towers and antennae shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device such as a six foot wall, fence or other appropriate device to prevent unauthorized access. 
(f)  All towers and antennae must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission or such governing agency guidelines as may be established by named agencies. All towers and antennae must be updated and brought into conformity with such standards and regulations within six months of their adoption. The failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the City of Senoia to require removal or re-permitting of the antennae or tower at the owner's expense. 
(g)  At the time of application for building permit, the plans for tower or antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable codes. Cost of engineering evaluation shall be the responsibility of the individual or corporation applying for the building permit. 
(h)  All conditional use permits mush show proof of notification to Big T Airport. 
Big T Airport Owner's Association 
(i)  Applicants are required to explore and fully utilize existing tower and antennae space and are required to bear an equitable share of capital, operating and other expenses in connection with such shared usage. 
(j)  Non-residential sites are encouraged for tower location where possible and use of platted lots in existing subdivisions are discouraged. 
(k)  In addition, all such towers and antennae shall be designed to minimize visual and scenic impact when located on slopes greater than 15 percent or on top of such slopes. 
(l)  Any tower approved under the provision of this article which is not utilized by any communications service provider for any communications related purpose for a period of 12 months may be subject for review by the planning commission for the purposes of initiating an application to zone the property back to its original district. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-219. - Landscape buffer/screening requirements. 
(a)  Unless otherwise noted within this section's requirements, or otherwise approved by the city council, any commercial tower or antennae which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 40 foot setback from the residential property, 15 feet of which shall be landscaped, screening buffer between the tower and the residentially zoned property, which shall be subject to city council approval. This setback is in addition to the required height setback in article XI, section 74-238. 
Note: Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that required buffers and setbacks are in conflict the more stringent shall apply. 
(b)  Additionally, necessary private utilities and/or access drives may be allowed through, over, or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses, which are proposed through, over, or across a designated, undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-220. - Objectives. 
The above required landscape screening buffer shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
(1)  Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
(2)  Control or direct vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
(3)  Reduce glare; 
(4)  Buffer noise; and 
(5)  Establish privacy. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.7-1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-221. - Standards. 
The above required landscape screening buffer is subject to review and approval by the city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Plantings are to be a mix of rows of evergreen trees and shrubs, deciduous trees and evergreens taller than the required five foot minimum. 
(2)  Species are to be ecologically compatible to site and appropriate for design situation. 
(3)  Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffers should provide maximum visual barrier to adjoining properties and public streets. 
(4)  Minimum height of plant materials at installation is to be five feet for trees. 
(5)  Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by the city council. 
(6)  Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner(s) to ensure that the above objectives and standards are met. 
(7)  When topography and existing conditions allow, the required landscape buffer should be undisturbed; provided, however, the buffer may be crossed by an access drive and/or necessary utilities as shown on the site plan. 
(8)  Any appeals from a determination by city staff regarding the landscape buffer shall be to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.7, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-222. - Action by city council. 
A consideration of a request for a conditional use permit under this section shall follow the same procedures set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-223. - Standards for review. 
(a)  The city council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to approve this proposed use: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower/fall zones; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures or uses which may be incompatible with the tower (such as private or public airports); 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(6)  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
(7)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures. 
(b)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers and structures do not have sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers and structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  The fees, cost or contractual provision required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates there are other limiting factors, which render existing towers and structures unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-224. - Action by city staff. 
Upon approval by city council of the conditional use permit, a building permit shall be issued and the permitted structure shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this article and any conditions imposed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 10, § 10.10, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-225—74-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-233. - Exceptions to development standards. 
(a)  Where a lot of record at the time of the adoption of or amendment to this article does not contain a sufficient area or dimension to conform to the area or dimensional requirements of this article, such lot may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, provided approval is given by the Coweta County Health Department. Such use or structure may be enlarged, provided that minimal yard dimensions are maintained. 
(b)  Double buffer. When a required buffer area would abut and be contiguous to an established buffer area which meets all requirements of this article, then this additional required buffer area need not be established 
(c)  Height requirements. The height limitations as stated in this article shall not apply to the following; 
(1)  Barns, silos or other farm structures when located on farms; belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; water towers; transmission towers; windmills; chimney's; smokestacks; flagpoles; radio or television towers; masts and aerials. 
(2)  Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks and scenery lofts and similar structures, provided that these structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which the structure is located. 
(3)  Multiple-frontage lots. Lots, which adjoin a public street on more than one side shall provide the minimum required front yard on each street. 
(d)  Projections into yards. 
(1)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features of the principal buildings, provided that these features do not project more than three feet into any required yard or by accessory structures as provided by article VI, Table 6.1. 
(2)  An open, unenclosed porch or hard-surfaced terrace, steps, stoops and similar fixtures of a building shall conform to required set backs. 
(3)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street side corner lots shall violate the corner visibility and that any fence in a required front yard in a residential district shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(e)  Relatives' residence in single-family residential districts. A second cooking facility may be constructed and used within a single-family residence for the exclusive use of relatives of the real property owner subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The real property owner must live in the single-family residence. 
(2)  Relatives must be by blood, marriage or law. 
(3)  The area of the second cooking facility shall not exceed the area of the main cooking facility. 
(4)  Access to the relatives' living area shall be required from the interior of the residence, although secondary access to the exterior of the dwelling is not prohibited. 
(5)  Paved off-street parking shall be provided for additional vehicles as needed. 
(6)  Permits for the second cooking facility shall not be issued until such time as the real property owner has applied to and received from the city a relative residence permit. The relative residence permit shall be in recordable form and, upon execution, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.1, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 74-234. - One building on each lot. 
Except in the case of planned center and planned developments, only one principal building, together with its customary accessory buildings, shall occupy each lot. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-235. - Use and construction of temporary buildings. 
These regulations are designed to allow short-term and seasonal commercial uses and activities that are temporary in nature, will not adversely impact the surrounding areas and land uses and that can be terminated and/or removed immediately. Non-commercial uses and activities are exempted from these regulations. 
(1)  Temporary uses are characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature. All temporary uses must take place on an improved lot. Provided that proper applications are filed and approved, temporary commercial activities include activities such as leasing offices, carnivals and fairs, parking lot sales and seasonal sales such as landscape materials and equipment, patio and lawn furniture, Christmas trees, pumpkin sales and produce stands. Provided that proper applications are filed and approved, temporary private uses are constructed for a specific project and removed at the end of the project. These include, but are not limited to, construction and film trailers and equipment. 
(2)  At least six weeks prior to the event, all sponsors shall submit to the city manager the appropriate application fee set by the mayor and council and an application that contains the following: 
a.  Event title. 
b.  Sponsor of event. 
c.  Dates and times of event, set up. event start and end times and break down/clean up. 
d.  Chief officer of sponsor organization. 
e.  Contact information. 
f.  Activity description. 
g.  Estimated number of participants. 
h.  Proposed site plan that includes, but is not limited to, vehicular and pedestrian ways, tents, booths, vendors, stage, sound equipment, generators, medical treatment facilities, portable restrooms and light equipment. Provision of a minimum 20-foot emergency access shall be provided. 
i.  Proposed parking plan shall be submitted with application. 
j.  Description of the proposed safety plan shall be submitted. 
k.  If an entry fee or admission is proposed, the fee shall be provided. 
l.  All temporary uses shall provide a copy of a signed contract for portable sanitary facilities for customers and employees or provide restrooms on the improved lot. 
(3)  Temporary commercial use permits shall not to exceed 45 days and shall be reissued for a minimum of 90 days. All permits shall and meet the following regulations: 
a.  No temporary use structure shall be located within a public right-of-way; 
b.  Adequate and safe ingress and egress to the site, such that the normal traffic pattern is not disrupted. Parking or stopping on the public right-of-way shall be prohibited; 
c.  No structure or improvement of a permanent nature shall be constructed. 
d.  Temporary vending and concession trailers are not permitted in the city historic district without authorization of the mayor and council in coordination with an authorized event 
(4)  Where allowed by zoning, outdoor promotional and/or seasonal sales events at retail stores, whether freestanding or in shopping centers, provided that the sales area is located on the same lot as the store holding the sales event and selling their own merchandise and goods normally used in the outdoors, including, but not limited to, lawnmowers, wheelbarrows, lawn furniture, plants, barbecue grills, play sets, manufactured outdoor storage buildings, etc., do not require a temporary use permit if the business holds a current occupational tax certificate registered with the city and is occurring on the same tot as the address of the certificate. 
(5)  Temporary use permits shall be issued in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Real estate sales office located within a subdivision under current development, provided there are no cooking or sleeping accommodations, for a period not to exceed 12 months; 
b.  Contractor's office and equipment sheds in any district for a period not to exceed 12 months, provided that such office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant, a final site plan has been approved and a land disturbance permit has been issued; 
c.  Concessions, except for seasonal produce, for a period not to exceed two months, provided the applicant submits written authorization from the property owner of the site including the proposed activity, date(s) activity is to operate and availability of adequate sanitary and parking facilities. The sale must be conducted within a commercial zoned district, outside of the historic district. The applicant must purchase or provide proof of an occupational tax certificate registered within the state and city; 
d.  Carnivals, fairs, circuses, craft fairs, outdoor markets concerts, flea markets, car shows and sales, temporary sales of goods, and similar activities shall be allowed one event per month per location for a period not to exceed two consecutive days and to not take place in conjunction with government sponsored or supported by special events. The applicant must provide written authorization from the property owner and have a temporary use permit approved by the city manager or his or her designee. If applicable, inspections will be conducted by the building division and fire marshal; 
e.  Temporary activities, structures and other requirements deemed necessary because of a natural disaster or other public health and safety emergency do not require a temporary use permit and may be authorized by the city manager for the duration of the emergency; 
f.  Tents used in conjunction with temporary commercial uses shall be permitted in all non-residential zoning districts. Any tent erected under this section which has an area of 200 square feet or more, requires a temporary use permit and submission of a flame retardant or flame-resistant certificate; 
g.  Temporary uses, with the exemption of fireworks, associated with existing businesses registered in the city and all businesses sanctioned by the state to conduct business in the state are exempt from permitting and fees. The maximum number of temporary use events to a single fixed business location shall be 12 per year; 
h.  No open flames; 
i.  Trash receptacles to be emptied at the end of each day of the event and removed from the premises to an approved disposable location, not to include the city owned receptacles; and 
j.  Outdoor markets, craft fairs and flea markets will also need to comply with the outdoor market regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.3, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 15-04, § 6, 8-3-2015 ; Ord. No. 17-08, § 1, 1-8-2018 ; Ord. No. 18-05 , § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 74-236. - Requirements for moving buildings. 
No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be moved within or into the city, unless when relocated, it meets all requirements of all ordinances and is first approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-237. - Lots with well and septic tank. 
Any lot upon which both an individual well and septic tank are to be provided shall have a minimum area of not less than one acre and meets soil test requirements of state and the Coweta County Health Department. The Coweta County Health Department in accordance with applicable board of health regulations shall approve the site location on the lot of these facilities. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-238. - Minimum area for lots served by septic tank. 
Any lot, which is to be served by an individual septic tank, shall have an area of not less than one acre. The Coweta County Health Department in accordance with applicable regulations shall approve the site location on the lot of the location. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-239. - Fences and walls. 
No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight feet in height, or be constructed in a public right-of-way or future street right-of-way. Any fence in a required front yard in a residential district shall not exceed four feet in height. The fence shall be constructed so that the frame is facing the inside of the property and the smooth side is facing neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.7, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 74-240. - Buffer area. 
Buffer areas required by this article shall be established and maintained by the property owner under the following provisions: 
(1)  Be maintained as a planted area or when required, additional plantings as provided in this section. 
(2)  Be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stone, rocks and other landscaping materials. 
(3)  Not be used for parking or a structure other than a fence or drainage improvements required by the city. However, a buffer area may be used for vehicular access and utility easements (only if these uses are provided approximately perpendicular to the greater distance of the buffer area). 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided the natural topography of the land shall be preserved and appropriately landscaped. 
(5)  Where the conditions described in paragraph (4) of this section cannot be met by reason of the topography of the land or of the prior removal of or lack of timber and foliage, the owner of the buffer area may erect a permanent wall or fence of not less than six feet in height, or a screen of evergreen plantings, so designed and developed to provide visual screening between the property described herein. These plantings shall consist of evergreen shrubs not less than six feet in height, or shrubs, which will, in normal growth attain a height of six feet within three years. The following plants shall be approved for this purpose but shall not be exclusive of other plants which may be suitable, provided that they can form a hardy screen, dense enough and high enough both to interrupt vision and to diffuse the transmission of sound: 
Magnolia grandiflora (Southern Magnolia), Pinus strobus (White Pine), Prunus caroliniana (Cherry Laurel), Ligustrum lucidum (Glossy Ligustrum), Ilex burfordi (Buford Holly), Elaeagnus pungens (Elaegnus) 
(6)  Any grading, improvements or construction adjacent thereto shall be conducted far enough from the buffer area so as not to disturb or encroach upon the buffer area. 
(7)  Be designated on each plat and recorded as a permanent easement. 
(8)  Projections into yards provided by article XII section 74-267 of this zoning ordinance shall not be permitted in the buffer area. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-241. - Parking of vehicles and trailers. 
(a)  No vehicles or trailers which are eight feet or higher in height or have more than two axles shall be permitted to be parked in front of the main building or dwelling, in side or rear yards of residential property. Recreational vehicles or campers that exceed the above criteria are allowed if parked or stored completely within an enclosed garage or roofed carport. School buses and commercial vehicles or commercial trailers exceeding the above criteria are not allowed. Nonresident parking is allowed for up to one week, if for longer than one week a parking permit must be obtained from the police department, not to exceed one additional week. These vehicles may be parked for no more than 24 hours in residential areas by the residents for loading and unloading only. 
(b)  No travel trailer or commercial trailer shall be permanently used for storage or additional retail space within the corporate limits of the City of Senoia. Such trailers may be used for storage at construction sites and renovation projects as long as they are parked in a manner consistent with this Code section. 
(c)  None of the above described vehicles may be parked overnight in the GC district, unless the vehicle is used in the day to day operation of and registered to a business on that lot. No lots may be used for storage of any of these vehicles unless it is approved by the mayor and council. Violators will be towed at the vehicle owner's expense. 
(d)  None of the above described vehicles may be parked in any designated publicly owned or leased parking area, spaces or street except for the purpose of loading and unloading for a duration not to exceed two hours. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.9, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 10-02, 6-21-2010) 
Sec. 74-242. - Nonresidential service areas. 
All service areas for nonresidential uses shall be established so as not to infringe upon any yard requirement and shall be visually screened from adjacent residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.10, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-243. - Fire safety in nonresidential districts and planned developments. 
Accessibility for fire fighting equipment on a hard-surfaced subbase (subgrade plus an asphalt first layer or bound crushed stone aggregate) shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction in all nonresidential districts and planned developments. Minimum widths of private access driveways with a development, excluding parking, shall be 20 feet, and the minimum turning radii shall be 35 feet. Fire hydrants and water service shall be installed to within 300 feet of units under construction before proceeding with framing. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.11, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-245. - Exterior storage yards. 
Exterior storage yards (but not including the parking of vehicles for sale or lease) shall not be permitted in any district except the GC, and I districts. A fence shall enclose these storage yards not less than six feet in height to provide visual screening. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.12, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-245. - Open space. 
Open space areas, required to be established by this article, shall be permanently maintained as open space and appropriately landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stones, rocks or other landscaping materials. These areas may not be used for vehicular access; parking or similar uses except as otherwise permitted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.13, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-246. - Determination of development standards from private streets. 
When this article requires the establishment of minimum building setback lines, frontages and related development standards, these measurements for property not abutting a public street shall be made from or along a private street, except in apartment developments where these measurements shall be made as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.14, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-247. - Required fences. 
When this article requires a fence to be constructed, the fence shall be completed prior to occupancy of the primary use structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.15, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-248. - Site plan preparation. 
Site plans and other development plans required to be submitted under the provisions of this article shall be prepared only by those currently registered for such work in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.16, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-249. - Lighting. 
Lighting in all districts shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon or adversely affects adjacent properties and roadways. This section shall not apply to lighting established by governmental authority within public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.17, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-250. - Special requirements—Residential. 
(a)  A buffer area with a minimum width by zoning district, as provided below, and a six foot fence or wall which provides visual screening shall be established and maintained by the owner when adjoining an R district. Such buffer shall be: 
(1)  In the OI, GC and I districts, 50 feet where development adjoins an R district. 
The requirements for a fence or wall may be waived by the city upon presentation of field survey data by the property owner or developer, which shows that construction of the fence or wall would destroy existing vegetation which, in itself, provides visual screening between the development and the R district, or when the development abuts undeveloped property. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.18, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-251. - Non-residential. 
This section applies to nonresidential districts. 
(1)  A percentage of lot area as listed below shall be appropriately maintained as open area. Not less than 50 percent of this area shall be located between the building and the public streets. No parking or other similar uses shall be permitted therein. On lots with multiple street frontage, the 50 percent area shall be evenly distributed along all street frontages: 
a.  In the OI districts, 20 percent. 
b.  In the GC districts, ten percent. 
c.  In the I district, ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.19, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-252. - Bed and breakfast. 
(a)  Zoning requirements. A facility operated as a bed and breakfast must first comply with zoning requirements set forth for that particular classification. 
(b)  Permits. A bed and breakfast must obtain an occupational tax and meet all qualifications set out by state and local regulations and provide proof of membership in the Bed and Breakfast Council of Georgia. 
(c)  Signs. Signs shall consist of one sign not to exceed two square feet in size. 
(d)  Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guestroom as well as one space for each resident occupying the property. In some cases, landscaping may be required to screen parking areas form adjacent properties. 
(e)  Special events. Any additional activity taking place at a bed and breakfast must comply with established health and zoning standards, must be of a nature that would normally occur in that neighborhood, i.e., wedding, party, tour, etc., must provide off-street parking and must not interfere with the quality of life of neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 11, § 11.20, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-253—74-263. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED USES Amended March 5, 2001 

Sec. 74-264. - Generally. 
Within the various zoning districts and shown on the official zoning map, many permitted uses shall comply with development standards designed for each use in addition to the development standards required by the specific zoning district. These special requirements are contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 12, § 12.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-265. - Accessory uses and structures—Generally. 
(a)  Incidental to permitted uses. The following provisions apply to accessory uses and structures that are incidental to permitted uses: 
(1)  An accessory structure shall be located on the same lot as the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(2)  No accessory structure shall be located upon a lot, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal building. 
(3)  An accessory structure shall not be permitted in a front or side yard in the residential districts. 
(4)  No accessory structure in a nonresidential district shall be used by other than employees of the owner, lessee or tenant of the premises, unless otherwise allowed by provisions of this article. 
(5)  A residential accessory structure shall not be rented. 
(6)  No accessory structure shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line in a residential district if the structure is located 20 feet or more to the rear of the principal building. 
(7)  An accessory structure located closer than 20 feet to the principal building in a residential district shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(8)  Where a corner lot adjoins, in the rear, a lot in a residential district, no accessory structure shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer than 25 feet to the rear property line. The setback of 25 feet will not be required when the adjoining yard is a rear yard. 
(9)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, the accessory structure shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. No breeze way or passageway that connects a primary structure to an accessory structure or detached garage shall extend further than 20 feet. 
(10)  Accessory structure swimming pools, when located closer than 20 feet to the rear of the dwelling in a residential district, shall comply with the minimum side and rear yard requirements of that district. Setback minimums shall be measured from the decking or closest part of the pool structure to the applicable property line. Accessory swimming pools shall be permitted only upon compliance with approval of the board of health swimming pool regulations. Every swimming pool constructed or installed in compliance with Appendix G of the International Residential Code. 
(11)  Accessory buildings in residential districts shall not exceed the following accumulative areas: 
The accumulative floor size of accessory buildings in any residential (R) district shall not exceed two percent of the size of the property. The size of the property shall be determined by a signed and sealed survey, final plat signed by the mayor of the City of Senoia or through Coweta County tax records. Accessory buildings shall be limited to two stories; however at no time shall the height of an accessory building exceed the height of the primary structure. No more than two accessory buildings will be allowed on any residential lot. 

 
• A bay is an enclosed area of 300 sq. ft. 
(12)  Recreational accessory structures in R residential districts incidental to primary use residences shall be limited to swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball goals, pool houses or cabanas containing no sleeping quarters and handball or racquetball courts. 
(13)  Accessory antenna structures for amateur radio service shall be located a distance of at least one-third of the height of the tower from all property lines. 
(14)  All accessory structures, including detached garages, located a distance equal to or less than the dimension of the required side yard for the zoning district in which the lot is situated, shall be screened through the installation or stockade type fence. Such screening shall be in compliance with provisions of section XII, buffer area of the zoning ordinance. 
(15)  The exterior finish and color of all accessory structures shall be identical to the exterior finish and color of the principal dwelling on which the accessory structures are located. In the case of brick dwellings, the accessory structure shall be similar to the trim work or siding materials of the dwelling. 
(b)  Customary home occupations. The following provision apply to customary home occupations. 
(1)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, other than non-illuminated identification sign having an area of not more than two square feet, which shall be attached wholly to the dwelling structure within which the home occupation is conducted. 
(2)  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare or electrical interference that would be detectable beyond the dwelling unit or accessory building. 
(3)  The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or accessory building and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed at the location of the home occupation. 
(4)  No more than 30 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for the conduct of the home occupation. 
(5)  No materials, equipment or business vehicles shall be stored or parked on the premises of the home occupation unless they are confined entirely within the residence, except that one business vehicle (the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed one and one-half tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in compliance with section 74-241 of this chapter. In addition, there shall be no storage of mechanical earthmoving equipment at the location of the home occupation unless the property area exceeds five acres. The offsite employees of the home occupation shall not congregate on or adjacent to the premises for any purpose concerning the business or home occupation. 
(6)  No home occupation shall be operated so as to create or cause a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 12, § 12.2, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 15-04, § 5, 8-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 74-266. - Customary home occupation day care services. 
Customary home occupation day care services may be established and operated in the city in accordance with the guidelines and procedures set forth below: 
(a)  Guidelines. 
(1)  A customary home occupation day care service means a private residence operated by any person who received therein pay for the supervision and care for fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, of not more than six children simultaneously, who are under 18 years of age, who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
(2)  No more than 25 percent of a residence may be used for a customary home occupation day care service and an outdoor play area may be provided. 
(3)  No customary home occupation day care service may be established and operated in the city until a permit to do so has been obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth below. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  Permit application. Persons seeking to operate a customary home occupation day care service in the city must file a permit application with the city clerk. Each application shall also be accompanied by the applicant's affidavit certifying the maximum number of children that will be served simultaneously and that the proposed customary home occupation day care service will meet and be operated in accordance with all applicable state laws ands regulations with all ordinances and regulations of the city and county. 
(2)  Decision of application. Within 30 days of the date the permit application is filed with the city clerk, a public hearing will be held and the city council shall either approve or disapprove the application for a permit to be issued. An application shall be approved only upon a determination by the city council that the customary home occupation day care service proposed by the applicant will be operated in compliance with all state laws and regulations. 
(c)  Issuance of permits. 
Each permit shall become effective on the date it is issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 12, § 12.3, 12-3-2007; Amd. of 5-2-2011) 
Secs. 74-267—74-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TRAFFIC AND PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-278. - Applicability. 
All uses shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-279. - Street access. 
Except as provided in this article, each building shall be located on a lot or parcel which abuts a public street or has access to a public street by means of a recorded access easement, if approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-280. - Street improvements. 
Street improvements required to accommodate traffic generated by a use and improvement of new street rights-of-way as established by the transportation and thoroughfare plan shall be made in accordance with city policy. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-281. - Extension of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be connected and extended as shown on the transportation and thoroughfare plan within the limits of the development. However, streets or portions of streets adjacent to a proposed nonresidential use which are developed and are being used exclusively for residential access shall not be connected, extended or in any way provide access to a nonresidential use. In addition, private drives which provide access to a nonresidential use shall not be permitted in any residential district. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-282. - Street access curb cuts in other than R districts. 
Curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits and other similar facilities on public streets in other than R districts shall not be located within 50 feet of any intersection and no closer than 20 feet to any property line, unless approved by the city engineer upon determination that such curb cuts will not create a traffic hazard. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-283. - Traffic-control devices. 
If the traffic forecasted to be generated by a use within a nonresidential district will necessitate, in order to handle turning movements into and out of the use onto a major or minor thoroughfare, traffic-control devices for that use to ensure public safety, the developer shall install such devices as are necessary to handle the traffic generated by the development. This determination shall be made by the city based upon standard traffic planning procedures of the federal highway administration and the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-284. - State department of transportation approval. 
All entrances or exits of any street or drive, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state department of transportation prior to the construction of the street or drive, or the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by the street or drive. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.7, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-285. - Corner visibility clearance. 
In any district, no fence, structure, sign, planting or other obstruction (above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.8, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-286. - Private streets. 
Private streets within any district shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this article. Private streets within any district shall be assigned names and locations and names of these streets shall be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in this article. All private street names shall be approved by the city council to avoid conflicting names. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.9, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-287. - Off-street automobile parking. 
(a)  General. Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section and in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act if applicable. 
(b)  Plans required. A parking plan for all but detached single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the city with the building plans. The city shall review the proposed parking plan with the city engineer to ensure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this article. The city shall not allow occupancy or use of a building until advised that its related parking facilities are completed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(c)  Design standards. All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall: 
(1)  Have access to public streets. 
(2)  Be graded and paved, including access drives, and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control. 
(3)  Have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar designations. 
(4)  In the case of each space, be not less than 162 square feet and not less than nine feet wide and 18 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street. 
(5)  Be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. 
(6)  Be separated from sidewalks and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and by a strip of landscaped space at least ten feet wide reserved as open space. 
(7)  If a parking area is established with an R district for a nonresidential use permitted in an R district, provide a continuous visual buffer at least four feet in height between the parking area and the abutting R property on a strip of land at least 20 feet wide adjoining the lot used for residential purposes which is reserved as open space, guarded with wheel bumpers, and planted in grass, shrubs and trees. 
(8)  Conform with regard to design of the parking area including space and driveway arrangement to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers. 
(9)  Provide adequate lighting if the facilities are to be used at night. This lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. 
(10)  Not be established within the required front yard of any R district except for single-family residential use, nor shall more than 35 percent of the required front yard be paved or used for parking under any circumstances. This paragraph applies only to parking and loading areas. 
(11)  Have a parking area that is permanently maintained by the owners or the occupants for their invitees of (or) licensees so long as the use exists. This includes prompt repair of pot holes and deteriorating pavement with materials which are comparable to the parking lot pavement. Such lots shall be kept free of trash and debris and all trash containers shall be kept neat and clean. 
(12)  The provisions of paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (6), (7) and (8) and of this subsection shall not apply to single-family residential uses where three or less spaces are required. 
(d)  Location. All parking facilities shall be located in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The required space shall be provided on the same plat with the use it serves. 
(e)  Joint use of parking facilities. The required parking space for a number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night and on Sundays. 
(f)  Use of area. No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long-term store of any vehicles or equipment unless permitted by the district in which the area is located. 
(g)  Location and surface of parking areas. The parking of any vehicle on any lot in any district on other than a surface treated and hardened to accommodate this vehicle is prohibited. Parking areas in all districts shall be connected to a public roadway by a driveway built according to the policies and ordinances of the city. In addition, parking of vehicles in the front yard or in front of the principal building line in an R district shall be prohibited except on a hard-surfaced driveway or in a carport or garage. Driveway extensions and second curb cuts shall be of the same material as the existing driveway. At a minimum all driveways in an R district shall have an apron, define in this section the driveway from the paved road way to the right-of-way line, of concrete or asphalt. Second curb cuts shall be approved by the city manager. 
(h)  Parking of business vehicles. The parking of business vehicles other than ordinary passenger automobiles shall be within a garage or carport or within a side or rear yard. The parking of any business vehicle other than a pickup or panel truck used to provide daily transportation to and from work and any vehicle with a carrying capacity of more than one and one-half tons is prohibited in any residential district. This section does not apply to business vehicle parking for pick up or delivery. 
(1)  Required spaces. The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: (unless owner can prove with real evidence why number of spaces should be different than that required by the following). 

 
(Ord of 12-3-2007, Art. 13, § 13.10; Amd. of 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 15-04, § 3, 8-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 74-288. - Street loading requirements. 
Off-street loading shall be established in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Design standards. Where required, one or more off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building. A loading berth shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 35 feet by 14 feet overhead clearance. A loading space need not be full berth but shall be sufficient to allow normal loading of magnitude appropriate to the property served. The city shall determine the sufficiency of loading space, but in no case shall this space or its use hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
(2)  Required spaces. The number of spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 

 

 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 13, § 13.11, 12-3-2007) 
Secs. 74-289—74-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 74-300. - Additional powers and duties of the city council. 
The city council shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  To authorize upon application a variance from the terms of the article, but only where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, which, at the time of adoption of this article was a lot or plat of record; or where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of a piece of property, or where by reason of other extraordinary or exceptional circumstances the strict application of the requirements of this article would result in practical difficulties of, or undue hardship upon, the owner of this property, provided that this relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this article. In granting a variance, the city council may attach such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this article will be served, pubic safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. However, the city council shall not be authorized to grant a use variance to permit a use in a district in which the use is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 14, § 14.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-301. - Appeals and hearings. 
Applications for an appeal to the city council may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of City of Senoia affected by a decision of an official or the city authorized under this zoning article. Such appeal shall be taken with 30 days of said decision by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Application for a variance or appeal must be filed with the city clerk at least 21 days before the scheduled public hearing. The contents of the application for variance or appeal shall be determined by the city council. The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the city council all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken or constituting the record upon which the application for a variance is based. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 14, § 14.2, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-302. - Notice of hearings. 
(a)  Notice of said hearing on said request for a variance or appeal shall be advertised once a week for two consecutive weeks in a Legal Organ of Coweta County. The first date of such publication shall be at least 15 days prior to but not more than 45 days prior to the date of said public hearing. The cost of the advertisement shall be borne by the applicant. 
(b)  The applicant for said variance or appeal shall also give notice of said request for variance or appeal and the public hearing thereon to the adjoining property owners of the property subject to the variance application or appeal by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of said adjoining property owner as shown upon the county tax records. Notice must be mailed no later than 15 days prior to the date of said scheduled public hearing. Proof of said notice shall be provided to the city council. In determining adjoining property owners, street or other right-of-way shall be disregarded and notice shall be given to a property owner whose property adjoins the same right-of-way at the location of the property, which is the subject of an application. 
(c)  The notice shall be required herein to be mailed to an adjoining property owner and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Address and location of the property for which the variance or appeal is sought; 
(3)  Current zoning of the property for which the variance or appeal is sought; 
(4)  The variance or appeal requested and the reason for the requested variance or appeal; and 
(5)  The date, time and place of the public hearing on said requested variance or appeal. 
(d)  All applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00, plus advertising costs. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 14, § 14.3, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-303. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal stays the enforcement of the provisions of this article under appeal until a final decision on the appeal is made, except the city council may revoke the stay of enforcement if such stay would cause immediate peril to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 14, § 14.4, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-304. - Decisions of the city council. 
(a)  In exercising its powers, the city council may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the city official whose decision is appealed and may issue or direct the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the city council, said council shall inform, in writing, all the parties involved of its decisions and the reasons therefor. Recourse from a decision by the city council shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction by the filing of a writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 14, § 14.5, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-305. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  All persons who wish to testify to the city council at a hearing concerning an appeal or variance under consideration by the council shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the city prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
(b)  The secretary will read the proposed appeal under consideration. The zoning administrator, or his designee, shall then present the basis of the appeal, along with the pertinent department reviews, if any, prior to receiving testimony on the proposed appeal. Appeals shall be called in the order in which they were filed. 
(c)  The mayor or his or her designee shall then call each person who has signed up to testify on the appeal or variance then before the council in the order in which the persons have signed up to testify, except the applicant and the witnesses for the applicant who may speak first. Prior to testifying, the witness will identify himself or herself and state his/her current address. 
(d)  Each witness shall testify only to the merits of the proposed appeal under consideration and shall address his/her remarks only to the members of the city council. Each witness shall refrain from the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed appeal under consideration. The mayor may limit a witness, if after being cautioned, the witness continues to violate this subsection. 
(e)  No person who has an interest in the decision of the council shall be denied the right to be represented by counsel or to examine a witness who addresses the council. 
(f)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the mayor from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure that the public hearing on the appeal is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 14, § 14.6, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-306. - Administrative variance. 
The zoning administrator is empowered to review and approve a request for an administrative variance. Applications may be considered only if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The request only pertains to a zoning setback requirement; and 
(2)  The request is for an encroachment that would not exceed ten percent of the required setback, up to a maximum of ten feet. 
In reviewing the application, the zoning administrator shall analyze the application to determine whether granting the request would cause substantial detriment to other property owners in the surrounding area or would impair the purposes of the zoning ordinance. If the request is in conformance with these requirements and does not adversely affect the area, the zoning administrator shall issue an official determination in writing approving the request. The property owner, the town clerk, and the building official shall be provided with a copy of this determination. If the request is not in conformance with these requirements or may possibly have an adverse effect on the surrounding area, the zoning administrator shall deny the appeal in writing, stating the reasons for the denial. The zoning administrator shall act on all requests within 15 working days after the application is filed. If the request is denied by the zoning administrator, the property owner many go through a variance process. 
Limitations on authority. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided herein, certain issues are not eligible for variances: 
(1)  There shall be no variance to the minimum lot area or size; and 
(2)  There shall be no variance to the minimum lot frontage on a street. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, 11-6-2017 ) 
Secs. 74-307—74-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS 

Sec. 74-316. - Introduction. 
This article is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater than those required by this article such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 15, § 15.1, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 74-317. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances; validity of prior approvals and actions. 
(a)  This chapter shall constitute the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Senoia, and all other ordinances in conflict therewith are hereby repealed. This chapter shall constitute the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Senoia, and all other ordinances in conflict therewith are hereby repealed, provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions or requirement of site development or used approved under a previous zoning ordinance or resolution, except as specifically provided by this chapter. Any violations of any previous zoning ordinance shall not be affected by the adoption of this chapter, and therefore any prosecutions for violation of any prior existing Zoning Ordinance may proceed as if the ordinance violated was still in force and effect. It is intended that this chapter shall be the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Senoia. And therefore any prior zoning ordinance heretofore adopted by the City of Senoia is hereby repealed. 
(b)  Validity. Should any part, section, or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining portion of this chapter. 
(c)  Adoption date. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Senoia, Georgia, is adopted after advertisement in the manner provided by law, by the City Council of Senoia, Georgia, at a public meeting held this 12th day of December, 2007. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, Art. 15, § 15.2, 12-3-2007) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1980 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1980 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1980 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1980 Code. Ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 