Chapter 30 - NUISANCES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances to enforce, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 30-1. - Findings.     The city council finds that there exist within the municipal limits buildings, dwellings, structures, or properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation; which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; which have other conditions that render such properties unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or which are vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes. (Ord. of 2-8-2010, § 33-101) State Law reference— Required findings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Sec. 30-2. - Intent and purpose.     The city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform, summary procedure for use in the abatement of public nuisances within the city limits. The provisions hereof are adopted pursuant to the authority provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. It is the further purpose and intent of this chapter that the procedures established hereunder shall comply with the minimum provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. (Ord. of 2-8-2010, § 33-102) 
Sec. 30-3. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Applicable codes means: (1)  Any housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2, including standard minimum codes as adopted now or hereafter by ordinance and codified under this Code, or by operation of law, or other property maintenance or building standards or codes as adopted now or hereafter by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; and (2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2. Any such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law.     Closing means causing a property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry.     Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act.     Interested party means: (1)  Owner; (2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the Georgia Bar; (3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; (4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. The term "interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and (5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises.     Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record.     Property means any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate, whether improved or unimproved. The term "property" shall include any dwelling, building, structure, or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouse, improvement, and appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "property" shall expressly include, for means of amplification and not limitation, swimming pools and wells. The term "property" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products.     Public authority means any member of the city council, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of city government relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning properties in the city.     Public officer means either the director of community development or his designee, the director of public safety or his designee, or the director of the county board of health or his designee.     Repair means altering or improving a property so as to bring any dwelling, building, or structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located, and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure.     Resident means any person residing within the municipal limits of the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. (Code 1992, § 33-101; Ord. of 2-8-2010, § 33-103) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
Sec. 30-4. - Duties of property owner. (a)  It is the duty of the owner of every property located within the municipal limits to: (1)  Construct and maintain such property in conformance with applicable codes in force within municipal limits, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any property in violation of such codes or ordinances; and (2)  Keep such property reasonably clean and free of any materials or conditions which create a health or safety hazard either on such property or to surrounding persons or properties. (b)  No owner shall allow any property located within the municipal limits to be used in the commission of drug crimes. (Ord. of 2-8-2010, § 33-104) State Law reference— Adoption of ordinances to enforce provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 30-5. - Nuisance abatement procedures. (a)  Appointment and designation of public officer. Each of the following is hereby appointed and designated as a public officer with the authority to carry out the powers and duties of this chapter: the city administrator, the city clerk, the chief of police, the code enforcement officer, the zoning administrator, and the building inspector. Such appointment and designation shall include the designees of such persons. (b)  Complaint and investigation. Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority or by at least five city residents charging that any building, dwelling, structure, or property: (1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; (2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, including, but not limited to, defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; and uncleanliness including the accumulation of grass, weeds, trash, junk, or filth; the public officer with whom the request is filed shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific property to determine if such conditions exist under applicable codes. The public officer shall have the authority to enter upon premises to conduct an inspection, provided such entry is made with the least possible inconvenience to the person in possession. If such an inspection is necessary, the public officer shall endeavor to obtain the permission of the owner to conduct such inspection. If permission is withheld, the public officer may seek the assistance of the city attorney's office to obtain an inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The public officer may determine that the property is being used in the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency. (c)  Judicial complaint and summons. If the public officer's investigation or inspection confirms that any property meets one or more of the three enumerated standards from subsection (b) of this section, the public officer may file in the municipal court a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which the nuisance complained of exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such property pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference, identify the interested parties, state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. (d)  Time of hearing. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held no sooner than 15 days and no later than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. (e)  Service and notice. Copies of the complaint and summons shall be served in each of the following ways as applicable: (1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. (2)  For an interested party whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. (3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the property is located at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint and summons shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. (f)  Right to be heard. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. (g)  Order. If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the property in question meets one or more of the standards enumerated in subsection (b) of this section so as to constitute a public nuisance, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which does one of the following: (1)  If the repair of the said property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to its present value, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time not to exceed 30 days, to repair such property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to effect a closing of any structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (2)  If the repair of the said property, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations, cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value thereof, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time not to exceed 30 days, to demolish and remove the noncompliant dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. For purposes of this section, in cases in which the nuisance complained of is a dwelling, building, or structure of any kind, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors with a current business license to do work in the county, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations. (h)  Remedies of public officer in the event of noncompliance with order. (1)  The order entered under subsection (g) of this section shall further provide that, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, demolish, or close the property within the specified time, the public officer may cause such property to be repaired, demolished, or closed. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of the time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer is also authorized to file a motion for attachment for contempt against the owner with the court which issued the order as an alternate or additional remedy. (2)  If the public officer chooses to have the work done as ordered on any dwelling building or structure, he shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words, including the Spanish translation:     "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (i)  Salvage. If the public officer has a structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any monies received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. Neither the public officer nor the county shall have any liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. (j)  Appellate procedure. Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a property shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. (k)  Alternate remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit or impair the authority of public officers or other county employees under existing and future ordinances to issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and to seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. The issuance of a citation for a violation of any such codes shall not be required as a prerequisite to issuing a complaint in rem under this section. (Code 1992, §§ 33-102, 33-103; Ord. of 2-8-2010, § 33-105) State Law reference— Adoption of ordinances to enforce provisions, procedure to enforce, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 30-6. - Recoupment and collection of costs; lien rights. (a)  Lien for costs. The order issued pursuant to section 30-5(g) shall provide that the amount of all costs associated with the abatement action shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of abatement and/or demolition, reasonable attorney fees and all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, restoration to grade of the real property should it be demolished, and title examination costs. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition, in the office of the clerk of superior court, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 30-5(e)(3). The clerk of the superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien for costs of abatement on the general execution docket. Such lien should cross reference the order and include the original caption and case number from the nuisance abatement action. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid in full. (b)  Enforcement of lien. (1)  Upon a final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer shall transmit to the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the general fund of the city. (2)  Enforcement of liens may be initiated at any time following receipt by the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. (3)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the county and the tax commissioner in the enforcement of the lien. Redemption of the property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. (c)  Waiver of lien. The city council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property of the owner for costs incurred by the city up to the time of the entry of the order and any additional costs incurred subsequent thereto in attempting to bring the property into compliance by entering into a contract with the owner in which the owner agrees to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property, and demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. (Ord. of 2-8-2010, § 33-106) 
Secs. 30-7—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE REGULATION 
Sec. 30-31. - Findings; applicability. (a)  The city finds that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and, a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated; and the people have a right to, and should be assured an environment free from excessive sound. It is the policy of the city to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life. (b)  This article shall apply to the control of sound originating within the city limits. (Code 1992, § 14-101; Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-101) 
Sec. 30-32. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     A-weighting means the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity.     Ambient sound level means the total sound pressure level in the area of interest including the noise source of interest.     Background sound level means the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest.     C-weighting means the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models a flat response (output equals input) over the range of maximum human hearing frequency sensitivity.     Commercial area means a group of commercial facilities and the abutting public right-of-way and public spaces.     Commercial facility means any premises, property, or facility involving traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit.     Construction means any site preparation, assembly erection, repair, alteration or similar action or demolition of buildings or structures.     dBA means the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.     dBC means the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level.     Decibel (dB) means the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location.     Emergency work means any work or action necessary to deliver essential services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, or abating life-threatening conditions.     Impulsive sound means a sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.     Industrial facility means any activity and its related premises, property, facilities, or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture, warehousing, distribution or production of durable or nondurable goods.     Legal holiday means a legal holiday as established by the city each year.     Measuring instrument means an instrument such as a sound level meter, integrating sound level meter or dosimeter used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified in the latest version of ANSI Standard SI .4-1983.     Motor vehicle means any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor.     Muffler means a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.     Multi-unit building means any building wherein there are two or more dwelling units.     Noise means any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the city or in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a place of employment.     Noise disturbance means any sound that: (1)  Endangers the safety or health of any person; (2)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (3)  Endangers personal or real property.     Noise investigator means a city police officer, city councilmember or city staff member assigned to investigate and enforce the provisions of this article.     Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, or alley that is leased, owned, or controlled by a government entity.     Public space means any real property or structure thereon that is owned, leased, or controlled by a government entity.     Real property line means either: (1)  The imaginary line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another; or (2)  The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a multi-unit building.     Residential area means a group of residential properties and the abutting public rights-of-way and public spaces.     Residential property means property legally used for human habitation, except for hotels and motels, which are commercial establishments.     Sound level means the instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels with a sound level meter set for A-weighting on slow integration speed, unless otherwise noted.     Sound level meter means an instrument designed to measure sound pressure levels and constructed in accordance with the requirements for general purpose sound level meters published by the American National Standards Institute.     Sound pressure level (SPL) means 20 multiplied by the logarithm to the base ten of the measured sound pressure, divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels.     Weekday means any day, Monday through Friday, that is not a legal holiday. (Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-102) 
Sec. 30-33. - Powers and duties.     The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city council, city administrator and/or city police department, as appropriate. (Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-103) 
Sec. 30-34. - Sound measurement procedures. (a)  Insofar as is practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions. (b)  All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: (1)  The noise investigator shall, to the extent practicable, identify all sources contributing sound to the point of measurement. (2)  Measurements shall be taken at or within 50 feet of the property line of the noise-producing source. (3)  The measuring instrument must be calibrated using a calibrator recommended by the measuring instrument manufacturer before and after each series of readings. (4)  No outdoor measurements shall be taken: a.  When wind speeds (including gusts) exceed 15 mph; b.  Without a windscreen, recommended by the measuring instrument manufacturer, properly attached to the measuring instrument; c.  Under any condition that allows the measuring instrument to become wet (e.g., rain, snow, or condensation); or d.  When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance of the measuring instrument. (5)  Prior to taking noise measurements, the noise investigator shall explore the vicinity of the source in question to identify any other sound sources that could affect measurements, to establish the approximate location and character of the principal sound source, and to select suitable locations from which to measure the sound from the source in question. (6)  When measuring continuous sound, or sound that is sustained for more than one second at a time, the measuring instrument shall be set for A-weighting, slow response, and the range (if the measuring instrument is designed to read levels over different ranges) shall be set to that range in which the meter reads closest to the middle of the scale. The minimum and maximum readings shall be recorded to indicate the range of monitored values along with the central tendency average most often displayed. (7)  The measuring instrument shall be placed at a minimum height of three feet above the ground or from any reflective surface. When handheld, the microphone shall be held at arm's length and pointed at the source at the angle recommended by the measuring instrument manufacturer. (8)  If extraneous sound sources, such as aircraft flyovers or barking dogs, that are unrelated to the measurements increase the monitored sound levels, the measurements should be postponed until these extraneous sounds have become of such a level as not to increase the monitored sound levels of interest. (9)  The monitoring session should last for a period of time sufficient to ensure that the sound levels measured are typical of the source in question. (Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-104) 
Sec. 30-35. - Sound level limitations.     Except as authorized elsewhere in this article, no person shall cause, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source on a particular category of property or any public space or right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth below, in Table 1, unless otherwise noted. Such a sound constitutes a noise disturbance. TABLE 1. SOUND LEVEL LIMITS Sound-Producing Property Time Sound Level Limit All residential 7:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 60 dBA 6:00 p.m.—10:00 p.m. 55 dBA 10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 50 dBA Commercial or business 7:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 65 dBA 6:00 p.m.—10:00 p.m. 60 dBA 10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 55 dBA Industrial or manufacturing 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 70 dBA 10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 60 dBA  (Code 1992, § 14-105; Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-105) 
Sec. 30-36. - Exemptions.     The following activities or sources are exempt from the sound level limits of section 30-35: (1)  Noise from public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or emergency work; (2)  Noise from construction activity, including the operation of tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavating, or demolition work between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.; (3)  Sound from bells and chimes while being used in conjunction with a governmental facility, religious observance or service; (4)  Normal sounds of reasonably cared-for agricultural or domestic animals, and the sounds of necessary farming equipment for a bona fide agricultural operation; and (5)  Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers, air conditioning equipment, operating motor vehicles, commercial vehicles in motion on a public roadway, and refuse collection vehicles between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. (Code 1992, § 14-103; Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-106) 
Sec. 30-37. - Specific prohibited acts. (a)  No person shall cause, allow, or permit to be made verbally or mechanically any noise disturbance. (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 30-35, no person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the following acts: (1)  Radios, phonographs, television sets, similar devices. The using, operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph or similar device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance for any person other than the operator of the device; (2)  Animals or birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird that, frequently or for continued duration, generates sounds that create a noise disturbance across a residential property line; (3)  Horns or signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning, is prohibited. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity, the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of this signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up, is prohibited; (4)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public street is prohibited; (5)  Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity, is prohibited; (6)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the residents of the area is prohibited; (7)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create unreasonably loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises is prohibited. This list includes specific prohibited acts but it is not limited. (Code 1992, § 14-102; Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-107) 
Sec. 30-38. - Special outdoor events.     A special outdoor event may be authorized subject to a special outdoor event permit approved by the zoning administrator and/or the chief of police and in compliance with the following: (1)  The duration of the event does not exceed 30 consecutive days. (2)  Special outdoor events on the same premises, that are approved, must be separated by at least five consecutive days. (3)  Special outdoor events shall not take place more frequently than four times in any calendar year on the same premises. (4)  The zoning administrator and/or the chief of police may condition the issuance of a special outdoor event permit upon such time limitations and sound levels as is necessary to minimize the impact of such events on neighboring properties. (5)  This issuance of a special outdoor event permit shall be made at the sole discretion of the zoning administrator and/or the chief of police. No applicant shall be entitled to a special outdoor event permit as such permit is a mere privilege and not a right. (Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-108) 
Sec. 30-39. - Penalties.     Each violation under this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Such offense shall be punishable according to the penalties described in the General Provisions chapter of this Code. (Code 1992, § 14-104; Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-109) 
Sec. 30-40. - Injunctions.     The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of the city shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Code 1992, § 14-105; Ord. of 7-8-2013, § 14-110) 
Secs. 30-41—30-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Prevention and control of air pollution, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-69. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors.     No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristic and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. (Code 1992, § 13-101(1)) 
Sec. 30-70. - Open burning.     No person shall kindle an open fire outside of any building, unless a permit is obtained from the state forestry commission. Exceptions to the permit requirement are made for the burning of leaves, to cook food, or in the course of agricultural operations. No open fires whatsoever are allowed during an air pollution alert as declared by the mayor. (Code 1992, § 13-101(2)) 
Chapter 31 - RESERVED 
Chapter 32 - OFFENSES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 32-1. - Disorderly conduct.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous, or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except that which occurs at boxing or wrestling exhibitions duly authorized by the city, shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. Persons found in violation of this section shall be fined an amount to be established by the city council, from time to time. (Code 1992, § 31-101) 
Sec. 32-2. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within 50 yards of any public street, thoroughfare, alley, or building, or at any point upon or across the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge any air gun, BB gun, or other toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. (b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone under 16 years of age to discharge any firearm in the city unless such child is under the direct supervision of an adult. It shall also be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of a child under 16 years of age to permit such child to discharge any firearm without direct adult supervision. As used herein, the phrase "under the direct supervision of an adult" means that such child must be within an adult's sight at any time that the firearm is discharged. (c)  This section shall not apply to: (1)  Persons who fire or discharge a firearm in legal defense of person or property; and (2)  Law enforcement officers in the performance of their duty. (Code 1992, § 31-102; Ord. of 11-11-2013) 
Sec. 32-3. - Report of treatment of wounds.     All physicians in the city are hereby required to report to the city police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician. (Code 1992, § 31-103) State Law reference— Reports by physicians and other personnel, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-9. 
Sec. 32-4. - Throwing of missiles.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. (Code 1992, § 31-104) 
Sec. 32-5. - Ball playing.     It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public city street, alley, or sidewalk. (Code 1992, § 31-105) 
Sec. 32-6. - Bonfires.     It shall be unlawful for any person or group, during a holiday or at any other time, to build a bonfire of any description within the city limits, except at places approved and designated by the fire chief. (Code 1992, § 31-106) 
Sec. 32-7. - Drinking in public.     It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. (Code 1992, § 31-107) State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 32-8. - Accumulation of junk.     It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city to permit to accumulate on such property any junk, including, but not limited to, any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof. (Code 1992, § 31-108) 
Sec. 32-9. - Abandonment of motor vehicles.     It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of ten days any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the city. (Code 1992, § 31-109) 
Sec. 32-10. - Removal of dead animals.     When any animal shall die within the city limits, it shall be the duty of the owner to remove the same without delay to a place where it shall not be a nuisance or source of annoyance to any person and, should the owner neglect or refuse to remove the same, he shall be in violation of this section. (Code 1992, § 31-110) 
Sec. 32-11. - Creating hazardous or offensive condition.     No person shall create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by an act which serves no legitimate purpose. (Code 1992, § 31-116; Ord. of 8-10-1998, § 31-116) 
Secs. 32-12—32-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOITERING 
Sec. 32-49. - General prohibition. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after having been directed by an officer or member of the public safety department to move away therefrom, to remain or loiter in front of any church or other place of public worship during service therein, or in front of any theater, concert hall, ballroom, coffeehouse, tavern or other public place, or to loiter or idle away time around hotels or on the sidewalks or public streets or roads of the county. (b)  A person commits the offense of loitering when the person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. (c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. (Code 1992, § 31-111; Ord. of 8-10-1998, § 31-111) 
Sec. 32-50. - Minors.     It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the custody or control of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate section 32-49. (Code 1992, § 31-112; Ord. of 8-10-1998, § 31-112) 
Sec. 32-51. - Responsibility of proprietors, managers, etc.     It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager or other person having control of any public or other place to permit, allow or encourage any minor to violate section 32-49 in such place. (Code 1992, § 31-113; Ord. of 8-10-1998, § 31-113) 
Sec. 32-52. - For purposes of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire.     It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. (Code 1992, § 31-114; Ord. of 8-10-1998, § 31-114) 
Sec. 32-53. - For purposes of engaging in drug-related activity.     It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 13. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: (1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For the purpose of this section, a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within the state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 13, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of such title and chapter of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as needle tracks, burned or calloused thumb and index fingers, being underweight, or nervous and excited behavior. (2)  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his presence in a high drug activity geographic area. (3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including, by way of example only, such person acting as a lookout or hailing of stopping cars. (4)  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a gang or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity. (5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive fashion. (6)  Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer. (7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any objects which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity. (8)  Such person possesses any instrument, article, or thing whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of controlled substances, such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades, or other cutting tools. (9)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking. (10)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. (Code 1992, § 31-115; Ord. of 8-10-1998, § 31-115) 
Chapter 33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - PUBLIC PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION CENTERS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs, and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
Sec. 34-1. - Regulations governing use of public parks and facilities. (a)  Use of grounds and facilities in general. Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. (b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person using such parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: (1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. (2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. (3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof. (4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any other animal. (5)  Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere. (6)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language. (7)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. (8)  Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting. (9)  Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park. (10)  Violate any rule made or approved by the park and recreation board for the use of the park. (11)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this section and with the rules applicable to such use. (12)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. (13)  Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet, or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. (Code 1992, § 23-101) 
Chapter 35 - ROAD NAMING AND ADDRESSING 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 35-1. - Title.     The ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be known as the Road Name and Addressing Ordinance of the City of Arcade, Georgia. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-2. - Purpose.     These regulations are established to provide a system of unique road names and addresses which are essential for successfully improving the response time of fire, police, ambulance vehicles and other emergency services; expediting postal and general delivery services; and enhancing the ability to locate a business and/or residences based on their address. This chapter is adopted to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Jackson County, Georgia. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-3. - Authority.     This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-122, as amended. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-4. - Delegation. (a)  The Jackson County Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Department and the Jackson County Public Development Department are hereby assigned overall authority and responsibility for the naming of public/private roads and addressing as directed by provisions of this chapter. (b)  The Jackson County GIS Department will be tasked with the maintenance of addressing data, coordinating with the public development department, designating road or street numbers, the approval of road or street names, and the assignment of road or street names. (c)  The Jackson County Public Development Department will be tasked with coordinating initial applications, code enforcement (shared authority with the city), coordinating with the GIS department, and assisting public inquiries. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-5. - Applicability.     The provisions set forth herein shall apply to those roads, both public and private (including manufactured/mobile home parks, condominium developments, apartment complexes, malls, shopping plazas, strip buildings, businesses, business or office parks) and addresses which are currently or will be located within the City of Arcade in Jackson County, Georgia. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-6. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined. Unless specifically defined, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to have the meaning in common usage and to give this chapter the most reasonable application.     Apartment: means a unit within a building consisting of two units or more for rent.     Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, or equipment and requiring a separate power meter to be installed for the building to have electrical service. This will also include mobile homes or manufactured homes. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "building" may also include other manmade structures meeting the same requirement as in the first sentence.     Commission means the Jackson County Board of Commissioners (BOC).     Condominium means an ownership of a single unit within a structure that may include common areas and facilities.     Driveway means a private road, easement, or private right-of-way, giving access from a public road, private road, or private right-of-way, leading to a building. A driveway does not serve more than two lots/buildings that have or require separate power meters to be installed for electrical service. If a driveway is said to serve more than two lots/buildings, it then shall be assigned and designated with a private road name with all properties addressed along such named private road.     Frontage unit means a standard interval in feet used to assign consecutive property numbers on a street or road.     GIS means the Geographic Information Systems.     GIS addressing coordinator means an employee or other designated official or person charged with the responsibility of assigning addresses and approving road names as defined in this chapter. This person shall be designated by the Jackson County GIS Manager and will be an employee of Jackson County GIS Department.     GIS manager means an employee or other designated official or person charged with the responsibility of managing the Jackson County GIS Department.     Honorary road name means a secondary road name designated to an individual person or organization.     House number means the number assigned by the GIS addressing coordinator to any building for the purpose of identification of the location.     Mailing address means the address assigned by the GIS addressing coordinator and used by the United States Postal Service (USPS) for the purpose of delivery of the United States mail. The property address and mailing address shall be the same for all buildings unless the property owners utilize a post office box for delivery of their mail.     Mobile home means a moveable or transportable dwelling.     Mobile home park means any site or parcel of land under single ownership where land or units are rented, and community utility(ies) provide for the occupancy of mobile homes.     Official road name means the name as designated in the complete list of all roads in Jackson County and on file with the Jackson County GIS Department.     Private road means any road, which is not maintained by GDOT and/or Jackson County or its municipalities through the use of public funds, or is not a driveway as defined by this chapter.     Public road means any road which is maintained by Jackson County, a Jackson County municipality and/or by Georgia Department of Transportation.     Road means a public or private one-way or two-way road for ingress and/or egress. Such roads may be of various types including frontage roads, rear access roads, roads with culs-de-sac and dead-end roads. This definition includes secondary roads, but does not include driveways. For purposes of this chapter, road and street shall have the same meaning.     Road sign means a metal blade and necessary hardware used to convey a road name, block range and, where applicable, the state road number.     Unit designator means the portion of the mailing address used to distinguish individual units within the same structure. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-7. - Abbreviations.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations are defined.     E 9-1-1. Emergency 9-1-1; a system used that links emergency callers with the appropriate public services.     ESRI. Environmental Systems Research Institute; a global company that provides the means for organizing and analyzing geographical information to help land planners and resource managers make well-informed environmental decisions.     FGDC. Federal Geographic Data Committee; a U.S. committee that coordinates the development of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure.     FHWA. Federal Highway Administration; agency in the U.S. Department of Transportation that supports states and local governments in the design, construction and maintenance of the nation's highway system.     GDOT. Georgia Department of Transportation.     GISOP. The Jackson County GIS Department Operating Procedures Technical Guide. The document used as a guideline by the GIS addressing coordinator and GIS department that will have the authority to authorize and approve alternate methods of displaying road naming and addressing which meet the intent of this chapter. This document may be changed periodically at the discretion of GIS department.     MRAD. Master Road and Address Database.     MUTCD. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; standard for signs, signals and pavement markings in the United States. MUTCD is published by the FHWA.     NENA. National Emergency Numbering Association; professional organization that promotes the implementation and awareness of 9-1-1 and the international three-digit emergency communication systems.     USPS. United States Postal Service. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Secs. 35-8—35-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROAD NAMING 
Sec. 35-11. - Consideration of new or proposed road names.     The naming of roads, particularly in new subdivisions, shall be reviewed and approved by the Jackson County GIS Department and the Jackson County Public Development Department per the selection standards provided in this article. Persons submitting road names that are rejected shall be notified so that changes may be made prior to the plan review process. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-12. - Selection standards.     In addition to those outlined in the GISOP, the following standards will be used in consideration of new or proposed road names. All current roads that would otherwise not meet these standards will be granted exceptions and maintain those names until changes, if considered, can be made to conform to this chapter. (1)  Names of new roads or proposed changes must not duplicate, in wording, in sound or pronunciation, an existing road within Jackson County regardless of distance between occurrences or in address ranges/block numbers. For communities that cross county boundaries the road names should not duplicate any other road name within the incorporated boundaries of that municipality or the same zip code community name even if it crosses into another adjoining county. (2)  Road names may not contain abbreviations of words, names or initials. (3)  Numerical references are prohibited, such as Fifth, Ten. (4)  Names of individuals will only be permitted for honorary purposes unless the individual holds a state, national or local significance. (5)  Single alphabetical characters are prohibited. (6)  Road names must be easy to pronounce and easily recognizable in emergency situations. (7)  Special characters will not be permitted; periods, dashes, apostrophes, hyphens, etc. (8)  Names that may be offensive (slang, words with double-meanings) will not be allowed. (9)  Road names will be continuous throughout their entire length, when feasible. (10)  Names which have homonyms (i.e., other words pronounced similarly but spelled differently) should not be used on any street and certainly not on multiple streets even if the street type is different (e.g., Steven Lane/Stephen Lane; Disk Drive/Disc Lane). (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-13. - Prefixes and suffixes.     Directional prefixes and suffixes will be used only when necessary. If used, cardinal (north, south, east, and west) directions will only be used as prefixes and ordinal (northwest, northeast, southwest, and southeast) directions will only be used as suffixes, in accordance to established baselines as outlined in the GISOP. The use of both a prefix and suffix for addresses and road names will not be permitted. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-14. - Road types. (a)  Each approved road name will be required to have a road type. There shall only be one road type per road name. Road types permitted for use in Jackson County will be in compliance with the standards of the USPS Publication 28. (b)  Both the Jackson County GIS Department and the Jackson County Public Development Department have the authority to determine which road type(s) shall be suitable for the new or proposed name, as outlined in the GISOP. (c)  If the requested type is deemed inappropriate by the Jackson County Public Development Department, a new one must be chosen. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-15. - Reserving road names. (a)  A request for road name reservation can be presented to the Jackson County Public Development Department for any new planned development. These road names will be reviewed and reserved in the road name inventory, if approved. (b)  Road names may only be reserved for two years. Upon reaching the two-year mark from date of reservation, the names will no longer be reserved, should a written extension request not be made. A new request for an additional one year extension of the road name(s) reservation must be submitted to the Jackson County Public Development Department. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-16. - Approvals.     All proposed road names shall be reviewed and approved by the Jackson County GIS Department and the Jackson County Public Development Department during the site or development plan review period. The appropriate Jackson County GIS Layers shall be amended by the Jackson County GIS Department to reflect all newly approved road names. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-17. - Change to approved road names.     Roads name changes shall be authorized only by action of the City Council of Arcade. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-18. - Road naming or road name change by petition.     Whenever a change to an approved and addressed road name is requested by a property owner or developer with access to the subject road, the following procedures shall apply. (1)  A complete application shall be made with the Jackson County Department of Public Development which shall be accompanied by a petition signed by 66 percent (two-thirds) or more of the property owners adjoining the said road in agreement. (An affected property owner is one who owns an interest in property contiguous to the street.) A nonrefundable application fee of $250.00 must be submitted to the Jackson County Public Development Department prior to processing; provided, however, applications initiated by city or county staff will have no fees associated with them. (2)  Within 30 days of submittal the department will determine the percentage of the affected property owners that has signed the petition. If less than 66 percent of the affected property owners have signed the petition, it will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant. If 66 percent or more have signed, the department will review the proposed road name for compliance with the requirements of this article. (3)  If the proposed road name meets all criteria provided in the GISOP, the proposed road name will be placed on a "reserve list" in the road book. A letter will then be sent by the Jackson County GIS department to affected county departments for review and comments. If the requested name change receives any unfavorable comments, the Jackson County GIS Department will schedule a meeting with affected departments and agencies to develop recommendations as to the beginning and ending points of said change (if necessary), or name change, or any road number changes that may be applicable. (4)  After review and acceptance by the county departments of the request, and if 66 percent or more of the affected property owners have signed a petition, then the proposal will be placed on the agenda of the Arcade City Council. If all of the affected property owners do not agree to the requested road name change, or if less than 100 percent have signed the petition, then an advertised public hearing before the Arcade City Council will be scheduled and held. Note, however, that at least 66 percent of the affected property owners must sign the petition for it to be accepted for processing. (5)  A notice advertising the name change shall be required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and county at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, before the public hearing. (6)  If, after public hearing, the name change is approved by the Arcade City Council, then the county departments will make changes as necessary and again notify affected property owners and public agencies in writing at least ten days before the change becomes effective. (7)  The applicant for road name change that has been approved shall be responsible for revising any final plats and paying any associated fees. The applicant shall also be responsible for the cost of new road name signs that will replace existing road name signs. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-19. - Honorary designations.     Honorary designations are discouraged but can be initiated by the Arcade City Council. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-20. - Renaming existing roads for emergency purposes.     Road names (public or private) may be changed by the Jackson County GIS Department as necessary for health, safety and welfare reasons and efficiency of the emergency response system. Owners of adjoining properties shall be notified in writing that the change is taking place and provided a list of proposed road names from which input shall be considered. A selection will be chosen after receiving input and be presented to the Arcade City Council for approval. For any case in which a continuous road has multiple names, the Jackson County GIS Department will determine the correct name and notify owners along such road of the name change. In the event of a conflict in either road naming or addressing, the Jackson County GIS Department will use its best judgment to resolve the conflict and have the responsibility of notifying the owner, E 9-1-1, USPS, and other agencies. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-21. - Temporary road names.     Temporary road names for events or special occasions will not be permitted. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-22. - Road name signage.     Sign location and installation shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), published by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) under 23 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 655, Sub part F. Road signs will contain the prefix (if used), road name, road type, suffix (if used) and block numbers. Private roads will be marked as such in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-23. - Official road name database/road book.     Road names that are assigned to roads shall be kept in a "road book" and have the road characteristics for each road centerline of the master road dataset. The Jackson County GIS Department shall make this information available via internet (for public use) and intranet (for internal use). The Jackson County GIS Department may designate other departments and/or personnel to maintain information as it is deemed practical, and shall provide means for the designated personnel to update the road book accordingly. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Secs. 35-24—35-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDRESSING 
Sec. 35-31. - Addressing applicability.     Addresses will be assigned on all roads and shall have a road sign placed on the main road or highway. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-32. - Property legal descriptions.     The adoption and implementation of this chapter shall not affect the legal descriptions of any property or be used to determine legal descriptions. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-33. - Ordering of addressing components.     Components of a property address shall always be in the following order: address number, address number suffix (if used prior to ordinance), directional prefix (if any), road name, road type, directional suffix (if any), unit type designation (if applicable), and a unit number (if applicable). (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-34. - Assignment and standards.     Addresses shall be determined based on the distance from the intersection of the driveway with the road and the current surrounding addresses, if compliant with this chapter. Additional standards used to determine addresses are as provided in the GISOP. (1)  Multiple structures sharing driveway. If more than two addressable structures access a common driveway as defined, that driveway will be assigned a private road name and all addresses will be assigned along such private road. (2)  Corner and multiple fronting parcels. Corner or double fronting parcels shall be assigned an address based on the driveway location of the intersecting road. If that entrance is not visible from that road or is inaccessible for emergency services, then the address shall be based on the road which the structure faces. (3)  Duplex/attached structures. Each unit of structure shall receive its own individual address as determined by the Jackson County GIS Department. This would include townhouses and condominiums. (4)  Multiple unit structures. Separate internal units within, or associated with, residential or commercial complexes shall have an individual address and be uniquely identified by the use of a unit type. All educational, medical, residential, industrial facilities, and/or any other type of property with private roads that is sold shall not be allowed to change addressing or road names without written approval of the Jackson County GIS Department. If road names or addresses are changed without approval, the property owner will be subject to penalties as provided for in this chapter. (5)  Vacant parcels. Vacant parcels less than one acre may be pre-addressed at the discretion of the Jackson County GIS Department. This pre-address shall be assigned to the center point of the parcel frontage. All other parcels will not carry an address until placement of a structure. (6)  Miscellaneous structures. Structures requiring an address for metering or permitting purposes shall be given their own individual address and a unit designator. These structures may include billboards/signs, power poles, utility assets and others. (7)  Mobile/manufactured home parks. Mobile home lots shall have sequential address numbers throughout the mobile home park. Each lot will have a separate address number assigned. The address number of each lot must be clearly displayed on the mobile home which is located on that lot and must be clearly visible from the road. If the lot is more than 50 feet from the road, the address number shall be displayed at the end of the road or easement giving access to that mobile home. Addresses are not transferrable with the mobile home. (8)  Wireless towers. Wireless towers shall be assigned one address to the tower owner. Should the tower have multiple carriers, each earner will be assigned a suite number that will include the address of the tower owner. A sign or post which clearly indicated the address number assigned to the tower shall be located at the entry point of the road on which the tower is located. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-35. - Numbering system.     The Jackson County GIS Department shall develop and maintain a uniform scaled system of numbering addresses. This addressing system shall be used in designating addresses for new and existing structures and to resolve address problems which tend to confuse the traveling public or tend to delay the response of emergency services, mail delivery and other service providers. Baselines and the point of origin shall be defined in the GISOP to include the numbering structure for Jackson County. Addressing shall conform to the GISOP; however, the Jackson County GIS Department reserves the right to amend as needed. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-36. - Specifications and placement of address numbers. (a)  All structure numbers shall be constructed of a durable, weather resistant material. The color shall contrast with the color scheme of the structure, and if mounted on glass, shall contrast with the background and be clearly visible. Reflective numbers for nighttime identification are required, if not in a well-lit area. (b)  In accordance with Section 505 of the 2012 International Fire Code and the city's property maintenance code, address numbers for both residential and commercial buildings shall not be less than four inches in height. Unit designators for these facilities shall not be less than four inches. In all cases, a number larger than the minimum size may be required where the minimum size does not provide adequate identification from the traveled roadway or is proportional to the building size. (1)  All dwellings and individual businesses shall be required to have numerical postings at the entrance or driveway of the property that is easily identifiable without obstruction of view. (2)  Any dwelling or individual business that is accessed via a common driveway with any other residential or commercial structure and located at more than 50 feet from the roadway and/or not clearly visible shall be required to have numerical posting at both the entrance or driveway and located in close proximity to the front door or entrance way. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-37. - Responsibility for placement of address numbers.     It shall be the responsibility of each and every property owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each residence, apartment building, business or industry to post and maintain, at all times, address numbers as required under this chapter. All addresses shall be displayed in such a way that they are unobstructed and legible from the traveled roadway. (1)  New addresses. The owner, occupant, or agent of each house, building or other structure assigned an address under the uniform numbering system shall place or cause to be placed the number on the house, building, or other structure within 30 days after receiving notification from the Jackson County GIS Department and or the Jackson County Public Development Department of the proper number assignment or within 30 days of occupancy, whichever is sooner. (2)  Existing addresses. To the extent required by section 35-36(b)(2), the owner, occupant or agent of any existing house, building or other structure existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter, shall place or cause to be placed the number on the house, building or other structure within 60 days after the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-38. - Changes of addresses. (a)  If an address number is changed for any reason, the Jackson County GIS Department shall be responsible for assigning the new address number. Requests for address reassignment should be made to the Jackson County Public Development Department. An application fee for reassignment shall be required prior to processing. Application fees are subject to change at the discretion of the Jackson County Public Development Department as outlined in the schedule of fees. The form shall be available online on the Jackson County website and at the Jackson County Public Development Department office. The Jackson County GIS Department has the authority to change addresses as necessary to ensure conformity throughout Jackson County and efficiency of the emergency response system. (b)  Requests will be reviewed within five business days for consideration and approval, but may be extended should further consideration be needed. When such a change is made, the Jackson County Public Development Department shall notify the building owner, the property owner, the Jackson County Road Department, all USPS, Jackson County offices, and emergency services. (c)  The owner of the building shall post the changed address numbers within 30 days of receipt of such notice. The owner/resident of the building will be responsible for notifying all suppliers and others of the address change. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Secs. 35-39, 35-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
Sec. 35-41. - Compliance. (a)  No owner of real property shall attempt to number or fail to number the property or the principal building, if not in conformity with this chapter. Either the Jackson County Public Development Department or the City of Arcade shall be authorized to send a written notice to any owner not in compliance with this chapter, to the owner's address as stated in Jackson County records, directing specific compliance with a provision of this chapter. (b)  If corrective measures have not been taken within 30 days of the notification of violation, a person or business will be subject to penalties provided in section 35-47 of this article. (c)  Jackson County and the City of Arcade will not assume any responsibility for the inability of emergency services (i.e., sheriff, fire, 9-1-1 departments) to locate the property in the event of an emergency due to incorrect property identification. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-42. - Development plan requirements.     All land subdivisions that create a new public or private road or road section in any jurisdiction within Jackson County must have a pre-approved list of road names and addresses from the Jackson County GIS Department or the Jackson County Public Development Department before submitting subdivision and development plans to the city department with jurisdiction. All multi-unit and multi-structure developments must submit the site plan with building layout, for unit numbering, to the Jackson County Public Development Department prior to occupancy. Any subdivision or site that requires new addresses will be reviewed within seven business days for assignment and subject to the final development/site plan approval before release. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-43. - Business occupation taxes.     All businesses, new or existing must have their address properly displayed in accordance to this chapter or a penalty will be assessed. All new businesses must have their address verified/confirmed against the master road and address database before an occupational tax certificate will be issued. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-44. - Building permits.     No permit shall be issued for any structure until the owner/developer/contractor obtains an official address assigned by the Jackson County GIS Department. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-45. - Certificate of occupancy.     A certificate of occupancy (CO) for any structure erected, repaired, or modified shall be withheld until the assigned address is posted on the structure as required by this article. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-46. - Enforcement responsibilities.     This chapter may be enforced by the Jackson County Public Development Department as well as the City of Arcade. The code enforcement division or any designee(s) of the Jackson County Public Development Department or local municipality shall have the responsibility for enforcing this chapter and issuing citations for violations. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-47. - Penalties for violation.     Any person, business or property owner that violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 but in no event to be less than $300.00. Each day any violation with the provisions of the Ordinance shall continue as a separate offense. In the event that violations of this chapter are not corrected within 30 days of receiving the fine, Jackson County or the City of Arcade may perform the work needed to comply and bill the property owner(s). If the bill for work performed is not paid within 90 days of mailing, then a lien may be put on the property to include the cost of the work and any applicable court costs. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-48. - Appeals.     Any owner or occupant can submit an informal appeal of an administrative decision made pursuant to this chapter in writing to the director of public development or to the GIS manager of the GIS addressing coordinator. Road naming and/or addressing decisions will be made within ten days of the notification date. The GIS manager shall review within reasonable time to determine if he/she will affirm, modify, or revoke the decision of the GIS addressing coordinator. If the appellant still finds the decision unsatisfactory, he/she may within 15 days of the notification date submit a formal appeal to the Arcade City Council. The notice of appeal shall include the application, and the appellant shall submit any applicable fees for filing an appeal application. The city council shall make its final decision on the appeal, in conformity with this chapter, and it shall be final and conclusive. In the absence of an appeal within the designated timeframes, the decisions of the GIS addressing coordinator or GIS manager shall be final. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-49. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances.     All provisions in other ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-50. - Severability.     If any provisions of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance are held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 35-51. - Liability.     Jackson County and the City of Arcade, its officers, agents or employees, together with any person following their instructions in rendering services, shall not be liable for civil damages as result of an act or omission under this chapter, including but not limited to, developing, adopting, operating, or implementing an addressing system or plan. (Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Chapter 36 - SANITARY SEWAGE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate and provide sewage collection and disposal systems, stormwater systems, and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6), (7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; Certification of Water and Wastewater Treatment Plant Operators and Laboratory Analysis Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-51-1 et seq. 
Sec. 36-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Act and the Act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, latest version.     BOD 5 (biochemical oxygen demand) means the amount of dissolved oxygen used by microorganisms decomposing organic matter in a five-day period.     Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside of the inner face of the building wall.     Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.     COD (chemical oxygen demand) means a measurement of the amount of material that can be oxidized (combined with oxygen) in the presence of a strong chemical oxidizing agent.     Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.     Industrial waste means the liquid waste from industrial or trade processes as distinct from domestic waste.     Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.     pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.     Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.     Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.     Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) means any device or system used in the treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature that is owned by a public authority. The term "publicly-owned treatment works" includes sewers, pipes, or other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing treatment.     Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.     Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.     Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage.     Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.     Sewerage system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.     Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.     TSS (total suspended solids) means the quantity of material removed from water or wastewater in a laboratory test.     Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. of 12-9-2013, att. A(21-101)) 
Sec. 36-2. - General regulations. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, spill, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any manner creating unsanitary conditions or creating a public nuisance on public or private property within the city any domestic, trade, industrial, or other objectionable waste. (b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. (c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. of 12-9-2013, att. A(21-102)) 
Sec. 36-3. - Private sewage disposal. (a)  General. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 36-5, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. (b)  Permit. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the county health department. Fees and specifications are to be set by the county. (c)  Inspection. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not be effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the county health department. The county shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the county when the work is completed and ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. (d)  Compliance with state standards. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of public health as well as the county health department. (e)  Owner to maintain. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city, in compliance with the health department regulations. (f)  Abandonment when superseded. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as required in section 36-4, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days, and such private disposal facilities shall be abandoned per state regulations and filled with suitable material. (g)  Additional requirements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state and county health departments. (Ord. of 12-9-2013, att. A(21-103)) 
Sec. 36-4. - Building sewers and connections. (a)  Permit for alterations to system. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. (b)  Classes of permits; applications; fees. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for residential and commercial service, and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented with any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city engineer. (c)  Indemnification. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (d)  Individual sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided to every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. (e)  Standards of construction. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes, and other applicable city rules and regulations. (f)  Elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (g)  Prohibitions. No persons shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwaters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly with a public sanitary sewer. (h)  Connection standards. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable city rules and regulations. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city engineer in advance of installation. (i)  Inspection of connections. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city engineer when the building sewer is ready for final inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city engineer or his designee. (j)  Safety and restoration of excavations. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city and at no cost thereto. (k)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city engineer, based on sound engineering standards, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful materials, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city engineer and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (Ord. of 12-9-2013, att. A(21-104)) 
Sec. 36-5. - Use of public sewers. (a)  General prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (b)  Discharge of sanitary wastewater to storm sewer. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. Cooling or condensing water may be allowed to be discharged into a storm sewer system provided a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit is obtained from the state environmental protection division. (c)  Discharge of underground garbage. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. (d)  Sanitary facilities required. The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose situated within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now or shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after the date of written notice from the city to the property owner requiring the property owner to make connection thereto, provided that the public sewer shall be within 100 feet of the property line. (e)  Prohibited substances. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the wastewater system. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the wastewater system, whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to any wastewater system: (1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater system or the operation of the wastewater system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent, or any single reading over ten percent, of the lower explosive limit (LEL) as measured by a meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides, and any other substances which the city, the state, or the EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. (2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, lint or textile fibers, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass-grinding or -polishing wastes. (3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 9.0, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the sewers or wastewater treatment plant. (4)  Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process or sludge disposal, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. (5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to health or life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair, or any highly oxidized or highly reduced agents which, by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life. (6)  Any substance which may cause the sewers or wastewater treatment plant effluent, or any other product of the sewers or wastewater treatment plant such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the sewers or wastewater treatment plant cause the sewers and wastewater treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. (7)  Any substances which will cause the sewers or wastewater treatment plant to violate the NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. (8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process which alters the plant effluent from that which would be expected from domestic sewage, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. (9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the sewers or wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewers which exceeds 149 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or into the wastewater treatment plant which exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). (10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) or unusual chlorine-demanding substances released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to expect will cause interference to the sewer or wastewater treatment plant. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate, or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. (11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city engineer in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. (12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. (13)  Any waters or wastes containing concentrated acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. (14)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, at a concentration that exceeds the limits established by the city. (15)  Materials which exert or cause unusual concentration of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. (16)  Any waters or wastes containing oils, fats, grease, wax, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral origin in amounts that will cause interference with the operation of the POTW or pass through the POTW. (17)  Any waters or wastes containing taste-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. (18)  Any pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. (19)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety hazards. (20)  Disposal of trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city engineer. (21)  Discharge of hazardous wastes. a.  The industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 1.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 2.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and 3.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. b.  All notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The notification requirement in this subsection does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d), and (e). c.  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. d.  In the case of any notification made under subsection (e)(21)a of this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practicable. (22)  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. (f)  Permit for exceeding concentration limits. The city may issue permits specifying limits greater than the limits in this chapter based on special agreements with the city, provided that all applicable state and/or federal categorical pretreatment requirements are met and provided that local treatment plant mass loadings are not violated. The permission to exceed concentration limits will be revoked if POTW mass loadings are exceeded. Additional testing requirements will be necessary for an industry which seeks permission to exceed concentration limits and may include testing of the waste treatment plant influent and effluent as well as the user's own effluent. The costs associated with such testing will be paid by the user for the parameter the user seeks permission to exceed. (g)  Modification of limits. The city reserves the right to modify the industrial discharge limits and conditions at the time of the permit renewal. Industrial users requesting permit variances must do so at least 60 days prior to the expiration of their discharge permits. (h)  Removal, transportation and disposal of scavenger waste. A permit for the discharge of scavenger wastes shall be required. For purposes of this subsection, the term "scavenger wastes" shall mean putrid or offensive matter, the contents of all privies, septic tanks, and cesspools. All other materials and substances, chemicals or chemical compounds, and/or industrial wastes will not be permitted to be discharged into the public sewer system except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (1)  The discharge of the wastes described in this section and trucked or hauled pollutants shall be made only at a location in the sewage treatment plant as shall be designated by the city engineer. (2)  Scavenger wastes will be admitted into the sewer system only by permit and subject to payment of fees or fixed charges. The fee or charge shall be based on the full capacity of each scavenger vehicle for each discharge. (3)  The applicant shall be the owner of the vehicle discharging the wastes. Any false, misleading, or untruthful statements as to the nature of the material shall be cause for relocation of any further discharge from the applicant. (4)  Discharges described in this subsection may also be suspended or terminated at any time by the city engineer for willful, continued, or persistent violations of this chapter. (5)  All equipment, such as trucks, tanks, pumps, and hoses, used in the collection and/or transportation of scavenger wastes shall be modern equipment in good repair. When more than one vehicle is used by an applicant, each vehicle shall bear an identifying number. (6)  All applicants for a permit shall furnish the following information with each application: a.  The name and address of the applicant. b.  The volume of scavenger waste for each numbered vehicle. c.  The number of scavenger vehicles in collection service. (i)  Damaging or tampering with sewage disposal facilities. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (j)  Billing and payment of charges; industrial user surcharge; right of city to suspend or terminate service. (1)  Billing. Sewer charges may be billed with water charges, and failure to pay sewer charges shall be treated in the same manner as for failure to pay water charges. (2)  Industrial user surcharge. The city shall levy a BOD 5 surcharge for industrial users whose BOD 5 concentrations exceed a certain minimum value called the surcharge concentration. The surcharge will be levied up to a maximum concentration, which is the local limit. Beyond the local limit, escalating levels of enforcement action will be pursued by the city. The surcharge concentration for BOD 5 is 300 mg/l and the local limit is 900 mg/l. The current surcharge amount and the surcharge basis may be found in the fee schedule on file with the city. The city reserves the right to revise the surcharge concentration for BOD 5 and the surcharge rate by providing a 30-day notice to the industrial users. (3)  Suspension of service or discharge permit; failure to pay charges. The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or significant interference with the sewerage system. Sewer charges shall be billed with water charges, and failure to pay sewer charges shall be treated in the same manner as for failure to pay water charges as defined herein. The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when the customer fails to pay for sanitary sewer service when due. (4)  Termination and disconnection of service. The city reserves the right to terminate wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: a.  A government agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, or it is determined that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or b.  The customer: 1.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the city. 2.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process. 3.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due. 4.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. (Ord. of 12-9-2013, att. A(21-105)) 
Sec. 36-6. - Industrial discharge permits and requirements for industrial users. (a)  Permit required; certification statement. (1)  It shall be unlawful for an industry or person to discharge industrial wastes to the sewer or the wastewater treatment plant except as authorized by the city engineer pursuant to a permit to discharge issued by the city. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or contribute to the sewer collection system or wastewater treatment plant shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting or contributing wastewater. All proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting or contributing to the wastewater system. (2)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:     "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person who manages the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." (b)  Application for permit. Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: (1)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address). (2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, latest edition. (3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in section 36-5, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. Results collected within the previous year will be acceptable. (4)  Time and duration of discharges. (5)  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any. (6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and schematic showing all water use and wastewater discharges. (7)  Description of activities, facilities and processes on the premises, including all raw materials, finished products and wastes that are or could be discharged. (8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. (9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. (c)  Public notice of issuance of permit and appeals. (1)  The city shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. (2)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. (3)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for the objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place on the wastewater discharge permit. (4)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. (5)  If the city fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. (6)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the superior court of the county. (d)  Modification of permit. The city may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. (2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance. (3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. (4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters. (5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. (6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting. (7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13. (8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. (9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. (e)  Duration and renewal of permit. Wastewater discharge permits are to be issued for a three-year period. The user must reapply for permit renewal a minimum of 90 days prior to permit expiration. The city retains the right to modify allowable discharge limits for specific pollutants if federal or state standards are changed in the interim, or for other just cause. (f)  Contents of permit. (1)  A wastewater discharge permit will specify the user's responsibilities, which shall be required of the user. Failure of the user to comply with the permit requirements will result in penalties and/or discontinuance of sewer service. Permits must contain the following information: a.  Statement of permit duration (no more than three years). b.  Statement of non-transferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator. c.  Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law. d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. e.  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. (2)  In addition, the permit may also contain the following information: a.  The unit charge or schedule of the user's charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. b.  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. c.  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. d.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. e.  Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule. f.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. g.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto. h.  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituent being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. i.  Requirements for notification of slug discharges. j.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter. (g)  Transfer of permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, a new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without prior notification (at a minimum) to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. (h)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and limits set by the city as stated in their permit. Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. The city in no way shall be responsible for the design operation of the plant; the review is intended only to ensure compatibility of the pretreatment system with the wastewater system. (i)  Publication of list of users in significant noncompliance. The city may annually publish in the local newspaper a list of the users which are in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same 12 months. (j)  Report of discharges; sampling; recordkeeping. (1)  Reporting requirements. The user will be required to submit to the city engineer reports indicating the nature and concentration of effluents on a periodic basis. Specific reporting requirements will be indicated in the user's permit. (2)  Analytical techniques. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and procedures approved by the EPA. (3)  Sample collection. a.  The user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. If flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city engineer may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. b.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. (4)  Timing of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (5)  Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. (k)  Compliance with federal pretreatment limits. No industry will exceed the pretreatment limits as established by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which apply to a specific category of industrial users. (l)  Dilution of discharge. No user shall increase the use of water or in any way dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on industrial users where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (m)  Reports of changed conditions. (1)  Each user must notify the city engineer of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater, at least 90 days before the change. (2)  The city engineer may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application. (3)  The city engineer may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. (4)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. (n)  Confidentiality of information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections, shall be available without restriction unless the user contends such information and data constitute a trade secret, in which case the information may be withheld from the general public. The effluent data will never be considered as confidential information. Information accepted by the city as confidential, and portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes, shall be transmitted to a government agency when required to document compliance with the pretreatment program. In matters of judicial review or enforcement proceedings against an industrial user, the city shall provide all available information pertaining to that industry to the government agency. (o)  Monitoring facilities. The city shall require to be provided and operated, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of all building sewers before they leave the property. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. (p)  Effect of new federal categorical pretreatment standards; modification of federal pretreatment standards. (1)  Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. (2)  Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the state for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. For purposes of this subsection, the term "consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system and 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) or 40 CFR 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. (q)  Compliance with federal categorical pretreatment standards. (1)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated. (2)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city engineer may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). (3)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city engineer shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (4)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. (5)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. (r)  Baseline monitoring reports. (1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city engineer a report which contains the information listed in subsection (r)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city engineer a report which contains the information listed in subsection (r)(2) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. (2)  Users described in subsection (r)(1) of this section shall submit the following information: a.  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. b.  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. c.  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of water use and discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. d.  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily water use and wastewater discharges, in gallons per day, to the POTW from all process streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). e.  Measurement of pollutants. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. (Ord. of 12-9-2013, att. A(21-106)) 
Chapter 37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 38-1. - Responsibility for disposal; storage of receptacles. (a)  The responsibility for lawfully disposing of solid waste shall be with the individual citizen. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building, except in watertight containers with a securely-fastened lid. (b)  All residents shall store their solid waste receptacles on non-pickup days at least five feet off the public right-of-way. (Code 1992, § 12-101) 
Sec. 38-2. - Penalties.     Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished according to state law. (Code 1992, § 12-107) 
Secs. 38-3—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sec. 38-21. - Collection.     The city shall provide garbage pickup to each residence and business weekly. (Code 1992, § 12-103) 
Sec. 38-22. - Disposal.     All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and within rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. (Code 1992, § 12-104) 
Secs. 38-23—38-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FEES AND BILLING 
Sec. 38-48. - Fees.     Fees charged for the public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be established by the city council, from time to time. (Code 1992, § 12-105) 
Sec. 38-49. - Billing. (a)  Against whom levied. Service charges in accordance with the schedule established under section 38-48 are levied against the owner and the occupant of the premises served, jointly and severally, but collecting from one shall relieve the other. (b)  Charges for solid waste collection and disposal. Charges for solid waste collection and disposal service shall be billed and collected monthly in advance by the fifth day of each month and shall be payable by the owner or occupant at the office of the city clerk. When such payment has not been made by the fifth day of any month, a ten percent penalty shall be added and collected. When such payment has not been made by the tenth day of any month, service shall be discontinued until all arrears, including penalty, have been paid in full, and the following month has been paid in advance. (Code 1992, § 12-106) 
Secs. 38-50—38-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC NUISANCE 
Sec. 38-79. - Public nuisance.     Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The city, by written notice, shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such accumulation to remove it within two weeks or be deemed in violation of this chapter. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day the condition continues. (Code 1992, § 12-102) 
Chapter 39 - RESERVED 