THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ARCADE, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2016 by Order of the City Council ____________ 
CITY OFFICIALS ____________ Doug Haynie Mayor ____________ Cindy Bone Dean Bentley Debra Gammon Tom Hays Ron Smith City Council ____________ Jody Campbell City Attorney ____________ Deborah Mockus City Administrator/Clerk of Courts 
PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Arcade, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code, as updated through February 8, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Mary Margaret Bielby, Code Attorney, and Rebecca Evans, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Jody Campbell, Deborah Mockus, and Ron Smith for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Arcade, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Arcade, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Arcade, Georgia. 2016. An Ordinance of the Arcade City CouncilTo Adopt The 2016 Published City of ArcadeCode of Ordinances     WHEREAS, the City of Arcade's current Code of Ordinances was written and adopted in 1992 for the purpose of maintaining public safety, health, morals, and general welfare to effectively serve the citizens and efficiently operate the City; and     WHEREAS, the Mayor and Council of the City of Arcade's desire is to re-codify and update the 1992 Code of Ordinances in order to integrate ordinances that have been adopted since the original codification of the Code, adjust ordinances based on changes to state law, and make the Code easier to read and understand and comply with; and     WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City to revoke the 1992 City of Arcade Code of Ordinances and adopt in its place the revised and updated ordinances;     IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED that the 1992 City of Arcade Ordinances as amended is hereby revoked, and the City Code of Ordinances compiled and published by Municipal Code Corporation in 2016 is hereby adopted as the Code of Ordinances for the City of Arcade.     SO ORDAINED this 10 day of October, 2016. /s/         Honorable Doug Haynie, Mayor   /s/         Council Member Dean Bentley   Attest: /s/         Deborah Mockus, City Clerk   /s/         Council Member Cindy Bone   /s/         Council Member Tom Hays   /s/         Council Member Ron Smith   /s/         Council Member Debra Gammon   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE     The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted."     In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/ Omitted Supp. No. Ord. of 10-10-2016(1) 10-10-2016 Included 1 Ord. of 02-12-2018(1)  2-12-2018 Included 1 2018-01  8-13-2018 Included 1 Ord. of 10-08-2018(1) 10- 8-2018 Included 1  
PART I - CHARTER[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 162), page 4024. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 
Sec. 1.10. - Name.     The Town of Arcade, in Jackson County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Arcade, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. (a)  The corporate boundaries of this city shall be as described and set forth in Appendix A attached to this Charter. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the mayor and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Arcade, Georgia," or "Official Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Arcade, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. (b)  The city council may provide for changes in the written description of the corporate boundaries as shown in Appendix A and for the redrawing of any city map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn written description of the corporate limits of the city or a redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire written description or map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. (a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. (b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams or bodies of water within the corporate limits of the city; (2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; (3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; (4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; (5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; (6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; (7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; (8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; (9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire districts and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; (11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; (13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares or other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; (15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; (16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; (17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; (19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which such utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; (21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; (22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; (23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; (24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; (25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is, or may become, dangerous or detrimental to the public; (26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and markethouses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; (27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; (28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; (29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; (30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; (31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; (32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; (33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to ensure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; (34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; (35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune-telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; (36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; (37)  Taxes; ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; (38)  Taxes; other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; (39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; (40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and (41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to execute all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers.     All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 
Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election.     The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The city council established in this Charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office.     Except as otherwise provided in Section 5.11 of this Charter, the members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of the mayor and members of the council and each shall continue to reside therein during that period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. (2010 Ga. Laws (Act No. 594), § 1, page 3990) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. (a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. (b)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses.     The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services, including, but not limited to, attendance at all council meetings and all council work sessions as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. (a)  Except as authorized by law, no councilmember nor the mayor shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which that person was elected. (b)  No councilmember nor the mayor shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which that person is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations.     The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain.     The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings.     The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the second [Monday] of January of each year. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows:     "I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.19. - Meetings. (a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. (b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three councilmembers of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members of the city council personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to members of the council shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a member of the council in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such member of the council's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. (c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. (a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. (b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. (a)  The mayor or mayor pro tempore and three councilmembers, or four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion, except that in the event a vote by councilmembers on the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion results in a tie vote, the mayor shall vote on the adoption of said ordinance, resolution, or motion. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the mayor shall not vote on the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. (b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of the city council holding office, then the remaining members of the city council in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining members of the council shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. (a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The City Council of Arcade hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. (b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember or by the mayor and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance.     Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies.     To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money, except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least two councilmembers or the mayor and one councilmember shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. (a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1)  The requirements provided under this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk as provided under this Charter. (b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. (a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature, and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the city council. (b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Arcade, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. (c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed as soon as practicable following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Sec. 2.27. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation.     The mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city immediately preceding the mayor's election for a period of time as provided in section 45-2-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1]. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit the office of mayor on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.28. - Mayor pro tempore.     By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor.     The mayor shall: (1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; (2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; (3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; (4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; (5)  Vote on matters before the city council as provided in this Charter; (6)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; and (7)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 
Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. (b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. (c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. (d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. (e)  All directors shall be under the supervision of the mayor and shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under the mayor's supervision. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of a majority of councilmembers. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. (a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. (b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. (c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. (d)  Except as otherwise provided by [this] Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. (e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. (f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. (g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by the mayor. (h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney.     The city attorney shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed and appointed by the city council. The mayor, with the advice and counsel of the city attorney, shall appoint such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - Personnel policies.     All employees of the city serve at will and may be discharged from employment at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name.     There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Arcade. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. (a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. (b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and is a member of the State Bar of Georgia or is serving as a magistrate or state or superior court judge. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. (c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. (d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of a majority of the councilmembers. (e)  Before assuming office each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered in the minutes of the city council journal required in this Charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening.     The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. (a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. (b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. (c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for one year, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. (d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operations and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. (e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. (f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. (g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. (h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. (i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari.     The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Jackson County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court.     With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 
Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law.     All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., "Georgia Election Code"] as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding.     The mayor and five councilmembers elected at the general municipal election in November 2009, shall serve for and during the four-year terms for which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. Of those five persons elected as councilmembers at the general municipal election in 2013, the three elected councilmembers who received the highest number of votes in the November 2013, general municipal election and the mayor elected at the November 2013, general municipal election shall serve for terms of four years each and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. All shall take office on January 1 following their elections. Thereafter, all successors to the mayor and five councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years each and until their respective successors are elected and qualified, and all shall take office on January 1 following their elections. (2010 Ga. Laws (Act No. 594), § 2, page 3991) 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections.     Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election of mayor by majority vote.     The mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast in the whole city. 
Sec. 5.14. - Election of councilmembers by plurality vote.     Councilmembers shall be elected from the city at large. The five persons receiving the most votes cast for the offices of councilmembers shall be elected to fill the positions for councilmembers. 
Sec. 5.15. - Special elections; vacancies.     In the event that the office of any member of the city council shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever prior to the expiration of the term of such office, the remaining members of the city council shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term of office if less than one year remains in such term; otherwise, they shall appoint a person to serve until a successor is elected and qualified at a special election which shall be called to fill that vacancy. Whenever a special election shall be called, such special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with [state law]. 
Sec. 5.16. - Other provisions.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., "Georgia Election Code."] Editor's note— Section 5.16 has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. II, §§ I—III and the "Georgia Election Code," O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5.17. - Removal or suspension of officers.     The mayor or any councilmember may be removed or suspended from office in the manner provided by sections 45-5-1, 45-5-6.1, and 45-11-4 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. §§ 45-5-1, 45-5-6.1, and 45-11-4] or by any other manner as provided by general law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
Sec. 6.10. - Property tax.     The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods.     The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises.     The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes.     This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.     The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds.     The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds.     Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council, as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans.     The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year.     The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Budget ordinance.     The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and auditing provisions of chapter 81 of title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 81]. 
Sec. 6.24. - Operating budget.     On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than November 30 prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the mayor may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Adoption. (a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. (b)  The city council shall by ordinance adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 31 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then-current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to this Charter. 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes.     Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in appropriations.     The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements. (a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than November 30 prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with the mayor's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided under this Charter. (b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 31 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, that the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by the mayor's recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.29. - Audits.     There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Procurement and property management.     No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: (1)  It is in writing; (2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and (3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings as required under this Charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Purchasing.     The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of property. (a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. (b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. (c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials.     The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances.     All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - First election under this Charter.     The first general municipal election shall be the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 1997, at which the mayor's and all councilmembers' positions shall be filled. 
Sec. 7.13. - Existing personnel and officers.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of this city and their rights, privileges, and powers now in force not inconsistent with this Charter shall continue in force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Pending matters.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.15. - Definitions and construction. (a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. (b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. (c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. (d)  The term "councilmember" shall mean any person elected or appointed under the provisions of this Charter to fill any of the five council positions and who is currently serving in said capacity. (e)  The term "members of the council" shall include the mayor and all councilmembers who are currently serving in said capacities under the provisions of this Charter. (f)  The term "city council" or "council" shall include the mayor and councilmembers who are currently serving in said capacities under the provisions of this Charter. 
APPENDIX A 
[Sec. A-1. - Corporate boundaries.]     All those tracts or parcels of land lying and being in the 242nd GMD and the 245th GMD, Jackson County, Georgia, and being within the corporate boundaries of the City of Arcade, as shown on a plat of survey entitled "Composite Plat of the City Limits of the City of Arcade," prepared for the City of Arcade by James R. Smith, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No. 2407, dated January 9, 1995, as recorded in Plat Book 42, Page 212, Jackson County, Georgia, public records, which plat is hereby incorporated herein by reference hereto. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE     This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. Ga. Laws Year Act Number Page Section  Section this Charter 2010 594 3990 1 2.11 3991 2 5.11  