CODE OF ORDINANCES DADE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Republished in 2016 by Order of the County 
____________ 

OFFICIALS  of the  COUNTY OF  DADE, GEORGIA  AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Ted Rumley 
Chairperson/County Executive 
____________ 
Mitchell Smith, District 1 
Scottie Pittman, District 2 
Robert Goff, Vice Chairman , District 3 
Allan Bradford, District 4 
Ted Rumley, At-Large 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Robin Rogers 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Don Townsend 
County Clerk/Finance Officer 
PREFACE 
This Republication constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Dade County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances and resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance or resolution included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
ORDINANCE NO. 04-01 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Dade County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal/Removal of Certain Ordinances; Providing Penalties for Violations Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Board of Commissioners: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 54, each inclusive, is adopted EXCEPT for the following provisions which are hereby expressly repealed: 
a)  Chapter 2—Administration, Article IV—Finance, Division 2— Purchasing, in its entirety; 
b)  Chapter 18—Buildings and Building Regulations, Article II— Building Permits, in its entirety; 
c)  Chapter 26—Flood Control, in its entirety; and 
d)  Chapter 46—Solid Waste, Article IV—Dumpsters, in its entirety; 
AND EXCEPT for the following provision of said Code, which shall be removed from said Code, but shall not be repealed and shall remain of record as a valid Resolution: 
e)  Chapter 38—Roads, Article II—Acceptance of Roads, in its entirety. 
Section 2. The following ordinances shall be adopted as part of said Code and included therein: 
a)  The Solid Waste Collection and Disposal Ordinance; and 
b)  The Food Service Regulation Ordinance, as amended. 
Section 3. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the County may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 5. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
ADOPTED, this 3rd day of May, 2001. 
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF  DADE COUNTY, GEORGIA  BY: 

ATTEST: 

(Seal) 
ORDINANCE NO. 04-02-09 
AMENDMENT TO ORDINANCE NO. 04-01 ADOPTING AND  ENACTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR  DADE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed the codification to the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia, which contains all ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia; and 
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the county and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the county that this ordinance take effect at an early date. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED that the County Commission of Dade County, Georgia, does ordain: 
Section 1. That the codification to the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety. 
Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the County Commission and the Clerk of Dade County, Georgia, is hereby authorized and ordered to insert any future ordained supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk. 
PROPOSED AND FIRST READING took place on the 5th day of March 2009. 
SECOND READING AND ADOPTION took place on the 2nd day of April 2009. 
DADE COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

ATTEST: 

(Seal) 
ORDINANCE NO. 10-02-14 
AMENDMENT TO ORDINANCE NO. 04-01 AND ORDINANCE NO. 04-02-09 ADOPTING AND ENACTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF  ORDINANCES FOR DADE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed the codification to the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia, which contains all ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia; and 
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the county and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the county that this ordinance take effect at an early date. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED that the County Commission of Dade County, Georgia, does ordain: 
Section 1. That the codification to the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety. 
Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the County Commission and the Clerk of Dade County, Georgia, is hereby authorized and ordered to insert any future ordained supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk. 
PROPOSED AND FIRST READING took place on the 4th day of September 2014. 
SECOND READING AND ADOPTION took place on the 2nd day of October 2014. 
DADE COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

ATTEST: 

DADE COUNTY CODE 
CLERK'S CERTIFICATE 
I, Don Townsend, County Clerk of Dade County Board of Commissioners, do hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance constitutes a true and correct copy of the Ordinance, adopted on September 4, 2014 and October 2, 2014, by the Dade County Board of Commissioners. After due notice was given in accordance with law; and the Commission being duly called and assembled, at which a quorum was present, the Dade County Board of Commissioners did adopt the attached Ordinance, the original appearing as a public record in the Minute Book of said Commission which is in my custody and control. 
Given under my hand and the Seal of Dade County this 2nd day of October 2014. 
(Seal) 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This Part I is a compilation of local legislation enacted by the Georgia General Assembly that was deemed advisable to print. Enacting language and repealers have been deleted from each act printed herein. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Section numbers have been arbitrarily assigned to the provisions of this part for ease of indexing and reference. 

ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Governing authority. 
(a)  There is created the Board of Commissioners of Dade County to be elected and organized as provided in this act [article]. There is created the office of Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Dade County. The chairman shall be a member of the board and shall be elected as provided in this act. 
(b)  The Board of Commissioners of Dade County shall constitute the governing authority of Dade County and the respective powers and duties of the board and the chairman shall be as provided in this act [article]. The board of commissioners shall be the successor to the office of Dade County Commissioner. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 1) 
Sec. 1.02. - [Commission districts.] 
(a)  For the purpose of electing the members of the board of commissioners, except of the chairperson/county executive, Dade County is divided into four commissioner districts which shall correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this act and further identified as Plan Name: dadeccp l Plan Type: Local User: staff Administrator: Dade Co. 
(b)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Dade County not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part that contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Dade County described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part that contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Each commissioner shall be a citizen of this state, at least 21 years of age, and shall have been a resident of the respective commissioner district for at least one year immediately prior to taking office. Each commissioner, except the chairperson/county executive, shall be required to reside in the commissioner district that such commissioner represents during his or her term of office. Each commissioner shall be elected by the qualified electors of the entire county. Any commissioner who ceases to be a resident of his or her respective commissioner district during his or her term of office shall thereby vacate his or her seat on the board. All members of the board shall be nominated and elected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 2; 1992 Ga Laws, page 6131, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5339, § 1-1; 2004 Ga. Laws, page 3535, § 1; 2009 Ga. Laws, page 3728, § 1) 
Sec. 1.03. - Election; bond. 
(a)  The members of the board of commissioners who are in office or take office on January 1, 2011, and any persons filling vacancies in such offices shall serve out the terms of office to which they were elected and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  The first members of the reconstituted board of commissioners of Dade County from Commissioner Districts 1 and 2 elected by the qualified electors of the entire county shall be elected at the state-wide general election in 2014. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  The first members of the reconstituted board of commissioners of Dade County from Commissioner Districts 3 and 4 elected by the qualified electors of the entire county shall be elected at the state-wide general election in 2012. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  The first chairperson/county executive of the reconstituted board of commissioners of Dade County shall be elected at the state-wide general election in 2004. Such chairperson/county executive shall take office on January 1 following such election for a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. 
(e)  Successors to members elected under subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section shall be elected at the state-wide general election next preceding the expiration of such terms of office and shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(f)  Before entering upon the duties of office, each member of the board shall take and subscribe to an oath for the faithful performance of that member's duties and shall give bond to and be approved by the judge of the Probate Court of Dade County in the amount of $10,000.00 each, with good and sufficient security, conditioned upon the faithful performance of that member's duties and the faithful accounting for all property and funds coming into that member's hands by virtue of that member's office. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 3; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5339, § 1-2; 2009 Ga. Laws, page 3728, § 2) 
Sec. 1.04. - Chairman. 
The person elected as chairperson/county executive shall devote full time to the business and interests of Dade County in the performance of the chairperson/county executive's duties. The chairperson/county executive shall have and maintain an office for the transaction of county business at the courthouse of Dade County. Such office shall remain open during regular hours of business on all days except Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. The chairperson/county executive shall preside over the meetings of the board and shall be a full-voting member of the board but shall not have any veto power. The chairperson/county executive shall call meetings of the board as provided in this act and as required by a majority of the members of the board. The chairperson/county executive shall also appoint members and chairpersons of all committees of the board. The chairperson/county executive shall be recognized as the official head of Dade County by state, federal, and other authorities for military and ceremonial functions. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 4; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5339, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1.05. - Vice-chairman. 
The board of commissioners may elect from its membership a vice-chairman to serve at the pleasure of the board. The vice-chairman shall preside at meetings of the board in the absence, disability, or disqualification of the chairman and during a vacancy in the office of chairman until such vacancy is filled as provided in subsection 1.07(a) of this section [article]. The vice-chairman shall receive no additional salary for service as vice-chairman, and the rights and duties of such person as a member of the board shall not be impaired by reason of such service as vice-chairman. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 5) 
Sec. 1.06. - Meetings. 
The board of commissioners shall hold a regular meeting no less than once a month, which meeting shall be on the first Tuesday of every month at the Dade County Courthouse, unless the board shall designate a different regular meeting day or place, and shall meet at such special or called meeting as they may see fit to hold. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but the concurrence of at least three commissioners shall be necessary to take official action. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 6) 
Sec. 1.07. - Vacancies. 
(a)  In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of the board [of commissioners], whether the vacancy is in the office of chairman or any other member, for any reason other than expiration of term, that vacancy shall be filled as provided in this subsection: 
(1)  If the vacancy occurs within the first two years of the term of the vacated office but at least 35 days before the November general election to be held within those first two years, then the remaining members of the board shall appoint, within 15 days after the vacancy occurs, a successor to fill that vacancy until it is filled for the remaining unexpired term by a person who shall be elected at a special election held upon the same date as that November general election. The Election Superintendent of Dade County shall conduct that special election on the same date as that November general election and shall issue the call therefor within the time period provided under Georgia state law for the calling of such special elections. The person elected at such special election to fill that vacancy shall take office within ten days after the results of that election are certified and shall serve out the remaining unexpired term and until a successor is elected and qualified; 
(2)  If the vacancy occurs at any time other than as specified in paragraph [subsection] (1) of this subsection [section], then the remaining members of the board shall appoint, within 15 days after the vacancy occurs, a successor to serve out the remaining unexpired term and until a successor is elected and qualified; and 
(3)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. Ch. 2, Tit. 21 shall apply to special elections to fill vacancies provided for in this subsection [section]. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 7; Ord. No. 07-03-14, 7-3-2014) 
Sec. 1.08. - Compensation. 
(a)  The chairperson/county executive shall receive an annual salary in an amount $500.00 greater than the annual salary received by the highest paid county officer of Dade County; provided, however, that such salary shall not be reduced in the event that the salary of the highest paid county officer of Dade County upon which such salary is based is reduced for any reason. Each member of the board, other than the chairperson/county executive, shall receive an annual salary of $4,000.00. Such salaries shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Dade County. 
(b)  In addition to said salaries, the chairman shall receive an expense allowance account of $2,000.00 per year from county funds, and each other member of the board shall receive an expense allowance account of $1,200.00 per year from county funds; provided, however, that the board may, by unanimous concurrence, authorize the reimbursement of expenses over and above the expense account allowance of any commissioner if such expenses are incurred by such commissioner in the performance of his or her duties. The chairman and other members of the board may be reimbursed from such accounts, up to such maximum amounts, for expenses actually incurred by them in the performance of their duties. A member claiming expense account reimbursement shall provide documentation of the expenditure for which reimbursement is requested, subject to such rules and regulations as the board shall specify. Expense accounts shall be maintained on a calendar year basis and any amounts not expended from a member's expense account for any calendar year for expenses incurred in that calendar year shall revert to the general fund of the county treasury. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 8; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5339, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1.09. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board [of commissioners] shall have the power and authority to fix and establish, by appropriate resolution or ordinance entered on its minutes, policies, rules, and regulations governing all matters reserved to its jurisdiction by this act [article]. The board shall exercise only those powers which are necessarily and properly incident to its function as a policy-making or rule-making body or which are necessary to compel enforcement of its adopted resolutions or ordinances. The following powers are vested in the board: 
(1)  To levy taxes; 
(2)  To make appropriations; 
(3)  To fix the rates of all other charges; 
(4)  To authorize the incurring of indebtedness; 
(5)  To authorize work to be done where the cost is to be assessed against benefited property and to fix the basis for such assessment; 
(6)  To establish, alter, or abolish public roads, private ways, bridges, and ferries, according to law, but the chairman shall have the authority to accept subdivision plats when the requirements established by the board for subdivisions have been met; 
(7)  To establish, abolish, or change election precincts and militia districts according to law; 
(8)  To allow the insolvent lists for the county; 
(9)  To authorize the acceptance for the county of the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of a county; 
(10)  To regulate land use by implementing a land use plan and by the adoption of other planning and zoning ordinances which relate reasonably to the public health, safety, morality, and general welfare of the county and its citizens; 
(11)  To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law; 
(12)  To fix the bonds of county officers where they are not fixed by statute; 
(13)  To enact any ordinances or other legislation the county may be given authority to enact; 
(14)  To determine the priority of capital improvements; 
(15)  To call elections for the voting of bonds; 
(16)  To exercise, together with the chairman of the board of commissioners, all powers now or hereafter vested in county governing authorities by the constitution and general laws of this state; 
(17)  To fix, levy, and assess license fees, charges, or taxes on all persons, firms, and corporations engaging in or offering to engage in any trade, business, calling, avocation, or profession in the area of Dade County outside the incorporated limits of municipalities situated therein, except businesses which are subject to regulation by the state public service commission, and to classify all such persons, firms, and corporations according to the nature, manner, and size of business conducted by such persons, firms, and corporations and to fix, levy, and assess different license fees, charges, or taxes against different classes of trades, businesses, callings, avocations, or professions. Such licenses shall be issued, annually or otherwise, and may be revoked, cancelled, or suspended after notice and a hearing, in accordance with rules prescribed by the board. Said board shall be further authorized to adopt ordinances and resolutions to govern and regulate all such trades, businesses, callings, avocations, or professions, not contrary to regulations prescribed by general law, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of said county and to prescribe penalties for the violation of any such ordinances and resolutions, including the operation of such businesses without the obtaining of a license or when such license is revoked or suspended. Payment of said license fees, charges, or taxes may be enforced by fi. fas. issued by the board and levied by any officer in said county authorized by law to levy fi. fas. for taxes, assessments, fines, costs, or forfeitures due said county. The board shall be authorized, in its discretion, to require any and all persons, firms, or corporations licensed pursuant to the authority herein granted to give a bond payable to Dade County and conditioned to pay said county or anyone else, suing in the name of said county and for their use, for injuries or damages received on account of dishonest, fraudulent, immoral, or improper conduct in the administration of the business so licensed, such bond to be fixed and approved by the board. Such license fees, charges, or taxes shall be in addition to all other taxes or assessments heretofore or hereafter levied by said county, and all funds received from same shall be paid into the county depository as general funds of said county; 
(18)  To adopt rules regulating the operation of the board; 
(19)  To adopt a civil service system covering county employees and employees of elected county officers pursuant to article IX, section I, paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983; 
(20)  To take any action permitted by article IX, section II, paragraph III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia; 
(21)  To authorize all contracts involving the expenditure of county funds in excess of $5,000.00, except for contracts of employment; 
(22)  To undertake and carry out community redevelopment programs pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983; and 
(23)  To make appointments to independent boards, agencies, and bodies from the recommendations of the Chairperson/County Executive or of any member of the Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  In addition to the powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, the board may adopt all such ordinances or regulations as it may deem advisable, not in conflict with the general laws of this state and of the United States, for the governing and policing of the county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of the county and for the implementation and enforcement of the powers and duties of the board, within the classes of subjects and areas of regulation enumerated below: 
(1)  To control and regulate the operation of and running of bicycles, automobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters, buses, taxicabs, trucks, wagons, and any and all kinds of vehicles operated in, upon, over, and across the roads, streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks, plazas, squares, and public places in said county and outside the corporate limits of municipalities situated therein, whether such vehicles are propelled by hand, foot, animal, steam, electricity, gasoline, or other motive power; to prescribe and fix speed limits and speed zones for all of the enumerated vehicles; to erect stop and warning signs and signals at dangerous intersections or places and at schools or other public places; to prescribe and establish lanes and directional signs, signals, and markings to control the direction or flow of traffic for all such vehicles, including limitation of travel to one direction and including markings, signals, and devices to control and regulate the manner of turning at intersections; to regulate and control, as well as to prohibit entirely, the parking, stopping, and standing of all such vehicles on or adjacent to such streets and public places; to impound such vehicles involved in violations of traffic ordinances or regulations; to restrict and limit the size and weight of all such vehicles operated on such streets and public places; to regulate and establish routes to be followed by trucks and other heavy or slow-moving vehicles; to regulate and control, by permits or otherwise, and to prohibit entirely, the times, routes, and manner of conduct of parades, motorcades, and other assemblages of all such vehicles, and public address systems or other noisemaking devices on such streets and public places; to regulate and control the manner of operation of all such vehicles along, over, and across all such streets and ways so as to prohibit and prevent the careless and reckless operation of same in such manner as would be hazardous to persons or property; to regulate and control in any and all of the foregoing respects all travel by pedestrians and equestrians along, over, and across such streets, ways, and public places; and to do any and all things to provide for the safety of persons and property using such roads, streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks, plazas, squares, and public places and of persons and property situated adjacent thereto; and any and all things necessary or incident to accomplishment of any of the foregoing powers, including the authority to require registration of the enumerated vehicles and of their owners and to prescribe standards of mechanical safety for such vehicles and qualifications of operators thereof. To carry out all or any of the foregoing powers, the board is authorized to adopt as county ordinances all or such portions of O.C.G.A. Ch. 6, Tit. 40, relating to the uniform rules of the road, as to the board may seem appropriate; and the board may adopt other additional ordinances and regulations, not in conflict with O.C.G.A. Tit. 40, and prescribe punishment for violation of same not to exceed the limits set forth in subsection (c) of this section; 
(2)  To adopt rules and regulations for the promotion of health and quarantine in the unincorporated area of said county, as are authorized by law or not inconsistent with general laws or regulations of the state department of human resources or the Dade County Board of Health, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. It is not the purpose or intent of this paragraph [subsection] to interfere with or restrict the operation of the Dade County Board of Health within the unincorporated area of Dade County, but to provide for the implementation of [the] same through the ordinances of the board of commissioners, and to promote more adequate health and quarantine provisions in said county, and to that end the board of commissioners is authorized to adopt all or any portion of the regulations of the Dade County Board of Health, as the same may be amended from time to time, and to prescribe additional regulations not inconsistent therewith, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of any such ordinances and regulations, which penalties and punishments may be enforced and imposed by the court having jurisdiction over offenses against county ordinances. Said health and quarantine powers shall extend to and embrace to health and quarantine of animals as well as persons; 
(3)  To prevent dogs, horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, chickens, and all other animals, or any one or more kinds of such animals, from running at large in the unincorporated area of said county; to prevent the keeping of any animal or animals or to regulate the manner and numbers in which they may be kept; to take up and impound any of such animals and to punish all owners or other persons keeping animals for failure or refusal to obey any such ordinance and to fix penalties and charges to be paid for release of such impounded animals; to provide for the sale or disposition of unclaimed animals impounded; to levy and collect a tax upon dogs kept in said county and to provide for registration of dogs; and to do any and all things necessary to carry out the purposes of this paragraph [subsection] for the public interest; 
(4)  To prescribe penalties and punishment for the violation of zoning ordinances, building codes (including electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning regulations), and all other lawful ordinances adopted by the board pursuant to this or any other law in force in said county; 
(5)  To provide ordinances for the preservation and protection of county property and equipment and the administration and use of county facilities, such as parks, playgrounds, and swimming pools, by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(6)  To prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(7)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the right-of-way of streets and roads within the unincorporated area of said county, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; and 
(8)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of idleness, loitering, vagrancy, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, and disturbing the peace in the unincorporated area of said county and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate such other conduct and activities within said area of Dade County which, while not constituting an offense against the general laws of this state, is deemed by the board to be detrimental and offensive to the peace, good order, and dignity of Dade County and to the welfare and morals of the citizens thereof. 
(c)  The board is authorized to adopt ordinances prescribing penalties and punishment for violation of any and all ordinances adopted by the board to carry out any of the provisions of this section or other provisions of this act or of any other law, and to prescribe maximum penalties and punishment for violation of same, except that the same shall in no event exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 9; Ord. No. 06-05-08, 6-5-2008; 2009 Ga Laws, page 4427). 
Sec. 1.10. - County manager. 
The office of County Manager of Dade County is created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22 to administer the affairs of the county and exercise those administrative powers, duties, and responsibilities vested in such office by the board [of commissioners], including, but not limited to, the power to sign checks or warrants against county funds and otherwise order disbursement of those funds. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 10) 
Sec. 1.11. - Audits. 
The board [of commissioners] may have the books and the accounts of the tax commissioner, custodian of county funds, sheriff, and such other officers, as may be necessary, audited annually by a certified public accountant of this state who shall be paid from county funds. Said audit shall be filed in the office of the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Dade County and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any citizen or taxpayer of said county. A summary of said audit shall be published in the official organ of Dade County within 30 days after it shall have been completed. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 11) 
Sec. 1.12. - Budgeting; control of expenditures. 
(a)  The county will comply with O.C.G.A. Ch. 81, Tit. 36, relating to local government budgets and audits, as well as the following provisions of this section. 
(b)  The chairman shall serve as budget officer for the county. The chairman shall submit to the board not later than the regular May meeting of each year a revenue estimate for the following year and a proposed budget governing the expenditures of all funds expected to be available to the county for the following calendar year and shall include proposed expenditures for capital outlay and public works projects. The chairman shall submit to the board at the time the proposed budget is submitted a report containing information relating to the financial affairs of the county which is relevant to establishing the annual budget. 
(c)  At the time the proposed budget is submitted to the board, the chairman shall cause to be published in the official organ of Dade County a copy of the proposed budget along with the public notices required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5(e). It shall be the duty of the board to hold a meeting at the time and place specified in the notice for the purpose of conducting such public hearing. The board shall review the proposed budget at such public hearing and may adopt the same as submitted by the chairman or make such amendments thereto as the board may deem necessary to maintain the county in sound financial condition. The board may continue the hearing on the proposed budget from time to time, but the time of and the place where the hearing is continued shall be publicly announced at the previous hearing. The board shall adopt the proposed budget as submitted or as amended by the board as the budget for the county for the following calendar year by not later than December 31. (Res. of 12-7-1993) 
(d)  The final budget adopted by the board shall constitute the board's appropriations of all funds for the calendar year covered by the budget. The budget may be amended during the calendar year which it covers upon the board taking formal action for such purpose at a regular meeting of the board. Prior to taking such action, the board shall cause to be published in the official organ of Dade County a notice setting forth the proposed changes in the budget and a summary of the reasons therefor. Said notice shall also state the time and place of the regular meeting of the board at which action to amend the budget is to be taken. Said notice shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of the meeting. No increase in appropriations shall be made without provision also being made to finance such increase. 
(e)  No expenditure of county funds shall be made except in accordance with the county budget, or amendments thereto, adopted by the board. The chairman shall enforce compliance with this requirement by all departments, offices, or agencies of the county government, including elected county officers, and to this end shall institute a system of quarterly allotments of all moneys appropriated and budgeted. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 12) 
Sec. 1.13. - Clerk. 
Subject to confirmation by the board [of commissioners], the chairman is authorized to appoint a Clerk of Dade County. Any citizen of said county, other than a member of the board, shall be eligible to hold said office of clerk of said board and shall receive a salary for his or her services to be fixed by the board, which salary shall be paid in equal monthly installments. Said clerk, before entering upon his or her duties, shall give bond with some responsible surety company authorized to do business in Georgia, as his or her surety, in the sum of $50,000.00, to be approved by the board, the premium on said bond to be paid by the county, payable to the judge of the probate court of said county and the judge's successors in office and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the clerk's duties as such clerk and to account for any and all funds, property, or effects which may come into his or her hands as such clerk or otherwise, which said bond shall be filed with the judge of the probate court of said county and recorded on the judge's minutes and may be sued on in like manner as the bond of the members of the board of commissioners. The clerk shall keep minutes of all meetings of the board, an inventory of all properties, and such books and records as may be required of the clerk by the board and do such other acts and things as may be required of the clerk by law or by the board. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 13) 
Sec. 1.14. - Records; minutes. 
The clerk of the board [of commissioners] shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes wherein shall appear all the acts, orders, and proceedings of the board, in chronological order. The minute books of the board shall be open to public inspection at all times during the regular office hours, and certified copies of any entries therein shall be furnished by said clerk to any person requesting same upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as other funds, to be assessed by the board in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing [the] same. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3893, § 14) 
Secs. 1.15—2.00. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2.01—2.20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SHERIFF 

Sec. 2.21. - Salary basis. 
The present mode of compensating the Sheriff of Dade County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 1) 
Sec. 2.22. - Salary. 
The sheriff shall receive an annual salary of $10,000.00, payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Dade County. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 2; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2764, § 1) 
Sec. 2.23. - [Budgeting of expenses.] 
The expenses of the sheriff's office, as provided in sections 6 [2.26] and 7 [2.27] of this act [division], shall be budgeted in accordance with procedures adopted by the governing authority [Board of Commissioners] of Dade County as provided by the act providing for basic local government financial management standards and procedures, approved April 8, 1980 (1980 Ga. Laws, page 1738). 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 3; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3371, § 1) 
Sec. 2.24. - Fees. 
After the effective date of this act [division], all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed the sheriff as compensation for his services in any capacity, except as hereinafter provided, shall become the property of Dade County. After said date, the officer collecting any such emolument shall hold such funds in trust for the county and shall pay such funds over to the county at such times and in the manner formerly paid to the sheriff, or as may hereafter be provided by law. All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures and cash bonds collected by the sheriff, or any of his deputies, shall be promptly paid over by him within forty-eight [48] hours, to the clerk of the court in which such matter may be pending, to be accounted for as provided by law, the sheriff's part thereof to be paid over to Dade County as hereinabove provided for. The sheriff, while acting as jailer, shall continue to receive reimbursement in such amount as is now, or may hereafter be, provided by law, for feeding prisoners confined in the county jail. If another person is acting as jailer, such reimbursement shall be to the jailer. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 4) 
Sec. 2.25. - Prisoners. 
As long as the Dade County Jail is used by the City of Trenton for incarceration of city prisoners, the sheriff may continue to collect from the City of Trenton such turn-key fees and board bills as he is now collecting, or as may hereafter be provided by law, and retain such payments as his own. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 5) 
Sec. 2.26. - [Appointment and discharge of employees; compensation.] 
The sheriff shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants, and other personnel as he shall deem necessary to efficiently and effectively discharge the official duties of his office and to fix their respective compensation in accordance with budgeting procedures and requirements established by the governing authority of Dade County pursuant to section 3 [2.23] of this act [division]. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the sheriff, during his term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as such deputies, clerks, assistants, or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 6; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3371, § 52) 
Sec. 2.27. - [Operating] expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the sheriff's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from funds of the county budgeted and appropriated for such purposes as provided by the provisions of section 3 [2.23] of this act [division]. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture and utilities and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office and the operation of the jail shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from funds budgeted and appropriated for the operation of the sheriff's office as provided by section 3 [2.23 of this division]. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 7; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2764, § 5) 
Sec. 2.28. - [Office exclusive.] 
There shall be no county law enforcement agency in the unincorporated areas of Dade County other than the Dade County Sheriff's Department. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2193, § 7A; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2764, § 6) 
Secs. 2.29, 2.30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX COMMISSIONER 

Sec. 2.31. - Offices abolished; tax-commissioner office created. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority of the same, that in accordance with and by authority of an amendment to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, approved August 18, 1924, that the offices of Tax-Receiver and Tax-Collector of Dade County, Georgia, are hereby abolished, and the duties of the two officers [offices] are hereby consolidated into one office, and placed under one man to be known and designated as [the] "Dade County Tax-Commissioner." And the rights, duties, and liabilities of the office of Dade County Tax-Commissioner shall be the same rights, duties, and liabilities of the tax-receiver and tax-collector of said county, so far as the same are applicable. The laws now governing the offices of tax-receiver and tax-collector shall govern the tax-commissioner so far as the same are applicable, and except as hereinafter provided. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 1) 
Sec. 2.32. - Collection of taxes. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all taxes that are due and payable at the time the provisions of this act [division] become effective, and all tax fi. fas. theretofore issued by the Tax-Collector of Dade County, Georgia, shall have full force and effect and be collected by the Dade County Tax-Commissioner. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 2) 
Sec. 2.33. - Fees, etc. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all fees, costs, commissions, and all other compensation allowed to the Tax-Receiver and Tax-Collector of Dade County, Georgia, at the time this act [division] becomes effective, or that might legally be allowed to such officers thereafterward were it not for the provisions of this act [division], shall be collected by said tax-commissioner and paid into the treasury of Dade County, Georgia, except as hereinafter provided. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 3) 
Sec. 2.34. - Term of office. 
Be it further enacted by [the] authority aforesaid, that [the] Dade County Tax-Commissioner shall hold office for a term of four (4) years, beginning January 1, 1937, and said tax-commissioner shall be elected at the general election to be held in November 1936, and every four years thereafter. This act [division] shall become effective January 1, 1937. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 4) 
Sec. 2.35. - Salary; [public funds; personnel]. 
(a)  The Tax-Commissioner of Dade County shall receive for his services as such an annual salary of $10,000.00, payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Dade County. 
(b)  All fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments and perquisites of whatever kind received and collected by the tax-commissioner shall be received, collected and held by him as public funds belonging to Dade County. Once each month the tax-commissioner shall turn over to the fiscal authority of said county all funds collected by him with a detailed itemized statement showing the sources from which such funds were collected. It is specifically provided that the salary provided herein for the tax-commissioner shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments and perquisites of whatever kind, including those commissions allowed by an act relating to the sale of motor vehicle license plates by local tax officials, approved March 9, 1955 (1955 Ga. Laws, page 659), as amended, and an act relating to the commission on taxes collected in excess of a certain percentage of the taxes due according to the tax net digest, approved January 17, 1938 (1937-38 Ex. Sess. Ga. Laws, page 297), as amended. 
(c)  The Tax-Commissioner of Dade County may employ clerical and other personnel to be paid from county funds, but the compensation of such personnel shall be subject to approval by the Dade County Commissioner. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 5; 1937, 1938 (Ex. Sess.) Ga. Laws page 796, § 1; 1950 Ga. Laws, page 2374, § 1; 1953 (Nov., Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws, page 2484, § 1; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2630, § 1; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 2689, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2568, § 1; 1967 Ga. Laws page 2266, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 3221, § 1; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4419, § 1) 
Sec. 2.36. - Oath; bond. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that before entering upon the duties of his office[,] the said Dade County Tax-Commissioner shall take the oath now prescribed by law for the tax-collector, and shall give bond and security in an amount as now provided by law for [the] tax-collector, with some surety company approved by the ordinary. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 6) 
Sec. 2.37. - Tax to pay salary and expenses; premium on bond. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Ordinary of Dade County, Georgia, shall levy a tax for the maintenance of said office and of the office supplies and pay the salary of said Dade County Tax-Commissioner, and that said ordinary shall pay out of funds thus raised the premium on the bond or bonds required of said Dade County Tax-Commissioner. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 7) 
Sec. 2.38. - Office in courthouse; rounds. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Dade County Tax-Commissioner shall have his office in the courthouse in Dade County, and that he shall be required to make the rounds to receive tax returns now required of tax-receivers, and when not thus engaged that he be required to keep his office open during reasonable office hours on all days except Sundays and holidays, for the purpose of collecting taxes. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 617, § 8) 
Secs. 2.39, 2.40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEPOSITORY 

Sec. 2.41. - Appointment. 
It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues of Dade County on January 1, 1961, and on January 1 of each succeeding year, to appoint some chartered bank located or doing business in Dade County as depository of all county funds of Dade County which are now required to be paid over to the county treasurer. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2393, § 1) 
Sec. 2.42. - [County funds.] 
From and after the effective date of this act [division] all county funds which are now required to be paid over to the county treasurer shall be paid over to the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues of Dade County and shall be deposited by said commissioner in said county depository. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2393, § 2) 
Sec. 2.43. - [Authorization to pay out.] 
Said county depository shall not pay out any of such county funds so deposited except on order or check duly signed by the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues of Dade County. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2393, § 3) 
Sec. 2.44. - [Selection rules and regulations.] 
Said depository shall be selected under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues of Dade County. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2393, § 4) 
Sec. 2.45. - Security. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of roads and revenues to require said depository to pledge and keep on deposit with said commissioner securities to be approved by the commissioner in the face amount of not less than fifty [50] percent of the total amount of county funds on deposit with such depository to secure the faithful performance of said depository of its duties under this act [division], and for the safekeeping of all county funds, deposited in said county depository. Said commissioner may, at his discretion, require a surety bond from said depository, in addition to the pledge of such securities, in an amount not to exceed $20,000.00 for the faithful performance of its duties hereunder, the premium for such bond to be paid out of county funds. The securities herein provided for shall be either obligations of the United States, or of the State of Georgia, or other obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States of America. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2393, § 5) 
Sec. 2.46. - Statements. 
Said depository shall furnish to the commissioner of roads and revenues at the end of each month a statement showing the amount of funds deposited and paid out during the month, and the balance remaining on deposit together with all cancelled checks paid during said month. Additional statements shall be furnished from time to time upon request of said commissioner. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2393, § 6) 
Sec. 2.47. - Compensation. 
Said depository shall receive no compensation for its services in acting as such depository, and shall not be required to pay any interest on funds deposited under the provisions of this act [division]. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2393, § 7) 
Secs. 2.48—3.00. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES AND BOARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3.01. - [Filling of vacancies on hospital authority of Walker, Dade and Catoosa counties.] 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of subsection (d) of Code Section 31-7-72 of the O.C.G.A., the method of filling vacancies on the board of the hospital authority of Walker, Dade, and Catoosa counties shall be as provided in this act. This act shall apply to vacancies for unexpired and full terms. The governing authority of the county from which the member whose seat becomes vacant was selected shall submit to the board of the hospital authority a list of three eligible persons. The board at its next regular or special meeting shall select one of those three persons to fill the vacancy. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the next vacancy to occur on the board following the effective date of this Act for a seat held by an appointee from Dade County shall be filled in accordance with subsection (a) of this section from a list of three eligible persons submitted by the governing authority of Catoosa County and any subsequent vacancies in such seat shall be filled in accordance with subsection (a) of this section by the submission of a list of three eligible persons by the governing authority of Catoosa County. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not become effective if Dade County by not later than July 1, 2013: 
(1)  Enters into an intergovernmental contract with the hospital authority and Walker and Catoosa counties pursuant to Code Section 31-7-85 of the O.C.G.A., under the terms of which Dade County agrees to make payments to the hospital authority in an amount equal to 20 percent of the annual principal and interest requirements of debt issued by the hospital authority for which the remaining 80 percent is similarly supported by agreements of Walker and Catoosa counties; and 
(2)  Amends its resolution creating the hospital authority to increase the number of members of the board from nine members to ten members with one additional member to represent Catoosa County. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 4531, § 1; 2013 Ga. Laws, page 4020, § 1) 
Editor's note— Provisions previously found at O.C.G.A. § 88-1803, 1933, are now at O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72, 1981. 
Secs. 3.02—3.20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF EDUCATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this division is [the] 1984 Ga. Laws, page 3575, as adopted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments to this act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. 

Sec. 3.21. - [Districts.] 
(a)  The board of education of Dade County shall be composed of five members to be elected as provided in this act. For the purpose of electing members of the board of education, Dade County shall be divided into five education districts. Education Districts 1 through 4 shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this act and further identified as Plan Name: dadeccp l Plan Type: Local User: Shantee Administrator: Dade Co. Education District 5 shall be composed of the entire Dade County school district. 
(b)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Dade County not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Dade County described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3575, § 1; 2004 Ga. Laws, page 3530, § 1) 
Sec. 3.22. - [Election.] 
There shall be one member of the board [of education] elected from each education district. A person may not offer as a candidate for election to the board from any education district other than from the education district in which he or she is a legal resident. The board member representing each education district shall be elected by the voters of the entire Dade County school district. Board members shall be elected by a majority vote of the registered voters casting ballots in an election. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3575, § 2) 
Sec. 3.23. - [Candidate requirements.] 
No person shall be eligible to offer for election to the board [of education] or serve thereon unless that person is at least 21 years of age, has been a resident of the state at least one year, and has been a resident of the territory embraced within the education district from which that person offers as a candidate for at least six months immediately preceding the date of the election. In the event a member moves his or her residence from the education district he or she represents, his or her place on the board shall immediately become vacant. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3575, § 3) 
Sec. 3.24. - [Terms of office.] 
(a)  The members of the board of education who were elected at the general election in November 2002 shall continue in office for the terms to which they were elected and until successors are elected and qualified as provided in this act. The members of the board of education who were elected at the general election in November 2000 shall continue in office for the terms to which they were elected and until successors are elected and qualified as provided in this act. 
(b)  Successors to the members of the board of education of Dade County from Education Districts 3, 4, and 5 shall be elected at the state-wide general election in 2004. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  Successors to the members of the board of education of Dade County from Education Districts 1 and 2 shall be elected at the state-wide general election in 2006. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  Successors to members elected under subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be elected at the state-wide general election next preceding the expiration of such terms of office and shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(e)  Education Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 as they existed on January 1, 2004, shall continue to be designated as Education Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, but as newly described under this act, and, on and after the effective date of this act, such members of the board serving from those former education districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3575, § 4; 2004 Ga. Laws, page 3530, § 2) 
Sec. 3.25. - [Chairman; quorum; compensation.] 
At the first meeting of the board [of education] in January, 1985, and at the January meeting biennially thereafter, the board shall elect one of their members as chairman to serve for a term of two years and such other officers as the board shall determine. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All members of the board shall be compensated as provided by general law. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3575, § 5; 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4767, § 1) 
Sec. 3.26. - [Vacancy; powers.] 
In the event any vacancy occurs on the Board of Education of Dade County, the remaining members of the board shall select a successor to serve for the unexpired term. In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of chairman of the board, the remaining members shall elect from one of their members a new chairman to serve for the unexpired term. The Board of Education of Dade County created by this act [division] shall be the successor to all the rights, powers, duties, and obligations of the old Board of Education of Dade County and shall be subject to all constitutional and statutory provisions relating to county boards of education not in conflict with this act [division]. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3575, § 6) 
Secs. 3.27—3.30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 3.31. - Created, term of office, powers, etc. 
A.  Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Dade County, Georgia, to be known as the Dade County Industrial Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and which in this amendment [division] is hereafter referred to as the "authority." 
B.  [Terms of office.] The authority shall consist of six members to be elected by an election committee composed of the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues of Dade County; the Ordinary of Dade County, and the Mayor of Trenton, Georgia, for initial terms of two, four and six years, and thereafter for staggered terms of six years. At the time of election of the first members, the election committee shall elect two members for a two-year term, two members for a four-year term, and two members for a six-year term, and thereafter the terms of all members shall be six years. In the event a vacancy occurs for any reason, the election committee shall immediately elect a person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum present of the membership of the authority. The authority shall have power to elect their own chairman, assistant chairman and secretary from its membership. No member of the governing body of the City of Trenton, Georgia, nor of Dade County, Georgia, may be a member of said authority and only residents of Dade County, Georgia, shall be eligible members for said authority. 
C.  Powers. The power of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
1.  To sue and be sued; to receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and administer trusts; 
2.  To borrow money, to issue notes and revenue bonds, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, lease, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
3.  To contract with the City of Trenton, Dade County, and with other political subdivisions of the state and with the state and with the United States Government or with any department or agency of either and with private persons and corporations; 
4.  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to any public or private corporation performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; 
5.  To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in Dade County, Georgia, so as to relieve, insofar as possible, unemployment within its boundaries, and[,] to that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of said county suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant, or fabricating plant including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building or buildings or other structures and facilities useful or desirable in connection therewith, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building; 
6.  No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than thirty (30) years from the date of transfer or possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all cost[s] of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking; 
7.  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
8.  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific manner; 
9.  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated; 
10.  To appoint and select officers, agents and employees including engineers, architects, builders and attorneys, and to fix their compensation; 
11.  To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be employed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
D.  Taxation. The property obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property obligations and interest on the obligations of Dade County, Georgia. The exemptions from taxation herein provided shall not include exemptions from sale and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use by the authority. 
E.  [Issuance of bonds.] In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds, debentures and revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the authority; such revenue bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the laws of Georgia, as though such bonds had originally been authorized to be issued under the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, page 761), as amended. The judgment of validation shall be final, conclusive and forever incontestable as to the validity of the bonds and the security for the payment thereof, as well as all other matters, both substantive and procedural, relative to their issuance, and any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered, including the creation of any security interest in any equipment or other property of the authority, as security for any lawful debt of the authority. 
F.  Debts. The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or County of Dade. 
G.  Property. Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Dade County, Georgia, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
H.  Intent. This amendment, being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of Dade County, Georgia, and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
I.  Severability. The provisions of this amendment are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
J.  Projects. Any project of the authority shall be restricted to or within the limits of Dade County, Georgia. 
K.  Intent. This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within the County of Dade and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
L.  Effective date. This amendment [division] shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the governor and the first members of the authority shall take office within thirty (30) days after such proclamation. 
M.  General Assembly. The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. 
(1967 Ga. Laws, page 907, § 1) 
Editor's note— 1967 Ga. Laws, page 907, is an amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § VII, para. V. This amendment was continued in force and effect by 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5062. 
Secs. 3.32—3.40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2542, amended this act by changing the name from "Dade County Water Authority" to "Dade County Water and Sewer Authority"; this change has been made throughout this division without history note. 

Sec. 3.41. - Short title. 
This act [division] may be cited as the "Dade County Water and Sewer Authority Act." 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 1) 
Sec. 3.42. - [Established; officers; compensation; vacancy.] 
(a)  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Dade County Water and Sewer Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title, such body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall consist of five members who shall be appointed and serve as provided in this section. Other than the chairperson, the members of the authority shall hold no other public office during their terms as members of the authority. 
(b)  The terms of the members of the authority in office on the effective date of this act shall terminate on the effective date of this act. 
(c)  On the effective date of this act, the chairperson/county executive of the governing authority of Dade County shall become the chairperson of the authority for a term that is concurrent with his or her term as chairperson/county executive. 
(d)  On the effective date of this act or as soon as practicable thereafter, the governing authority of Dade County shall appoint four members to serve on such authority. Each district commissioner shall nominate one person from such commissioner's district to serve on the authority, and the governing authority shall ratify such nominations by majority vote of the governing authority. Of the initial appointments by the governing authority under this subsection, one member shall serve an initial term of office beginning on the date of his or her appointment and ending December 31, 2011, and until a successor is appointed and qualified; one member shall serve an initial term of office beginning on the date of his or her appointment and ending December 31, 2012, and until a successor is appointed and qualified; one member shall serve an initial term of office beginning on the date of his or her appointment and ending December 31, 2013, and until a successor is appointed and qualified; and one member shall serve an initial term of office beginning on the date of his or her appointment and ending December 31, 2014, and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The governing authority in making such initial appointments shall specify which member of the authority shall serve which term of office. Thereafter, except for the chairperson, appointments shall be made not more than 60 days prior to the expiration of the term of office of a member of the authority by nomination by the district commissioner in whose district the member whose term is expiring resides and ratification by majority vote of the governing authority. Such successors to the initial members under this subsection shall serve terms of office of four years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. Except for the chairperson, members of the governing authority shall remain residents of the districts from which they were appointed during their terms of office or such offices shall be declared vacant. 
(e)  The seat of any member of the authority, except for the chairperson, who is absent without being excused by the chairperson for two or more consecutive meetings of the authority shall be declared vacant. 
(f)  Any member of the authority, except for the chairperson, may be removed from office for cause upon a majority vote of the governing authority of Dade County. 
(g)  A vacancy on the authority, except for the chairperson, shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term of office by nomination by the district commissioner in whose district the member whose position is vacant resided and ratification by majority vote of the governing authority. 
(h)  The members of the authority shall elect from among their number a vice chairperson and may elect a secretary and a treasurer who need not necessarily be members of the authority. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all of the duties of the authority. The chairperson of the authority shall not be entitled to vote upon any issue, motion, question, or resolution except in case of a tie vote of the other members of the authority voting on such issue, motion, question, or resolution; provided, however, that three affirmative votes shall be required to transact any business of the authority. 
(i)  The members of the authority shall receive such compensation for their services as may be provided by the board of commissioners of Dade County and all members shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own governance. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 2; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3843, § 1; 2010 Ga. Laws, page 3535, § 2) 
Sec. 3.42.5 - [Fire hydrants.] 
(a)  The authority shall have the duty and responsibility of ensuring that all fire hydrants connected to its water system are properly functioning at all times and have sufficient water pressure. 
(b)  The authority shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to open and public meetings, and Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to inspection of public records. 
(2010 Ga. Laws, page 3535, § 2) 
Sec. 3.43. - Annual meetings. 
There shall be an annual meeting of the users of the facilities of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority. Such annual meeting shall be held on the first Monday in March of each year at a time and location to be determined by the [water and sewer] authority. It shall be the duty of the [water and sewer] authority to advertise the date, time and location of the annual meeting of the users in the local organ of Dade County once a week for a period of two weeks immediately prior to the date of such meeting. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 2A; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2542, § 3) 
Sec. 3.44. - Definitions. 
As used in this act [division], the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word[s] "[water and sewer] authority" shall mean the Dade County Water [and Sewer] Authority created by section 2 [3.42] of this act [division]. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition and construction of all necessary and usual water facilities useful and necessary for the obtaining of one or more sources of water supply, the treatment of water and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale, within and without the territorial boundaries of Dade County and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate water utility system deemed by the [water and sewer] authority necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of such type of undertaking. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation of expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] for such project. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds" and "bonds" as used in this act [division], shall mean revenue certificates as defined and provided for in the Revenue Certificate Law of Georgia (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761, as amended) and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Certificate Law and in addition shall also mean obligations of the authority the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this act [division]. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the [water and sewer] authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the [water and sewer] authority therefrom will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 3) 
Sec. 3.45. - Powers. 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the [water and sewer] authority, the [water and sewer] authority being under no obligations to accept and pay for any property condemned under this act [division] except from the funds provided under the authority of this act [division], and in any proceeding to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action or proceedings as may be just to the [water and sewer] authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this act [division] upon which any lien or other incumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or incumbrance; and if the [water and sewer] authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any other lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the governor is hereby authorized to convey, for and in behalf of the state title to such lands to the [water and sewer] authority upon payment to the state treasurer for the credit of the general fund of the state of the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the governor and the chairman of the [water and sewer] authority; 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases or projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the [water and sewer] authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable, and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the [water and sewer] authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water and related services and facilities by the [water and sewer] authority to such municipal corporations and counties for a term not exceeding 30 years; 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the [water and sewer] authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)  To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(i)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state; and 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this act [division]. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 4) 
Sec. 3.46. - [Issuance of revenue bonds.] 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the [water and sewer] authority created hereby, shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds, in a sum not to exceed $10 million [$10,000,000.00] outstanding at any one time, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at the rate or rates, and shall mature at such time or times as permitted by resolution of the [water and sewer] authority. The bonds shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the [water and sewer] authority and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the [water and sewer] authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the [water and sewer] authority by resolution of the [water and sewer] authority. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 5; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 3839, § 1) 
Sec. 3.47. - Existing facilities. 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority shall be authorized to purchase any existing water and sewage facilities or systems within the county, provided such facilities or systems are appraised by a competent engineer furnished or recommended by the state department of natural resources, and provided further, that a notice of such purchase shall be advertised in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements are published, at least once a week for three weeks before such purchase. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 6; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2542, § 6) 
Sec. 3.48. - [Bonds]—Form; denominations; registrations; place of payment. 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the [water and sewer] authority may determine, provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 7) 
Sec. 3.49. - Same[—]Signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the Chairman of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the signature or facsimile signature of the chairman of the [water and sewer] authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the [water and sewer] authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 8) 
Sec. 3.50. - Same[—]Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of the state. Such bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation with the state. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 9) 
Sec. 3.51. - [Same—Price; sale of.] 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the [water and sewer] authority. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 10; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 3839, § 2) 
Sec. 3.52. - Same[—]Proceeds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of such deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund hereinafter provided for the payment of principal and interest of such bonds. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 11) 
Sec. 3.53. - Same[—]Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 12) 
Sec. 3.54. - Same[—]Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 13) 
Sec. 3.55. - Conditions precedent to issuance[—]Object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this act [division]. In the discretion of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act [division] shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the [water and sewer] authority by a majority of its members. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 14) 
Sec. 3.56. - [Same—]Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Dade County or a pledge of the faith and credit of said county, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 15) 
Sec. 3.57. - Same[—]Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the [water and sewer] authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the [water and sewer] authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the right and remedies of the bondholder as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the [water and sewer] authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the [water and sewer] authority and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefore and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the [water and sewer] authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the [water and sewer] authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 16) 
Sec. 3.58. - Same[—]To whom proceeds shall be paid. 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which[,] shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this act [division] and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 17) 
Sec. 3.59. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the [water and sewer] authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be [p]ledged to an[d] charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest; and (4) any premium upon bonds, retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase of [or] redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 18) 
Sec. 3.60. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act [division] or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tools, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 19) 
Sec. 3.61. - Refunding bonds. 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the [water and sewer] authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the [water and sewer] authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act [division] insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 20) 
Sec. 3.62. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act [division] or any suit or action against such [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Dade County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 21) 
Sec. 3.63. - Validation. 
Bonds of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937, as amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the [water and sewer] authority for the services and facilities of the water system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the [water and sewer] authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the [water and sewer] authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality contracting with the said Dade County Water [and Sewer] Authority. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 22) 
Sec. 3.64. - Interests of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said [water and sewer] authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will complete [compete] with the [water and sewer] authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the [water and sewer] authority. The provisions of this act [division] shall be for the benefit of the [water and sewer] authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 23) 
Sec. 3.65. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the [water and sewer] authority of this act [division], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act [division.] 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 24) 
Sec. 3.66. - Purposes of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provision of this act [division], the general purpose of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority is declared to be that of acquiring an adequate source or sources of water supply, treatment of such water, and thereafter the distribution of same to [the] Dade County water system, and the various municipalities in said county and environs, including adjoining counties and municipalities located therein, but such general purpose shall not restrict the [water and sewer] authority from selling and delivering water direct to consumers in those areas where there does not now exist [a] water distribution system and where neither any county nor municipality deems it desirable for [or] feasible to furnish water in such locality. The [water and sewer] authority shall also have the authority, where it deems it feasible, to sell to consumers, governmental agencies, or governmental instrumentalities of adjoining states, provided the law of the adjoining state does not prohibit or tax said activity. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 25) 
Sec. 3.67. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls or charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls or charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of the water utility system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 26) 
Sec. 3.68. - Rates and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the [Dade County Water and Sewer] Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this act [division], including the basis on which water service and facilities shall be furnished. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 27) 
Sec. 3.69. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this act [division] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 28) 
Sec. 3.70. - Liberal construction of act. 
This act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 28) 
Sec. 3.71. - Effect of partial invalidity of act. 
The provisions of the act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 29) 
Sec. 3.72. - Repeal. 
This act does not in any way take from Dade County or any municipality located therein or any or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate and maintain water systems or issue revenue cerificates as is provided by the Revenue Certificate Law of Georgia. All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3260, § 30) 
Secs. 3.73—3.90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION 

Sec. 3.91. - [Purpose.] 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A., there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Dade County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the judge of the probate court of Dade County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," and the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the board of registrars of Dade County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 1) 
Sec. 3.92. - [Definitions.] 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this act, and the term "county" means Dade County. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 2) 
Sec. 3.93. - [Board authorized generally.] 
(a)  The board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector of Dade County, shall have been a resident of Dade County for a period of two years, shall be at least 25 years of age at the time of assuming office, and shall be qualified and selected in the following manner: 
(1)  Two members shall be appointed by the county executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding general election received the largest number of votes in this state for the office of Governor; 
(2)  Two members shall be appointed by the county executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding general election received the next largest number of votes in this state for the office of Governor; 
(3)  Each of the appointments made by the respective executive committees shall have been ratified by a majority of the members of each of such respective executive committees voting at a meeting duly called and held for such purposes. In the event such appointments are not ratified by a majority of the members of such executive committees, then such members shall be appointed by the judge of the probate court of Dade County; 
(4)  The fifth member of the Dade County Board of Elections and Registration shall be appointed by the county executive committee of the political party or body whose candidate at the last preceding general election received the third highest number of votes in this state for the office of Governor, provided that such number is at least 1 percent of the total number of votes cast for such office. Otherwise, the fifth member of the Dade County Board of Elections and Registration shall be appointed by the judge of the probate court of Dade County; 
(5)  At the first meeting of each calendar year, the members of the Dade County Board of Elections and Registration shall select one of the members of the board to serve as chairperson; 
(6)  No person who holds or is a candidate for an elective public office or who serves as an officer, employee, committee member, or other representative of either a political campaign of a candidate for elective public office or a political party or who is engaged on behalf of any candidate for an elective public office in the solicitation of votes for such candidate shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office or within two years after such active political participation as described in this paragraph, and the position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office or upon such member's engaging in such political activity described in this paragraph. This paragraph shall not prohibit a nonelective employee of the county governing authority from serving as a member of the board of elections and registration; 
(7)  (A)  The initial appointments to the board shall be made not later than July 1, 2005; 
(B)  Of the two initial members appointed by the executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding general election received the largest number of votes in this state for the office of Governor, one of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on July 1, 2005, and expiring on December 31, 2006, and one of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on July 1, 2005, and expiring on December 31, 2008; 
(C)  Of the two initial members appointed by the executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding general election received the next largest number of votes in this state for the office of Governor, one of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on July 1, 2005, and expiring on December 31, 2006, and one of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on July 1, 2005, and expiring on December 31, 2008; 
(D)  The initial member appointed as provided in paragraph (4) of this section shall serve a term of office beginning July 1, 2005, and expiring December 31, 2008; and 
(E)  All such persons so appointed shall serve for the initial terms specified and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified; 
(9)  After the initial terms of office, successors to members whose terms are about to expire shall be appointed to take office on the first day of January immediately following the expiration of a term of office and shall serve for terms of four years each and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified; and 
(10)  Appointments on behalf of political parties and bodies that do not have county executive committees in Dade County shall be made by the state executive committee of such party or body. 
(b)  The appointment of each member shall be made by the appointing authority's filing with the clerk of the Superior Court of Dade County an affidavit stating the name and residence address of the person appointed and certifying that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this act. The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the court and shall certify the name of each such member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members and chairperson within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. If any appointing authority does not, in conformity with this act, certify an appointment to the board within 30 days after the beginning of a term of office or within 30 days after the creation of a vacancy in that office, a vacancy shall be deemed to have been thereby created and the judge of the probate court of Dade County shall fill that vacancy by making the appointment thereto and shall certify it as provided in this section. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve out the unexpired term of office. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 3) 
Sec. 3.94. - [Succession; resignation; removal.] 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to succeed himself or herself without limitation and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the appointing authority and to the clerk of the Superior Court of Dade County. Each member shall be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, by the chief judge of the Superior Court of Dade County in the same manner and by the same authority as provided for the removal of registrars. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 4) 
Sec. 3.95. - [Vacancy appointment.] 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member before the expiration of his or her term by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the appointing authority for that position on the board. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of such interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 5) 
Sec. 3.96. - [Oath.] 
Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 6) 
Sec. 3.97. - [Authority.] 
The chairperson of the board shall be the chief executive officer of the board and shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 7) 
Sec. 3.98. - [Employment.] 
The board shall be authorized to employ such full-time and part-time employees, including a full-time chief clerk, as the board shall deem necessary. The governing authority of Dade County shall have the right to approve the hiring of any such employee. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 8) 
Sec. 3.99. - [Selection, appointment, training of poll workers.] 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in elections; and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided the board by the county executive committee of each political party. The board shall also formulate, adopt, and promulgate rules and regulations, consistent with law and the rules and regulations of the state executive committee of each political party, governing the conduct of primaries to the end that, insofar as practicable, all primaries shall be uniformly conducted by the board, poll workers shall be properly trained, and voters shall be adequately informed and instructed. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 9) 
Sec. 4.00. - [Expenditures.] 
The board shall propose an annual budget to the county governing authority for approval or negotiation detailing the expenditures necessary for the execution of its duties. With the consent of the governing authority of Dade County, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds for the purpose of distributing sample ballots, voter information booklets, and other material designed to inform and instruct adequately the electors of the county with regard to elections. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 10) 
Sec. 4.01. - [Compensation.] 
Compensation for the chairperson and other members of the board and for employees of the board shall be fixed by the board with the approval of the governing authority of Dade County. Such compensation shall be paid from county funds. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 11) 
Sec. 4.02. - [Offices and equipment.] 
The governing authority of Dade County shall provide the board with proper and suitable offices and equipment. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 12) 
Sec. 4.03. - [Contracts.] 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipal corporation located within the county for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within the municipal corporation. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3940, § 13) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL 
DIVISION - 1. 
GENERALLY 

Secs. 4.04—4.20. - Reserved 
DIVISION 2. - PROBATE JUDGE 

Sec. 4.21. - [Salary basis.] 
Beginning January 1, 1961, the compensation of the Ordinary of Dade County shall be changed from the fee system to the salary system, and the salary herein specified shall constitute the full and complete compensation for such officer. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 1) 
Sec. 4.22. - Salary. 
The salary of said ordinary shall be $8,500.00 per year, payable in monthly payments at the end of each calendar month by the commissioner of roads and revenues out of the general funds of Dade County. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 2; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 2121, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2772, § 1) 
Sec. 4.23. - County funds. 
All fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances and all other perquisites which are now or which may hereafter be allowed by law to be collected by such officer, shall be received and collected by said ordinary for the sole use of Dade County, and shall be held and accounted for as public monies belonging to said county. On or before the 10th day of each month, beginning February 10, 1961, said ordinary shall prepare in duplicate a detailed, itemized statement showing the amounts, dates and sources of sums collected by him during the previous calendar month. One copy of this statement shall be furnished to the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues of Dade County, together with full payment of the amounts shown thereon; the other copy shall be retained on file as a part of the records of said ordinary. Said ordinary shall be diligent in the collection of such fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances and other perquisites, and in making the monthly accounting herein provided for. It shall be unlawful for the commissioner of roads and revenues to pay to the ordinary the monthly salary herein provided for while said ordinary is delinquent in the making of any monthly accounting herein provided for. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 3) 
Sec. 4.24. - Gift for performing marriages. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this act [division], it is specifically provided that no sum of money or other gift donated or given to the ordinary by any person for the performance of a marriage ceremony shall be construed to be fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances or other perquisites, and any such gift or donation shall be the property of the ordinary. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 3) 
Sec. 4.25. - Collection of fees. 
The procedure now in force as to collection and distribution of costs shall remain in force, but as herein provided all such sums to which the ordinary would, but for this act [division], be entitled to, shall be collected for the use of the county, and Dade County shall be subrogated to the rights and claims of such ordinary in and to the same. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 4) 
Sec. 4.26. - Office expenses. 
The commissioner of roads and revenues shall provide necessary books, records, stationery, postage and other office supplies for the Ordinary of Dade County to be paid for out of county funds. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 5) 
Sec. 4.27. - [Employees; compensation.] 
The Dade County Probate Judge may employ clerks and deputies to be paid from county funds, but the compensation of such clerks and deputies shall be subject to approval by the Dade County Commissioner. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 6; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2229, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 3225, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4079, § 1; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4414, § 1) 
Sec. 4.28. - [Election]. 
[(a)]  The Judge of the Probate Court of Dade County shall be elected by the qualified voters of Dade County in a nonpartisan primary and election. Except as otherwise provided in this act [division], the judge of the probate court shall be elected pursuant to the general election laws of Georgia. 
[(b)]  Beginning with the election held in 1996 and every four years thereafter, the judge of the probate court shall be elected at the nonpartisan primary and general election immediately preceding the expiration of the term of the office of the judge of the probate court, and shall take office on January 1 immediately following such election for a term of four years and until such judge's successor is elected and qualified. 
[(c)]  Candidates for the office of judge of the probate court shall be nominated in a nonpartisan primary to be held at the same time as and in conjunction with the general primary every four years. A nominating petition shall not be required to place the name of any such candidate on the primary ballot. A candidate may have his or her name placed on the primary ballot by filing a notice of candidacy with the county election superintendent and by paying the qualifying fee. 
[(d)]  The candidate receiving a majority of votes in the nonpartisan primary shall be the nominee for the office of judge of the probate court and shall be the only candidate for such office to have his or her name appear on the general election ballot. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes for the office shall be in a runoff to be held on the same day as a runoff from the general primary, as provided by state law, to determine which candidate will be on the general election ballot. 
[(e)]  The names of all candidates for the office of judge of the probate court shall appear in a separate section for each primary and general election ballot of each elector. No party designation or affiliation shall appear beside the name of any such candidate on any primary or general election ballot, and no candidate for the office of judge of the probate court shall be nominated by any political party. 
[(f)]  This act [section] is enacted pursuant to the authority of Code Section § 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2390, § 9; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3867; § 1—6) 
Secs. 4.29—4.40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAGISTRATE COURT 

Sec. 4.41. - [Election—Term of office.] 
At the statewide primary and November general election[s] conducted in 1998 and every four years thereafter, the Judge of the Magistrate Court of Dade County shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters of Dade County in a nonpartisan primary and election. Persons elected to such office shall take office the first day of January immediately following such election and shall serve for a term of office of four years and until the election and qualification of their respective successors. The procedures for such nonpartisan primary and election shall be as provided in Code Section § 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 4352, § 1) 
Secs. 4.42—4.50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUPERIOR COURT CLERK 

Sec. 4.51. - [Salary basis.] 
The present mode of compensating the Clerk of the Superior Court of Dade County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 3824, § 1) 
Sec. 4.52. - Salary. 
The clerk of the superior court shall receive an annual salary of $8,500.00 payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Dade County. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 3824, § 2) 
Sec. 4.53. - Public funds. 
The Clerk of the Superior Court of Dade County shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the clerk of the superior court shall furnish the governing authority [board of commissioners] of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 3824, § 3) 
Sec. 4.54. - [Employees; compensation.] 
The Dade County Clerk of Superior Court may employ deputies to be paid from county funds, but the compensation of such deputies shall be subject to approval by the Dade County Commissioner. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 3824, § 4; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 3230, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3969, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4077, § 1, 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4417, § 1) 
Sec. 4.55. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the clerk of the superior court's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority [Board of Commissioners] of Dade County. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 3824, § 5) 
Secs. 4.56—5.00. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FROM COUNTY TAXES FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 

Sec. 5.01. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this act [article]: 
(1)  Ad valorem taxes for county purposes means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Dade County, including, but not limited to, taxes to pay interest on and to retire bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  Homestead means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence and not more than five contiguous acres of land immediately surrounding such residence. 
(3)  Income means federal adjusted gross income for income tax purposes from all sources. 
(4)  Senior citizen means a person who is 70 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the [homestead] exemption under this act [article] is made. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 1) 
Sec. 5.02. - [Homestead exemption—Qualification.] 
(a)  Each resident of Dade County who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Dade County ad valorem taxes for county purposes for the full value of that homestead, if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse of such person who resides within such homestead, does not exceed $15,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. 
(b)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the Tax-Commissioner of Dade County giving the person's age, the amount of income which the person and the person's spouse residing within such homestead received during the last taxable year, and such additional information relative to receiving such [homestead] exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such [homestead] exemption. The tax-commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 2) 
Sec. 5.03. - [Same—Application form.] 
The Tax-Commissioner of Dade County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the [homestead] exemption granted by this act [article] and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the [homestead] exemption. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 3) 
Sec. 5.04. - [Same—Renewal; notification of change of eligibility.] 
The [homestead] exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The [homestead] exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (b) of section 2 [5.02] of this act [article], it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year, and the [homestead] exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this act [article] to notify the Tax-Commissioner of Dade County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that [homestead] exemption. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 4) 
Sec. 5.05. - [Other taxes not affected.] 
The [homestead] exemption granted by this act [article] shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, independent school district taxes, or Dade County school district taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this act [article] shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to Dade County ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 5) 
Sec. 5.06. - [Effective date.] 
The [homestead] exemption granted by this act [article] shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1999. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 6) 
Secs. 5.07—5.10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FROM COUNTY TAXES FOR CERTAIN SENIOR CITIZENS 

Sec. 5.11. - [Definitions.] 
For purposes of this act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Dade County, including, but not limited to, taxes to pay interest on and to retire bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence and not more than five contiguous acres of land immediately surrounding such residence. 
(3)  "Income" means federal adjusted gross income for income tax purposes from all sources. 
(4)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 70 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this act is made. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 1] 
Sec. 5.12. - [Homestead exemption—Qualification.] 
(a)  Each resident of Dade County who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Dade County ad valorem taxes for county purposes for the full value of that homestead, if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse of such person who resides within such homestead, does not exceed $15,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. 
(b)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Dade County giving the person's age, the amount of income which the person and the person's spouse residing within such homestead received during the last taxable year, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 2] 
Sec. 5.13. - [Same—Application form.] 
The tax commissioner of Dade County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this act and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 3] 
Sec. 5.14. - [Same—Renewal; notification of change of eligibility.] 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2 of this act, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this act to notify the tax commissioner of Dade County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 4] 
Sec. 5.15. - [Other taxes not affected.] 
The exemption granted by this act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, independent school district taxes, or Dade County School District taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to Dade County ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 5] 
Sec. 5.16. - [Effective date.] 
The exemption granted by this act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1999. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4537, § 6) 
Secs. 5.17—5.25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FROM COUNTY TAXES 

Sec. 5.26. - [In general.] 
(a)  As used in this act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Dade County, including, but not limited to, any taxes to pay interest on and to retire county bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this act is first granted to the most recent owner of such homestead. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence and not more than three contiguous acres of land immediately surrounding such residence. 
(b)  Each resident of Dade County is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Dade County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the current year assessed value of that homestead exceeds the base year assessed value of that homestead. This exemption shall not apply to taxes assessed on improvements to the homestead or additional land that is added to the homestead after January 1 of the base year. If any real property is removed from the homestead, the base year assessed value shall be adjusted to reflect such removal and the exemption shall be recalculated accordingly. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Dade County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. 
(d)  The tax commissioner of Dade County shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section which shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(e)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the tax commissioner of the county or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this act shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, or municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to county ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
(g)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2003. 
(2002 Ga. Laws, page 4719, § 1) 
Secs. 5.27—5.40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FROM SCHOOL DISTRICT TAXES 

Sec. 5.41. - [In general.] 
(a)  As used in this act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Dade County School District, including but not limited to taxes to pay interest on and to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  "Base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this act is first granted to the most recent owner of such homestead. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence and not more than three contiguous acres of land immediately surrounding such residence. 
(b)  Each resident of the Dade County School District is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Dade County School District taxes for educational purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the current year assessed value of that homestead exceeds the base year assessed value of the homestead. This exemption shall not apply to taxes assessed on improvements to the homestead or additional land that is added to the homestead after January 1 of the base year. If any real property is removed from the homestead, the base year assessed value shall be adjusted to reflect such removal and the exemption shall be recalculated accordingly. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Dade County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. 
(d)  The tax commissioner of Dade County shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section which shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(e)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the tax commissioner of the county or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this act shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to county school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
(g)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2003. 
(2002 Ga. Laws, page 4733, § 1) 
Secs. 5.42—5.50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FROM SCHOOL DISTRICT TAXES FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 

Sec. 5.51. - [In general.] 
(a)  As used in this act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Dade County school district, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire county school district bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence and not more than five contiguous acres of land immediately surrounding such residence. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this act is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the Dade County school district who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Dade County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes for the full value of the homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Dade County giving the person's age and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this act to notify the tax commissioner of Dade County in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect any state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes, or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to Dade County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1 of the year immediately following the year in which the election provided for in Section 2 of this act is conducted. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3574, § 1) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The codification of resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances passed by the board of commissioners is adopted as the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Dade County Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Dade County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Commissioner. The term "commissioner" shall mean one (1) or more members of the board of commissioners. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Dade, State of Georgia. 
County clerk. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the term "county clerk" shall mean the person employed by the board of commissioners to fulfill the duties of clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Day. The term "day" shall mean a calendar day of twenty-four (24) hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Joint authority. The words giving joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the board of commissioners. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" shall mean and denote applicable federal law, the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Georgia, the resolutions of the county, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated under such law. 
May. The term "may" is permissive. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is mandatory. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Dade County" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal resolutions, ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances or resolutions of the county. 
Person. The term "person" shall include a natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, company, business, trust and any other group acting as a unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of such, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property, except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he/she is absent, he/she has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Road or street. The term "road" or "street" shall include all roads, streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this county which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the county clerk's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the Sheriff of Dade County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven (7) days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the resolutions of the county unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
(1)  Gender . Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
(2)  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
Sec. 1-4. - Incorporation of resolutions, etc. 
Any resolution, general resolution or ordinance not presently included in the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, and passed subsequent to the preparation of such codification is automatically included and incorporated in this Code by reference. 
Sec. 1-5. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk to the board of commissioners, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or someone authorized by the clerk to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances which indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make such resolutions and ordinances a part of the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, when such resolutions and ordinances have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the board of commissioners. This copy of the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the Code and shall be considered the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia. 
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code, printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-7. - References to titles of officers, employees or public bodies. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the county. 
Sec. 1-8. - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Sec. 1-9. - Acts by agent. 
When an act is required by resolution or ordinance, the act being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by a designated agent. 
Sec. 1-10. - Causing, permitting, abetting or concealing prohibited act. 
Whenever in the resolutions or ordinances of the county any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
Sec. 1-11. - Construction of provisions. 
The provisions of the resolutions or ordinances of the county and all proceedings under such resolutions or ordinances are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of repeal or expiration of resolution. 
(a)  The repeal of a resolution or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the resolution expired and shall not repeal the repealing clause of a resolution or revive any resolution or ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(b)  When a resolution or ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous resolution or ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code, or the resolution or ordinance adopting this Code, shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county, or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any resolution or ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any resolution or ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation resolution or ordinance. 
(8)  Any resolution or ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any resolution or ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such local improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning resolution or ordinance. 
(11)  Any resolution or ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any resolution or ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative resolutions or ordinances of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any resolution or ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any resolution or ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(b)  No such resolution or ordinance shall be construed to revive any resolution or ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent resolution or ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such resolutions or ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Provisions considered continuations of existing resolutions. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as resolutions or ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-16. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All resolutions or ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent resolutions or ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent resolutions or ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent resolutions or ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent resolutions or ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not previously existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia, is amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section shall read as follows: . . . ." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-17. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of resolutions or ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest resolution or ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in resolutions and parts of resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the resolution or ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this resolution" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the resolution or ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of resolution or ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of resolution material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-18. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by resolution or ordinance or other official act of the board of commissioners. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-19. - General penalty, continuing violations; authority granted to court. 
(a)  For the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives the board of commissioners authorization to adopt resolutions and ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, violations of which resolutions and ordinances may be punished by fine and/or imprisonment. 
(b)  In 1991 the Georgia General Assembly amended O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, relating to resolutions and ordinances for governing and policing unincorporated areas of the county, so as to increase the maximum fine from five hundred dollars ($500.00) to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives jurisdiction over violations of county resolutions and ordinances to the magistrate court of the county. 
(d)  O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 is incorporated as a part of the Code of Ordinances, Dade County, Georgia. 
(e)  Whenever in this Code, or in any resolution or ordinance of the county, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code, or any resolution or ordinance, the doing of an act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such resolution or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment in the county prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the county, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor, if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any resolution or ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  The judge of the magistrate court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the magistrate court the fines provided for in this Code, the resolutions and ordinances of the county, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(g)  The judge of the magistrate court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers' annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-20. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
Sec. 1-21. - Designation of District Attorney's Office of the Lookout Mountain Judicial Circuit to prosecute criminal offenses. 
The board of commissioners hereby designates the District Attorney's Office of the Lookout Mountain Judicial Circuit to prosecute all misdemeanor criminal offenses within the jurisdiction of the magistrate court of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-262. 
(Res. No. R-16-00, 11-2-2000) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The administrative resolutions or ordinances of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-13(13); civil emergencies, ch. 22; administration of flood control regulations, § 26-46 et seq.; administration and application of road addressing regulations, § 38-67; taxation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Regulations governing use of county vehicles. 
The following regulations governing the use and operation of county-owned or county-leased vehicles shall be established: 
(1)  There shall be placed on the front doors of both sides of county vehicles a sticker or other markings identifying the vehicle as being owned by the county. 
(2)  There shall be no smoking of any tobacco products permitted in county vehicles. 
(3)  County vehicles may be driven home only by those county employees who could reasonably be expected to provide emergency services after regular work hours. These employees shall include the 911 director, the director of public works, road supervisors, and such other employees as may be designated by the county commission. 
(4)  It is expressly understood and intended that the regulations set forth in this section apply to all vehicles owned or leased by the county, but not for those vehicles assigned by the county commission exclusively for use by the sheriff's department. 
(Res. R-03-07, 1-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-2. - Smoking or other use of tobacco products on county property and vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County facility. Any building, office complex, office center, courthouse, civic center, auditorium, jail, or other enclosed structure, owned or otherwise under the exclusive control of the county. There is specifically included within this definition all county property within fifty (50) feet of the building or enclosed structure. 
County vehicle. Any automobile, truck, van, or other motor vehicle designed primarily for on the road use and which is owned or otherwise under the exclusive control of the county. 
Smoking. The burning of any tobacco product in a cigarette, cigar, or pipe of any type or kind. 
Tobacco products. Any kind or type of tobacco, whether loose leaf, processed, or rolled, that is intended, packaged, or sold for the purpose of chewing, dipping, or smoking. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or to otherwise use tobacco products in county facilities or county vehicles. Except, however, the Dade County Sheriff is authorized to designate one (1) or more specific locations within the confinement area of the county jail as a tobacco use area. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize tobacco use in any areas of the county jail accessible to members of the general public. 
(c)  Violation; penalties. In addition to penalties which may be imposed under state law for the violation of O.C.G.A § 16-12-2, any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in section 1-19 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-11, §§ 1—3, 12-1-2011) 
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-13(4). 
State Law reference— Employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; civil service system for county employees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Personnel provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to the city's personnel classification system, employee pay plan, retirement plan or employee benefits, including, but not limited to, Resolution R-8-97, effective July 1, 1997, adopting the Dade County Personnel Policies. All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in full in this Code. 
State Law reference— Social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-32. - Workers' compensation coverage—Elected officials. 
Certain elected officials of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their elected duties, the county commissioner, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of the court, magistrate judge, tax-commissioner and coroner shall be covered under the worker's compensation laws of the state. 
(Res. of 2-18-1992(1), § I) 
Sec. 2-33. - Workers' compensation coverage—Volunteer firefighters, emergency medical technicians, rescue workers. 
Volunteer firefighters, emergency medical technicians and rescue workers of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their duties, such workers shall be covered under the worker's compensation laws of the state. 
(Res. of 2-18-1992(2), § I) 
Sec. 2-34. - County issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(a)  Intent and scope. This section is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(b)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the Dade County Board of Commissioners. 
County means Dade County and/or the board of commissioners. 
County purchase card, county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(c)  Designated elected officials. The Dade County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this section or for any purchases that are not authorized by this section. 
(d)  Card administrator. The board of commissioners shall designate a county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this section, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(e)  Use of cards . 
(1)  Authorized purchases. County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this section, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per transaction: $3,000.00 
Per month: $5,000.00 
(2)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(3)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(4)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(f)  Review of purchases and audit. Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the Dade County's Accounting Department Policy and Procedure Manual (credit card section) as may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(g)  Violations. 
(1)  An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this section or the user agreement. 
(2)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this section may result in: 
a.  A warning; 
b.  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
c.  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
( Ord. No. 02-04-16 , § I—VII, 2-4-2016) 
Secs. 2-35—2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 

Sec. 2-56. - Policy. 
The county board of commissioners is dedicated to the providing of safe, dependable and economical services to the citizens of the county. County employees are our most valuable resource and it is goal of the board of commissioners to provide a healthy, satisfying work environment which promotes personal opportunities for growth. In meeting these goals, it shall be the policy to: 
(1)  Ensure that employees are not impaired in their ability to perform assigned duties in a safe, productive and healthy manner; 
(2)  Create a work place environment free from the adverse effects of drug abuse and alcohol misuse; 
(3)  Prohibit the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of controlled substances; and 
(4)  Encourage employees to seek professional assistance any time personal problems, including alcohol or drug dependency, adversely affects their ability to perform their assigned duties. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 1.0, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-57. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to ensure worker fitness for duty and to protect county employees, passengers and the public from the risks posed by the misuse of alcohol and use of prohibited drugs. This division is also intended to comply with all applicable federal regulations governing workplace antidrug and alcohol programs in the transit industry. The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has published 49 CFR 653 and 49 CFR 654, as amended, that mandate urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing for safety-sensitive positions and prohibits performance of safety-sensitive functions when there is a positive test result. The U.S. Department of Transportation has also published 49 CFR 40, as amended, that sets standards for the collection and testing of urine and breath specimens. In addition, the federal government published 49 CFR 29, The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988, which requires the establishment of drug-free workplace policies and the reporting of certain drug-related offenses to the Federal Transit Administration. This policy incorporates those requirements for safety-sensitive employees and others, when so noted. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 2.0, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-58. - Applicability. 
This division applies to all safety-sensitive employees and contractors when they are on county property or when performing any county-related safety-sensitive business. This division applies to off-site lunch periods or breaks when an employee is scheduled to return to work. A "safety-sensitive" function means any duty related to the safe operation of any county transportation service, including the operation of a vehicle, dispatch or maintenance of a vehicle or equipment used in transportation services, personnel who carry firearms, equipment operation, equipment maintenance, emergency personnel, emergency dispatch operations and any other employee who holds a commercial driver's license. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 3.0, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-59. - Proper application of policy. 
The county is dedicated to ensuring fair and equitable application of this division. Supervisors/managers are therefor required to use and apply all aspects of this division in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any supervisor/manager who knowingly disregards the requirements of this division, or who is found to deliberately misuse this division in regard to subordinates, shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.7, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-60. - Prohibited substances. 
Prohibited substances addressed by this division include the following: 
(1)  Illegally used controlled substances or drugs. The use of any illegal drug or any substance identified in schedules I—V of section 202 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 USC § 812), as further defined by 21 CFR 1300.11—1300.15, is prohibited at all times unless a legal prescription has been written for the substance. This includes, but is not limited to, marijuana, amphetamines, opiates, phencyclidine (PCP) and cocaine, as well as any drug not approved for medical use by the U.S. Drug Administration. The term "illegal use" includes use of any illegal drug, misuse of legally prescribed drugs and use of illegally obtained prescription drugs. 
(2)  Legal drugs. The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs and nonprescription medications is not prohibited; however, the use of any substance which carries a warning label that indicates that mental function, motor skills or judgment may be adversely affected by use of such substance must be reported to a county supervisor. The employee must obtain a written release from the attending physician releasing the person to perform his job duties any time such employee obtains a performance-altering prescription. A "legally prescribed drug" means an individual has a prescription or other written approval from a physician for the use of a drug in the course of medical treatment. Such prescription or written approval must include the patient's name, the name of the substance, quantity/amount to be taken and the period of authorization for use of such substance. The misuse or abuse of legal drugs while performing county business is prohibited. 
(3)  Alcohol. The use of beverages containing alcohol or substances including any medication, mouthwash, food, candy or any other substance so that alcohol is present in the body while performing county business is prohibited. The concentration of alcohol is expressed in terms of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath as measured by a breath testing device approved for evidentiary purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, §§ 4.0—4.3, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-61. - Prohibited conduct. 
County employees, contract employees and subcontractors are prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of prohibited substances while on county premises, in county vehicles, in uniform or on county business. Employees who violate this section will be discharged from employment. Law enforcement shall be notified, as appropriate, where criminal activity is suspected. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.1, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-62. - Intoxication; under the influence. 
Any safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee who is reasonably suspected of being intoxicated, impaired, under the influence of a prohibited substance or not fit for duty shall be suspended from his job duties pending an investigation and verification of his condition. Employees found to be under the influence of prohibited substances or who fail to pass a drug or alcohol test shall be removed from duty and discharged from employment. A drug or alcohol test is considered positive if the employee is found to have a quantifiable presence of a prohibited substance in his body above the minimum thresholds defined in 49 CFR 40, as amended. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.2, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-63. - Alcohol use. 
No safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee shall report for duty or remain on duty when his ability to perform assigned safety-sensitive functions is adversely affected by alcohol or when his breath alcohol concentration is 0.04 or greater. No safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee shall use alcohol while on duty, in uniform, while driving a county vehicle (whether on or off duty), while operating county equipment (whether on or off duty), while performing assigned functions or just before or after performing an assigned function. No safety-sensitive employee shall use alcohol within four (4) hours of reporting for duty, or during the hours that he/she is on call. Violation of this section is prohibited and punishable by disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.3, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-64. - Compliance with testing requirements. 
All safety-sensitive employees will be subject to urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing as a condition of employment. Any safety-sensitive employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing shall not be hired or shall be removed from duty and discharged from employment. Any safety-sensitive employee who is suspected of falsifying test results through tampering, contamination, adulteration or substitution will be required to undergo an observed collection. Verification of these actions will result in removal from duty and termination from employment. Refusal to comply with testing can include: 
(1)  An inability to provide a sufficient urine sample, saliva sample or breath sample without a valid medical explanation; and 
(2)  A verbal declaration, obstructive behavior or physical absence resulting in the inability to conduct the test. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.4, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-65. - Treatment requirements. 
All employees with a drug or alcohol abuse problem are encouraged to use any available resources for treatment of alcohol misuse and illegal drug use. Under certain circumstances, employees may be required to undergo treatment of substance abuse or alcohol misuse. Any employee who refuses or fails to comply with the county requirements for treatment and after care, as a condition to return to duty, shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be paid for directly by the employee or his insurance provider. Employees who make self-referrals (i.e., no management intervention or positive test results) will be allowed to take accumulated sick leave and vacation during such treatment or rehabilitation. Employees that test positive for alcohol misuse or illegal drug use will be referred to the substance abuse program for assessment and be discharged from employment. No treatment opportunities will be afforded to those who test positive for alcohol misuse or illegal drug use. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.5, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-66. - Notification of conviction. 
All employees are required to notify the county of any criminal drug statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace within five (5) days after such conviction. Failure to comply with this section shall result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.6, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-67. - Testing process. 
(a)  Analytical urine drug testing and breath testing for alcohol may be conducted when circumstances warrant or as required by federal regulations. All safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employees shall be subject to drug and alcohol testing prior to employment, for reasonable suspicion and following an accident as set forth in sections 2-70—2-72. Refusal to submit to the test or failure to pass the test will be cause for immediate termination of employment. The employee will be referred to a substance abuse professional but will be discharged from employment. Those employees who perform safety-sensitive functions shall also be subject to testing on a random, unannounced basis. Employees who are subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Transit System and Federal Highway Administration shall be required to undergo testing required by such departments. 
(b)  Drug and alcohol testing shall be conducted in a manner that assures a high degree of accuracy and reliability and using techniques, equipment and laboratory facilities which have been approved by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). All testing will be conducted consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 CFR 40, as amended. 
(c)  Drugs that will be tested for include marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines and phencyclidine. An initial drug screen will be conducted on each urine specimen. For those specimens that are not negative, a confirmatory gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GCMS) test will be performed. The test will be considered positive if the amounts present are above the minimum thresholds established in 49 CFR 40, as amended. In instances where there is a reason to believe an employee is abusing a substance other than the drugs listed in this subsection, the county reserves the right to test for additional drugs under the county's own authority using standard laboratory testing protocols. 
(d)  Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be conducted utilizing a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved testing device operated by a trained technician. If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater, a confirmatory test will be performed using a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration-approved evidential breath testing (EBT) device operated by a trained breath alcohol technician (BAT). A safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04 will be removed from his position of employment for eight (8) hours unless a retest results in a concentration measure of less than 0.02. The inability of an employee to perform safety-sensitive duties due to an alcohol test result of 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04 will be removed from his position for twenty-four (24) hours unless a retest results in a concentration measure of less than 0.02. The inability of an employee to perform assigned duties due to an alcohol test result of greater than 0.02 but less than 0.04 will be considered an unexcused absence subject to county disciplinary procedures. An alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater will be considered a positive alcohol test and the employee will be removed from his position of employment, informed of educational rehabilitation programs available and referred to a substance abuse professional for assessment. A positive drug and/or alcohol test will also result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. The county affirms the need to protect individual dignity, privacy and confidentiality throughout the testing process. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 5.8, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-68. - When testing performed. 
Alcohol tests will only be performed immediately before, during or immediately after the performance of safety-sensitive job functions. Drug tests will be performed any time a safety-sensitive employee is on duty. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.0, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-69. - Employee requested testing. 
Any safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee who questions the results of a required drug test under sections 2-70—2-75 may request that the split sample be tested. This test must be conducted by a different U.S. Department of Health and Human Services-certified laboratory. The test must be conducted on the split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the original sample. All costs for testing are paid by the employee unless the result of the split sample invalidates the result of the original test. The method of collecting, storing and testing the split sample will be consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 CFR 40, as amended. The employee's request for a split sample test must be made to the medical review officer within seventy-two (72) hours of notice of the original sample verified test result. Requests made after seventy-two (72) hours will only be accepted if the request delay was due to documentable facts that were beyond the control of the employee. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.1, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-70. - Pre-employment testing. 
All safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive position applicants shall undergo urine drug testing immediately following the offer of employment or transfer into an assigned safety-sensitive position. Receipt by the county of a negative drug test result is required prior to employment or transfer. Failure of a pre-employment drug test will disqualify an applicant for employment for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days. Evidence of the absence of drug dependency from a substance abuse professional that meets county approval and a negative pre-employment drug test will be required prior to further consideration for employment. The cost for the assessment and any subsequent treatment will be the sole responsibility on the individual tested. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.2, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-71. - Reasonable suspicion testing. 
All safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employees may be subject to a fitness for duty evaluation and urine and/or breath testing when there are reasons to believe that drug or alcohol use is adversely affecting such employee's job performance. A reasonable suspicion referral for testing will be made on the basis of documented objective facts and circumstances which are consistent with the shortterm effects of substance abuse or alcohol misuse. Examples of reasonable suspicion include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Physical signs and symptoms consistent with prohibited substance use or alcohol misuse. 
(2)  Evidence of the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of controlled or prohibited substances, drugs or alcohol. 
(3)  Occurrence of a serious or potentially serious accident that may have been caused by prohibited substance abuse or alcohol misuse. 
(4)  Fights (assault or battery) and flagrant disregard or violation of established safety, security or other operating procedures. 
Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made by a supervisor who is trained to detect the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use and who reasonably concludes that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his work performance due to possible prohibited substance abuse and alcohol misuse. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.3, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-72. - Post-accident testing. 
(a)  All safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employees will be required to undergo urine and breath testing if they are involved in an accident with a county vehicle (on or off duty) that results in a fatality. This includes all surviving safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employees that are operating such vehicle or a passenger in such vehicle and any other safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee whose performance could have contributed to the accident. A post-accident test will also be conducted if an accident results in injuries requiring immediate transportation to a medical treatment facility; or one (1) or more vehicles incurs disabling damage; or the employee receives a citation under state or local law for a moving violation arising from the accident. If no citation is given, the county system's safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employee may still be tested if such employee cannot be completely discounted as a contributing factor to the accident. 
(b)  Following an accident, the safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employee will be tested as soon as possible, but not to exceed eight (8) hours for alcohol testing and thirty-two (32) hours for drug testing. Any safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee involved in an accident must refrain from alcohol use for eight (8) hours following the accident or until he/she undergoes a post-accident alcohol test. Any safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee who leaves the scene of an accident without justifiable explanation prior to submission to drug and alcohol testing will be considered to have refused the test and his employment will be terminated. Employees tested under this section will include not only the operations personnel, but any other covered employee whose performance could have contributed to the accident. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.4, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-73. - Random testing. 
Employees in assigned positions will be subject to random, unannounced drug and alcohol tests. The selection of safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employees for random alcohol testing will be made using a scientifically valid method that ensures each covered employee will have an equal chance of being selected each time selections for random testing are made. The random tests will be unannounced and spread throughout the year. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.5, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-74. - Return-to-duty testing. 
All safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employees who previously tested positive on a drug or alcohol test must test negative for alcohol (below 0.02) and drugs and be evaluated and released to duty by the substance abuse professional before returning to work. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.6, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-75. - Followup testing. 
Safety-sensitive and nonsafety-sensitive employees will be required to undergo frequent, unannounced urine and breath testing following their return to duty. The followup testing will be performed for a period of one (1) to five (5) years with a minimum of six (6) tests to be performed the first year. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 6.7, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-76. - Employment assessment. 
Any safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee who tests positive for the presence of illegal drugs or alcohol above the minimum thresholds set forth in 49 CFR 40, as amended, will be referred for evaluation by a substance abuse professional. A "substance abuse professional" is a licensed or certified physician, psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional or addiction counselor with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol-related disorders. The substance abuse professional will evaluate each employee to determine what assistance, if any, the employee needs in resolving problems associated with prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse. Assessment by a substance abuse professional or participation in the county's employee assistance program does not shield an employee from disciplinary action or guarantee employment or reinstatement with the county. If a safety-sensitive or nonsafety-sensitive employee is allowed to return to duty, he/she must properly follow the rehabilitation program prescribed by the substance abuse professional, he/she must have negative return-to-duty drug and alcohol tests and be subject to unannounced followup testing for a period of one (1) to five (5) years. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be paid directly by the employee or his insurance provider. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, § 7.0, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-77. - Disciplinary actions. 
(a)  Employees removed from their employment positions for violation of this division shall, for the first offense, utilize any accumulated sick, vacation or holiday leave. If there are no leave hours remaining, the employee will be placed on unpaid suspension. 
(b)  Refusal by the employee to submit to testing constitutes a violation of this division and shall result in termination of employment of such employee or other disciplinary action. 
(c)  Failure to successfully complete prescribed treatment will result in the employee's termination. 
(d)  A second positive test result shall require the employee's termination. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, §§ 8.1—8.4, 6-6-1996) 
Sec. 2-78. - Information disclosure. 
(a)  The county shall release information regarding a covered employee's record as directed by specific written consent from the employee authorizing release of the information to an identified person. 
(b)  A covered employee is entitled, upon written request, to obtain copies of any records pertaining to his use of prohibited substances, including any records pertaining to tests for such prohibited substances. 
(c)  The county may disclose information that is required to be maintained to the decision-maker in a lawsuit, grievance or other proceeding initiated by or on behalf of the employee tested for prohibited substances. 
(d)  When requested by the National Transportation Safety Board as part of an accident investigation, the county shall disclose information related to its administration of drug and alcohol tests following the accident investigation. 
(e)  Records shall be made available to subsequent employers upon receipt of written request from the covered employee. 
(f)  The county shall disclose data for its drug and alcohol testing program, and any other information pertaining to its antidrug program, when requested by the secretary of transportation or any department of transportation agency with regulatory authority over the county transit system. 
(Ord. No. O-1-96, §§ 9.1—9.6, 6-6-1996) 
Secs. 2-79—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDEMNIFICATION OF PERSONNEL 

Sec. 2-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the board of commissioners. 
Claim includes all claims presented against an employee prior to institution of a proceeding. 
Employee means any member of the board of commissioners, employees of the county and elected or appointed county officers and their appointees and employees, including appointed members of county boards, commissions, councils and authorities, past, present and future. The word "employee" does not include any member of the county board of education or any employee, officer or appointee of such board or the county school system. 
Proceeding includes any matter of a civil nature in or before any court or agency of this state, any other state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. O-3-97, § 1-A, 9-4-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-102. - Defense of employees. 
Whenever any claim is made or proceeding is brought against an employee, either against him/her asserting personal liability for damages arising out of the performance of his duties or in any way connected with the performance of his duties, whether based on negligence, violation of contract rights or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or other statutory rights, whether federal, state or local, the county shall, upon the employee's written request, provide for the employee's defense unless otherwise limited by the terms of this division. The board of commissioners may decline defense of an employee if the employee fails to provide notice in writing of any claim or proceeding to the commission within thirty (30) days after the employee has received notice of a claim or within ten (10) days after the employee has been served with process in a proceeding initiated against the employee. 
(Ord. No. O-3-97, § 1-B, 9-4-1997) 
Sec. 2-103. - Grounds for refusal of defense. 
(a)  The county shall refuse to provide for the defense of a claim or proceeding brought against any employee if it determines that: 
(1)  The act or omission did not arise out of and in the course of his employment; 
(2)  The employee acted or failed to act because of actual or intentional misconduct, fraud, corruption or malice; 
(3)  Defense of the claim or proceeding by the county would create a conflict of interest between the county and the employee; 
(4)  The proceeding is a criminal prosecution; 
(5)  Provision of a defense against the claim or proceeding would not be in the best interest of the county; 
(6)  The employee acts or fails to act as a result of, or at a time when, his own self-indulgence substantially impaired his judgment, as, for example, an officer or employee who causes damage or injury while under the influence of drugs or alcohol while on the job; 
(7)  The employee acts or fails to act, except in emergencies or the existence of extenuating circumstances, directly contrary to the advice of the county attorney; 
(8)  The employee acts or fails to act in such manner as to constitute a criminal act, as, for example, misappropriation of property or funds; 
(9)  The employee acted or failed to act in a willful disregard of county policy or specific instructions of the employee's supervisor; or 
(10)  The employee fails to cooperate in the defense of the claim or proceeding. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the county from providing a defense against a claim or proceeding where there is a conflict of interest between one (1) employee, or group of employees, of the county and another employee, or group of employees, of the county. 
(c)  The determination required by subsection (a) of this section shall be made by the chairman of the board of commissioners. An appeal may be made by such employee to the commission in the event of a denial by the chairman. Such appeal must be submitted in writing within ten (10) days of the denial. 
(d)  Upon approval of the defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee, the chairman shall refer the matter to the county attorney for disposition; however, if two (2) or more employees are involved, and the interest of one (1) employee, or group of employees, conflicts with the interest of another employee, or group of employees, then, in such event, the commission shall specify which employee, or group of employees, shall be represented by the county attorney and shall authorize the other employee, or group of employees, to employ counsel at the expense of the county; provided, however, that the selection and compensation of such other counsel shall be subject to the prior approval of the commission. 
(Ord. No. O-3-97, § 1-C, 9-4-1997) 
Sec. 2-104. - Payment of judgments and settlement of claims. 
(a)  Where defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee is provided by this division, all final judgments awarded in courts of competent jurisdiction against such employee in proceedings to which this division applies or any amount payable under any settlement of such proceeding or of claims in accordance with this division may be paid, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, by the county, as provided in this section. All compromises of claims or proceedings governed by this division shall be submitted to the commission for prior approval. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, payment of judgments and claims shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  No sum shall be paid where the employee's liability is based on a discretionary act, and the county and the employee reserve the right to asset all governmental and sovereign immunity in defense of such claims. Payment of judgments and claims pursuant to this section shall be made only where liability is based upon a ministerial act of the employee. It is the intent of this section to provide for the payment of claims and judgments only where the defense of sovereign and governmental immunity may not be asserted initially as a defense to the claim or proceeding. 
(2)  No sum shall be paid on behalf of an employee in any one (1) claim or proceeding in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damages and not to exceed the total cost of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence, except that attorney's fees of plaintiff's attorneys shall be allowed in addition, if awarded. 
(3)  No sum shall be paid under the provisions of this division for punitive or exemplary damages awarded against any employee. 
(4)  No sum shall be paid under the provisions of this division unless the claimant unconditionally releases the employee and the county from any and all claims, causes of action or judgments arising out of the subject claim or proceeding. 
(5)  Excluded further from the operation of this division is any claim or proceeding for which insurance coverage is applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-3-97, § 1-D, 9-4-1997) 
Sec. 2-105. - Construction. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to constitute any waiver by the county of the governmental immunity afforded it under the constitution and laws of the state. Nothing contained in this division shall be interpreted in any way to reduce or eliminate the rights of any employee of the county against any other party. 
(Ord. No. O-3-97, § 1-E, 9-4-1997) 
Secs. 2-106—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 2-111. - Position created. 
There is hereby created the position of code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 06-07-07(b), § 1, 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-112. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The primary duties and responsibilities of the code enforcement officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  To enforce all ordinances and codes heretofore or hereafter enacted by governing authority of the county, unless specific provisions in the ordinance or code expressly limit the enforcement powers of the code enforcement officer; 
(2)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance or code violations, and summons and citations for court appearances for violations of ordinances and codes; 
(3)  To enter upon and inspect any building, land, structure or premises in the county for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all ordinances and codes; 
(4)  To investigate and collect evidence of ordinance and code violations; 
(5)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance and code violations; 
(6)  To appear and testify in court; 
(7)  To do any follow up work that may be necessary; 
(8)  To insure proper collection of fees, fines, and penalties; 
(9)  To coordinate enforcement efforts with other departments or divisions of the county as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 06-07-07(b), § 2, 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-113. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any order of the code enforcement officer given in pursuance of and by the authority of this division, or who shall undertake actions intended to delay, frustrate, or hinder the code enforcement officer in the performance of duties described in this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 06-07-07(b), § 3, 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 2-114—2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HARASSMENT AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY 

Sec. 2-121. - Definition of harassment. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Harassment is verbal or physical conduct that degrades or shows hostility or aversion toward an individual because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability or that of his or her relatives, friends, or associates and that: 
(1)  Has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; 
(2)  Has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance; 
(3)  Has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's employment opportunities. 
Harassing conduct includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Epithets, slurs, negative stereotyping, or threatening, intimidating, or hostile acts, that relate to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or disability; 
(2)  Written or graphic material that degrades or shows hostility or aversion toward an individual or group because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability and that is placed on walls, bulletin boards, or elsewhere on county premises or is circulated in the work place. 
(Res. R-16-01, § I, 5-3-2001) 
Sec. 2-122. - Harassment complaint procedures. 
Employees encountering harassment should tell the offending person that such conduct is inappropriate and offensive. The employee shall document all incidents of harassment in order to provide the fullest basis for investigation. In addition, the employee shall notify his or her supervisor of the harassment as soon as possible so that steps may be taken to protect the employee from further harassment and appropriate investigative and disciplinary measures may be initiated. If the employee works for the sheriff's department, tax commissioner, probate judge or superior court clerk, he or she shall report any alleged harassment to his or her immediate supervisor and/or the pertinent constitutional officer if possible and appropriate under the circumstances. Otherwise, such employee shall notify the county manager or the county's female designee of the alleged harassment. The county's female designee may be changed by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. R-16-01, § II, 5-3-2001) 
Sec. 2-123. - Definition of sexual harassment. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inappropriate sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other physical, verbal or visual conduct based on sex constitutes sexual harassment when: 
(1)  Submission to such conduct is either explicitly or implicitly made a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis for any employment decision affecting such individual; and/or 
(3)  Such conduct has the purpose and effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
Sexual harassment may include explicit sexual propositions, sexual innuendo, suggestive comments, sexually oriented "kidding" or "testing", practical jokes, jokes about gender or specific traits, foul or obscene language or gestures, displays of foul or obscene language or gestures, displays of foul or obscene printed or visual material, any physical contact, such as patting, pinching, or brushing against another's body. 
(Res. R-16-01, § III, 5-3-2001) 
Sec. 2-124. - Sexual harassment complaint procedures. 
(a)  All employees are responsible for helping to insure that harassment is avoided. If any employee feels that he or she has experienced or witnessed harassment, such employee shall notify either his or her immediate supervisor, the county manager, or the county's female designee. If the employee works for the sheriff's department, tax commissioner, probate judge or superior court clerk, he or she shall report any alleged harassment to his or her immediate supervisor and/or the pertinent constitutional officer if possible and appropriate under the circumstances. Otherwise, such employee shall notify the county manager or the county's female designee of the alleged harassment. Reports are to be made as soon as practicable, and preferably in writing. Oral reports, however, will be taken in the case of unusually sensitive circumstances. 
(b)  It shall be the county's policy to investigate all such complaints to the fullest extent practicable. The county will keep complaints and the terms of their resolution confidential. If an investigation confirms that sexual harassment has occurred, the county will take corrective action in accordance with the nature and extent of the offense. The county also prohibits retaliation against any employee bringing a claim of sexual harassment. 
(Res. R-16-01, § IV, 5-3-2001) 
Sec. 2-125. - Harassment and sexual harassment false accusation procedures. 
The county recognizes that false accusations of harassment and sexual harassment can have a serious effect on innocent men and women. Individuals falsely accusing another of harassment or sexual harassment will face corrective action in accordance with the nature and extent of his or her false accusation. 
(Res. R-16-01, § V, 5-3-2001) 
Sec. 2-126. - Sexual harassment and harassment employee inquiry procedures. 
The county encourages any employee to raise questions he or she may have regarding the harassment policy or sexual harassment with his or her immediate supervisor, constitutional officers, the county manager or the county's female designee. 
(Res. R-16-01, § VI, 5-3-2001) 
Sec. 2-127. - Dissemination of policy. 
The county deems harassment and sexual harassment to be a matter of concern. The county shall disseminate this harassment policy to all employees. Each employee will receive a copy of this policy and is instructed to read the policy. Each employee shall sign a statement one (1) week after delivery of the policy that the employee acknowledges receipt of this policy and has read this policy. 
(Res. R-16-01, § VII, 5-3-2001) 
Secs. 2-128—2-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage control board, § 6-44; license review board, § 10-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-136. - Board of Commissioners meetings. 
The regular monthly workshop and regular monthly meeting of the Dade County Commission shall be held in the Dade County Administration Building, Trenton, Georgia, on the first Thursday of every month, beginning at 6:00 p.m. The regular monthly meeting shall immediately follow the conclusion of the monthly workshop. 
(Res. No. R-21-10, 9-2-2010) 
Secs. 2-137—2-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-156. - Created. 
Pursuant to the Housing Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq., there is created in and for the county a housing authority. 
(Res. of 11-7-1985) 
Sec. 2-157. - Composition; appointment. 
The housing authority shall be composed of five (5) commissioners who shall be residents of the county appointed by resolution of the board of commissioners. If a commissioner at any time ceases to be a resident of the county, his term of office shall end. 
(Res. of 11-7-1985) 
Sec. 2-158. - Terms. 
The commissioners appointed to the housing authority shall serve for terms of five (5) years, provided the initial commissioners shall be appointed in such a fashion that such terms shall be staggered annually. If at the end of any term of office of any commissioner a successor thereto shall not have been elected, the commissioner whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Res. of 11-7-1985) 
Sec. 2-159. - Powers. 
The housing authority shall have the powers granted to it under state law to issue revenue bonds for the purpose of providing funds to finance housing in the county. 
(Res. of 11-7-1985) 
Sec. 2-160. - Compensation; expenses. 
No member of the housing authority shall receive any compensation for serving as a commissioner, but may be reimbursed for his actual expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. 
(Res. of 11-7-1985) 
Secs. 2-161—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-181. - Created. 
Pursuant to the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., there is created in and for the county a development authority. 
(Res. of 6-11-1980) 
Sec. 2-182. - Composition; appointment. 
The development authority shall be composed of seven (7) directors who shall be taxpayers of the county and one (1) of whom is an officer or employee of the county appointed by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 6-11-1980) 
Sec. 2-183. - Terms. 
The directors appointed to the development authority shall serve for terms of six (6) years, provided the initial directors shall be appointed in such a fashion that such terms shall be staggered. If at the end of any term of office of any director a successor thereto shall not have been elected, the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Res. of 6-11-1980) 
Sec. 2-184. - Powers. 
The development authority shall have the powers granted to it under state law to issue revenue bonds for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county, thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry. 
(Res. of 6-11-1980) 
Secs. 2-185—2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AREA PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-206. - Membership. 
The Coosa Valley Area Planning and Development Commission shall consist of two (2) members from each of the counties participating in the area planning commission. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 1) 
Sec. 2-207. - Appointment. 
Of the two (2) members of the area planning commission from each county, one (1) shall be appointed by the governing authority of the municipality wherein the county seat is located and the other shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 1) 
Sec. 2-208. - Term of office. 
The term of office for all members of the area planning commission shall be five (5) years, except that the initial appointment by this county shall be for a term of three (3) years. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 2) 
Sec. 2-209. - Filling of vacancies. 
Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the area planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment which has become vacant. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 2) 
Sec. 2-210. - Removal. 
The appointing authority shall have the power to remove any member of the area planning commission it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 2) 
Sec. 2-211. - Compensation. 
All members of the area planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 2) 
Sec. 2-212. - Organization. 
The area planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 3) 
Sec. 2-213. - Officers. 
The area planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its appointive members. The term of the office of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be for one (1) year or until reelected or their successors are elected. The area planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the commission. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 3) 
Sec. 2-214. - Meetings. 
The area planning commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the chairman or board of commissioners may determine. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 3) 
Sec. 2-215. - Employees and staff. 
The area planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 3) 
Sec. 2-216. - Interagency cooperation; expenditures. 
In the performance of its duties, the area planning commission may cooperate with, contract with or accept funds from federal, state or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend such funds and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. The commission may make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 3) 
Sec. 2-217. - Powers; duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the area planning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the entire northwest Georgia area and each political subdivision therein. In general, the area planning commission shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in this division. 
(Res. of 11-15-1960, § 4) 
Secs. 2-218—2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-13(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-13(3); taxation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-251—2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-271. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County agency means any department or division of the county government. 
IFB means an invitation for bid. 
LPA means a limited purchase allowance. 
PO means a purchase order. 
PR means a purchase requisition. 
Purchasing agent means the county manager or his designee, who is authorized and responsible for the procurement of supplies and services for county use. 
RFQ means a request for quotation. 
Vendor means any person or company that sells supplies and/or services. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § I(A), 2-3-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-272. - Program objectives. 
(a)  Purchasing program objectives are essential to the implementation and administration of a meaningful, viable and successful purchasing program. Purchasing program objectives spell out in words what is expected of the purchasing program and of the individuals who administer and participate in the purchasing program. Purchasing program objectives also serve as a set of guidelines to be used by management, operation personnel and the purchasing agent in reaching responsible and intelligent decisions relative to the day-to-day administration of the purchasing program. Purchasing program objectives provide management with a set of general standards against which to gauge the effectiveness and success of the purchasing program. 
(b)  The primary objectives of the county purchasing program are to: 
(1)  Establish an ongoing centralized purchasing function capable of providing daily service and support on an organization-wide basis. 
(2)  Introduce a greater measure of responsibility and accountability over implementation of the annual budget, specifically as related to the procurement of commodities, contractual services and capital outlay items. 
(3)  Ensure realization of the principles of competitive purchasing and the best buy at the least cost. 
(4)  Assist management at all levels in reaching responsible cost-effective decisions in the procurement of quality supplies and services for county use. 
(5)  Formulate policies and procedures designed to systematize and enhance the efficiency of the county procurement process and ensure procurement in a timely and proper manner. 
(6)  Promote goodwill and clear communication in county-vendor relations and intraorganization relations relative to purchasing. 
(7)  Promote the realization of equal opportunity policies through procurement relations with vendors. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § I(B), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-273. - Inventory. 
(a)  The county purchasing agent shall make an inventory of all county-owned equipment, furniture, fixtures and vehicles, describing each by model and serial number and setting out to which office such property is assigned. 
(b)  Upon the completion of such inventory as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the county purchasing agent shall furnish a list of the property assigned to each office to the department head or office holder acknowledging such property is in fact located in that office; thereafter, each item of such property that is purchased for such office or department costing in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or has a life expectancy of three (3) years or longer, shall, upon its delivery, be assigned to the department or office holder, and such item shall be added to the inventory of such department. 
(c)  The inventory of property assigned to each office shall be maintained as a permanent record in the office of the county manager. Upon reassignment of the use of such property between departments, a receipt for the property shall be taken from the department head receiving it, and the property shall be removed from the inventory list of the department from which it is removed and shall be added to the inventory list of the department to which it is assigned. 
(d)  Annually, the county purchasing agent shall inventory the property of each office and present the inventory to the department head of such office and shall file such annual inventory with the permanent record. 
(e)  Upon the retirement, resignation or discharge of any department head, an inventory shall be taken of each office and all property charged to that department shall be satisfactorily accounted for. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § I(C), 2-3-2000) 
Secs. 2-274—2-290. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration 

Sec. 2-291. - In general. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for maintaining a centralized purchasing program shall reside in the county manager as purchasing agent, or his designee, and his immediate staff. This places the responsibility on those who have the interest and skill to do the procedure work properly and whose primary concern is the performance of uniform policies covering county-vendor relationships as well as interdepartment relationships and permits adequate controls to be exercised over expenditures. 
(b)  The purpose of this subdivision is to establish a set of policies designed to guide the decision process as it relates to the procurement of supplies and services for use by the county. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(A), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-292. - Centralized purchasing. 
It shall be the policy of the county to maintain a centralized purchasing process with the purchasing agent. It shall be the purchasing agent's responsibility to administer purchasing policies, institute reports necessary to permit analysis of purchasing performance, negotiate and approve term contracts in concert with county departments, consolidate purchases of like or common items, analyze prices paid for materials and equipment and generally define how to obtain savings and to coordinate purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(B), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-293. - Supply sources. 
The purchasing agent shall select supply sources in concert with the appropriate department. This shall be accomplished with a view toward creating good vendor relations and promoting the best interest of the county. The county recognizes that frankness and fair dealing comprise the cornerstones to strong and lasting relationships with suppliers. As a general policy, purchases shall be awarded on the basis of availability, best price, delivery and quality taking into consideration the reputation and performance capability of the suppliers. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(C), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-294. - Commitments. 
In concert with county departments, the purchasing agent shall conduct and conclude all negotiations affecting vendor selection, prices, terms, delivery, etc. Commitments, in order to be valid, shall be stated by contract, letter or purchase order (PO) signed by the purchasing agent or a person duly authorized to sign in his stead. Negotiations leading up to, or likely to conclude in, contract arrangements shall not be conducted without the knowledge and authorization of the purchasing agent. No one other than the purchasing agent shall commit the county to any purchase, vendor or product, or give any information concerning price or competitive performance. Exceptions to the provisions of this section include emergencies and other situations as set forth in this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(D), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-295. - Interdepartmental relations. 
(a)  A central purchasing system cannot function properly without the cooperation and assistance of all department heads. It shall be the policy of the county to promote the intelligent and harmonious relationship between the purchasing agent and the other county departments relative to procurement. The purchasing agent has the duty and authority to request reconsideration of specifications or quantity of material if, in his opinion, it appears that the interest of the county may be better served; however, the final determination of quality and quantity will remain the prerogative of the requisitioning agency. 
(b)  To enable the purchasing agent to develop the best source of supply, requisitions should be submitted as far in advance of the required date as possible. Useful information obtained by the purchasing agent from interviews of salesmen and by direct mail should be forwarded to the appropriate county departments. Using departments are encouraged to reciprocate by forwarding useful information on materials and suppliers to the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(E), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-296. - Vendor relations. 
The purchasing agent will promote a program of fairness and friendship with all vendors. Salespersons will be received by the purchasing agent as promptly and courteously as time permits. 
(1)  Salespersons will only be received in other departments after approval has been given or arrangements have been made by the purchasing agent. 
(2)  The purchasing agent will arrange interviews between vendor representatives and department heads when it appears to be to the advantage of the county or when such an interview is requested by an appropriate county employee. 
(3)  No county employee is required to place his time at the disposal or discretion of a salesperson; however, if any interview is to be denied, such denial will be acknowledged promptly, a reason given for not granting the interview and the suggestion offered to see the purchasing agent. 
(4)  The purchasing agent will handle all correspondence with suppliers except when technical or other details make it necessary or appropriate to assign such correspondence to another department. 
(5)  Prices and other specific information received from vendors shall be considered confidential. During negotiations, quotations received from one (1) supplier will not be divulged to another supplier. 
(6)  The purchasing agent will advise unsuccessful bidders as to the disposition of their quotations or bids at the request of the unsuccessful bidders. 
(7)  Vendor representatives who are unavailable at the time the purchasing agent calls to request information on the status of an order or other inquiry are requested to return the call by the end of the working day on which such call is made. 
(8)  Salespersons calling on the county should be prepared to advise the purchasing agent on the status of existing county orders with their company. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(F), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-297. - Gifts and gratuities. 
County employees are expressly prohibited from soliciting or accepting any rebate, money or costly entertainment, gift or gratuity from any person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is, or might be, awarded. The county will not tolerate circumstances that produce or reasonably appear to produce conflicts between the personal interest of an employee and the interests of the county; therefore, the county may terminate, at no charge to the county, any purchase order or contract if it is found that substantial gifts or gratuities were offered to a county employee. The county may also take disciplinary action, including dismissal, against a county employee who solicits or accepts gifts or gratuities of any value whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(G), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-298. - Bid deposits. 
Bid deposits or surety shall be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of their deposit or surety. A successful bidder, upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within the time specified after written notification of the bid award, shall forfeit any surety deposited with the county. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(H), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-299. - Performance bonds. 
The county shall require a performance bond in such amount as shall be found necessary to protect the best interest of the county, before entering a bid-based contract. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(I), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-300. - Bidders list. 
With the aid of other county department heads, the purchasing agent shall compile and maintain a bidders list. Vendors desiring to be on such list shall advise the purchasing agent, in writing, of the following: 
(1)  Type of business. 
(2)  Name of the officers, owners or partners of such business. 
(3)  Persons authorized to sign bids, offers and contracts. 
(4)  Type of equipment, supplies, materials sold and/or services provided. 
(5)  How long they have been in the present business. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(J), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-301. - Award of bid-based contracts. 
The board of commissioners will award bid-based contracts upon the recommendation of the purchasing agent. The award will usually be to the lowest and best responsible bidder. When an award is recommended not to be made, or not to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for such recommendation shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and shall be filed along with other papers relating to the transaction. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(K), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-302. - Expediting. 
The purchasing agent shall expedite the followup on the delivery position of material on order. Any information other county departments may acquire or be requested to acquire concerning the delivery status of ordered material should be relayed to the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(L), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-303. - Tax exemption. 
The county is exempt from all city, state and federal sales and excise taxes except for three percent (3%) and 7.5 percent (7½%) fuel taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(M), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-304. - Employee bidding. 
No county employee, constitutional officer or county commissioner will be eligible to bid on county contracts, supply items or any type of construction. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § II(N), 2-3-2000) 
Secs. 2-305—2-320. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Procedures 

Sec. 2-321. - In general. 
This subdivision outlines the county's purchasing procedure and the forms system designed to complement it. The purchasing procedure outlined in this subdivision is designed to take full advantage of a centralized purchasing system. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(A), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-322. - Purchase requisition. 
(a)  The purchase requisition (PR) initiates the procurement cycle. The receipt of a PR with the necessary information and required signature gives the authority for each specific purchase. A purchase order (PO) will not be issued unless authorized by a proper requisition. The PR makes the purchasing agent accountable for filling the needs as stated on the requisition. The signature of the department head is required on all PRs. 
(b)  The PR shall be used to: 
(1)  Request the purchase of supplies or services, except engineering and other professional services. 
(2)  Change or cancel an existing PR. 
(3)  Request price and delivery information on possible future requirements. 
(c)  The PR will be a single part form available from central supplies. The completed form is to be forwarded to the director of purchasing. The director of purchasing will review the PR for the purpose of ensuring that: 
(1)  All required information is provided; 
(2)  The price indicated is the best price; 
(3)  Budget compliance/variance is known; and 
(4)  Contract compliance will be discussed directly with the requisitioner. 
The director of purchasing may only recommend approval or disapproval of a PR. 
(d)  A PR shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  Date the PR is prepared. 
(2)  Complete ship-to-address. 
(3)  Expenditure code number and line items of account. 
(4)  Indicate whether the purchase is budgeted or unbudgeted. 
(5)  List proper numbers of fund, program and expenditure chart or account. 
(6)  List project number or name, if applicable. 
(7)  A definite date for completion shall always be given. Terms such as "emergency" and "rush" may be used, but also a firm date shall be included. The term "a.s.a.p." should not be used. 
(8)  If known, one (1) or more suppliers should be recommended. If the requisitioner feels a particular supplier should not be used, such supplies should be stated along with the PR, with a brief explanation. 
(9)  The quantity requested should clearly identify measurable units such as pieces, sheets, pounds, gallons, feet, etc. 
(10)  Descriptions should be complete and detailed. Specifications should be written so that no guess work is required. If a specification such as color is not important, it should be so stated on the PR. If known, the manufacturer and part number should be shown. 
(11)  List the unit price or an estimated unit price. 
(12)  The requisitioner should include on, or attached to, the PR, any useful information that will assist in making the best possible buy on the needed supplies or services. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(B), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-323. - Vendor selection. 
Vendors will be selected on a competitive basis. Bids, quotations and proposals will be solicited by newspaper advertising, direct mail, requests of prospective suppliers and by telephone, as appropriate. Purchase orders (POs) or contracts will be awarded to the lowest and best responsible vendor. All bids may be rejected if it is in the public's interest to do so. In determining the lowest and best responsible vendor, in addition to price, the following will be considered: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the vendor to perform the contract or provide the material or service required. 
(2)  Whether the vendor can perform the contract or provide the material or service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the vendor. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts, orders or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the vendor with laws and ordinances relating to the contract, order or service. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the vendor to perform the contract, fill the order or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplier or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the vendor to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(C), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-324. - Invitation for bid; request for quotations. 
(a)  The invitation for bid (IFB) will include a general description of the items to be purchased; the bid deposit and performance bond required, if any; where bid blanks and specification may be secured; and the time and place for opening bids. The purchasing agent may also solicit sealed bids from responsible prospective suppliers by sending them a copy of such notice. Sealed bids will be opened in public at the time and place stated in the IFB. A tabulation of bids can be obtained from the purchasing office after the opening of the bids. 
(b)  Purchases of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) will be made in the open market without necessary resort to IFBs or request for quotations (RFQs). 
(c)  Purchases of five hundred one dollars ($501.00) to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) must have three (3) bids which may be solicited either by telephone or written at the discretion of the purchasing agent; however, in those instances where the purchasing agent cannot secure at least three (3) bids within a time frame of five (5) working days, then two (2) or less bids shall be considered adequate. 
(d)  Purchases of one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) to two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) require written bids. Purchases over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) require written bids and must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Purchases made from state contracts, with the exception of the purchase of automobiles, require no further bid. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(D), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-325. - Negotiation. 
The invitation for bid (IFB) method of formal advertising and, to a lesser extent, the request for quotation (RFQ) method involves the inflexible process of sealed bids, public opening and award to the lowest and best responsible bidder, whereas negotiation usually involves, after receipt of quotations, the process of bargaining with suppliers or offerers proffering the best deal to the county. Notwithstanding county procurement by negotiation, like procurement by formal advertising requires the observation of impartiality toward all offerers. While negotiation procedures are more flexible than advertised procedures, such flexibility demands a greater degree of care to ensure that all competitive offerers are treated equally. Negotiation, as a purchasing technique, shall be used only after authorization by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(E), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-326. - Purchase orders. 
(a)  The purchase order (PO) is basically a legal contract. It represents a meeting of the minds between buyer and seller. All formal POs will be prepared by the director of purchasing and executed and issued by the purchasing agent. No PO will be issued without a properly processed purchase requisition (PR). 
(b)  All purchases, except purchases of less than fifty dollars ($50.00), whether for single or multiple items, will require a PO. 
(c)  The PO will be a numbered, three-part form. After the PO is executed, it will be issued as follows: 
(1)  White copy. The white copy shall be mailed to the vendor. 
(2)  Yellow copy. The yellow copy shall be maintained in the purchasing department. 
(3)  Pink copy. The pink copy shall go to the accounting department. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(F), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-327. - Purchase order log. 
The director of purchasing will maintain a purchase order (PO) log that will contain the following information: 
(1)  PO number. 
(2)  Date the PO was issued. 
(3)  Department. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(G), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-328. - Charge account purchase. 
(a)  The purchasing agent will issue purchase orders (POs) to selected vendors establishing charge accounts. This method of buying is intended to expedite the procurement of frequently needed low dollar value supplies. Blanket POs will have a two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) cumulative limit and no single purchase may be over fifty dollars ($50.00). Department heads will forward to the purchasing agent a list containing the names and signatures of all personnel proposed to be authorized to sign for supplies under such agreements. Any changes to the name/signature list should be made in writing and filed with the purchasing agent. 
(b)  When charging supplies, the vendor's invoice must be signed by the authorized county employee receiving the material. Department heads will forward these signed invoices immediately to the director of purchasing. The director of purchasing must have all signed invoices in order to verify the accuracy of the vendor's monthly bills. Invoices signed by unauthorized personnel will not be paid. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(H), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-329. - Emergency purchases. 
Emergency purchases may be approved by the county manager upon the request of the appropriate department head and recommendation of the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(I), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-330. - Receipt and inspection. 
The ordering agency shall ultimately be responsible for the receipt, inspection and acceptance of the incoming supplies and equipment. Receiving procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  When any or all items on the purchase order (PO) have been received, inspected and accepted, the delivery receipt shall be signed and forwarded to the director of purchasing. 
(2)  When received items are not acceptable, the receiving agency shall forward to the purchasing agent a receiving report with the reason for rejection stated thereon. The purchasing agent will then arrange for the return and replacement of the defective items or take other action as required. In the case of defective supplies, the receiving report will also be used as a rejection report. 
(3)  When items that already have been accepted are subsequently found to be defective, the using agency shall notify the purchasing agent in writing. The following information, when known, is required: 
a.  Name of supplier. 
b.  PO number item was purchased on. 
c.  Date defective item was received. 
d.  Nature of defect. 
e.  Action requested (return for credit, for replacement, etc.). 
(4)  When items are to be received by or delivered to someone or some place other than the using agency, the procedures set forth in subsections (1)—(3) of this section shall be modified only to the extent that: 
a.  Someone other than a using agency employee may sign the delivery receipt, but he/she must notify the using agency of receipt of the order. 
b.  Someone shall check the condition of the items and check the items delivered against the matching copy of the PO. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(J), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-331. - Payments. 
Most vendors offer a cash discount if their invoices are paid promptly. To take advantage of this discount policy and maintain good vendor relations, it is important that all invoices, packing slips and receiving reports be promptly forwarded to the director of purchasing. These documents should reach the director of purchasing within one (1) working day after their receipt by the using agencies. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(K), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-332. - Change orders. 
(a)  Using agencies wishing to change or cancel an existing purchase requisition (PR) or purchase order (PO) shall issue a PR requesting such change or cancellation. The changed PR will require the same signatures as required on the original PR. The original PR number shall always be referred to and the action requested shall be clearly stated. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a properly signed and processed change request PR, the purchasing agent will issue a change order or change the original PR, as required. When a change or cancellation is decided upon, the purchasing agent should be notified immediately. A few hours' advance notice to the purchasing agent could save the county costly restocking or cancellation charges. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(L), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-333. - Vendor's catalog file. 
The purchasing agent will maintain a vendor's catalog file. Catalogs in this file will be available to all interested county employees. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(M), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-334. - Sale of personal property. 
Only property declared surplus and obsolete to the needs of the county will be offered for sale. Only the purchasing agent is authorized to sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange such supplies for, or trade in such supplies on new supplies. Surplus supplies will be sold on a competitive basis to the highest bidder. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(N), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-335. - Maintenance contracts. 
The purchasing agent will maintain all records and information concerning county maintenance agreements. Before renewing any such agreement, the purchasing agent will check with the concerned department head to determine if the agreement should be renewed. Agreements found to be unnecessary will be terminated. Department heads will advise the purchasing agent of any change in the status of items covered by maintenance agreements. A copy of maintenance contracts will be on file in the county clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(O), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-336. - Maintenance garage. 
An inventory of gasoline, oil and other supplies will be maintained at the purchasing department's maintenance garage. Parts, gasoline and oil issued to the various departments will be charged to such departments at the end of each month. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(P), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-337. - Storeroom. 
(a)  The purchasing agent will establish and control a central storeroom for selected items such as office supplies, janitorial supplies, etc. This system will enable the purchasing agent to buy storeroom items in large quantities at a considerable cost savings as compared to buying such items as normally required. The storeroom method will also allow the county to standardize frequently used supplies. 
(b)  When a using agency needs any item that falls in the storeroom category, such agency will prepare a purchase requisition (PR) and present it to the purchasing agent for filing. If the requested item is not in stock, the purchasing agent will buy it, using the PR as authority to purchase. Requisitioned storeroom items will be charged to the appropriate departments at the end of each month. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(Q), 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-338. - Suggestions. 
Suggestions that will help reduce costs, promote efficiency or improve supplier services are both welcome and requested. Cost reduction ideas should reduce costs without a corresponding reduction in quality of service. 
(Ord. No. O-11-12-99, § III(R), 2-3-2000) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-06-17 , adopted Apr. 6, 2017, amended Ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-31—6-46, 6-71—6-88, 6-111—6-116, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-2-95, §§ 1.1—1.17, 2.1—2.19, 3.1, 3.2, 4.2, adopted Feb. 3, 1995; Ord. No. O-1-05, adopted Apr. 7, 2005; Ord. No. 02-02-12, adopted Mar. 1, 2012; Ord. No. 08-02-12, adopted Aug. 2, 2012; and Ord. No. 03-03-16, adopted Feb. 4, 2016. 
Cross reference— Drug and alcohol testing of officers and employees, § 2-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

Sec. 6-1. - Name of ordinance. 
This ordinance [from which this chapter derived] shall be known as the Dade County Alcoholic Beverage Control Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 1, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol beverage control board means a five-member board established to investigate, grant, supervise, monitor, and enforce alcoholic beverage licenses as provided in this chapter. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all distilled spirits, alcohol, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises means all distilled spirits, alcohol, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine that are consumed on the premises, including bottles of beer or malt liquor and bottles of wine that are opened only for consumption on the premises, except for certain partially consumed bottles of wine in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 and this chapter. 
Beer. See "malt beverage". 
Church means a tax exempt organization in a building including the main structure together with any auxiliary structures where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Convenience store means a small store or shop that sells, but is not limited to, such items as candy, ice cream, soft drinks, water, lottery tickets, tobacco products, newspapers, magazines, a selection of processed foods, sandwiches, a few items of groceries, ATM and money order services, as well as fuel, motor oils, etc., such as are typical in Dade County. 
County means Dade County, Georgia. 
County clerk means the official certified county clerk, or other duly designated person appointed by the governing authority to handle certain county clerk duties. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-five (24) percent alcohol by volume (or any other such percentage that may be determined by the laws of Georgia). 
Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, with seating for sixty (60) or more persons, or other number as specified in this chapter, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises, with a full-service kitchen which must be approved by the health and fire departments, and sanitary restroom facilities. 
Fuel means any petroleum product including but not limited to, gasoline, diesel, kerosene, ethanol and propane. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of Dade County or its duly appointed designee. 
Grocery store means a store established primarily for the retailing of food. This term includes large grocery stores, such as supermarkets, that also stock products other than food, such as paper goods, cleaning supplies and household items in addition to food items. 
Licensee means a person, as defined herein, holding any class of license issued under this chapter. 
Malt beverage (commonly referred to as beer) means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer, as well as hard cider containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Nonprofit organization means an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of 26 U.S.C. §§ 501(c), 501(d), 501(e). 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, box or other original consumer container. 
Person or entity means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, sole proprietorship, or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether such entity operates for profit or nonprofit. 
Premises means the entire building, including patios, porches and decks. In some instances, where indicated, premises may also include the entrance area, parking lot and the entire lot or parcel wherein the licensed establishment is located. 
Registered agent means a resident of the county designated to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents with respect to any alcohol license and who will be responsible for any matters relating to the alcohol license. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any convenience store or grocery store which offers for the retail package sale of beer, malt beverages or wine, or any combination thereof, by unbroken packages in sealed containers to consumers at retail only and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means an entity that sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, retail package dealers, or retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume (or any other such percentage that may be determined by the laws of Georgia) made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, flavored malt beverages, and like products. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 1, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, to offer for sale, or to provide to the general public, at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and prominently display a copy of any license obtained pursuant to this chapter on the licensed premises and to instruct each employee as to the terms of this chapter. The licensee and each employee shall at all times be familiar with this chapter and any amendments thereto. 
(c)  A licensee is charged with the responsibility for compliance with this chapter by its officers, agents, servants and employees. A licensee is responsible for acts in violation of this chapter committed by others, other than those listed in this chapter, if within the knowledge of the licensee. 
(d)  All federal and state laws and regulations relating to the sale, manufacture, and distribution of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine in Georgia, including all laws which may subsequently be enacted, are incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. Any violation of such state or federal law or regulations shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 2, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-4. - Establishment of alcoholic beverage control board. 
There is hereby established the alcoholic beverage control board comprised of five (5) members, to be appointed by the board of commissioners. Each member so appointed by the board of commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners and until the member's successor is duly appointed. The board of commissioners shall designate a member of the alcoholic beverage control board to serve as the chairperson thereof. 
Any vacancies on the alcoholic beverage control board shall be filled by appointment by the board of commissioners. The alcoholic beverage control board shall appoint its own clerk. The alcoholic beverage control board members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Those board members currently serving at the time of the final adoption of this chapter amendment shall continue to serve for the remainder of their current terms. 
The alcoholic beverage control board shall be the designee of the Dade County Board of Commissioners to receive, investigate, and duly consider the applications for licenses, and to otherwise administer the terms of this chapter. The board of commissioners shall establish powers, duties, rules and regulations governing the alcoholic beverage control board consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The members of the alcoholic beverage control board shall be residents of Dade County for at least one (1) year and shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. A quorum required for all meetings shall be deemed to be a majority of the Board members then serving. Decisions shall be decided by a majority of those members present. The alcoholic beverage control board shall meet at such times as may be deemed necessary or appropriate, and meetings shall be open to the public except as may be expressly provided by the Georgia Open Meetings Law. The alcoholic beverage control board clerk shall serve as secretary, and shall make a full and complete record of proceedings consistent with the Georgia Open Meetings Law, and shall retain original applications and copies of all relevant documents. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 3, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale in unincorporated area of county; license a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may be sold in the unincorporated area of the county under licenses granted by the alcoholic beverage control board upon the terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(b)  Malt beverages and wine for consumption off premises may be sold in the unincorporated area of the county by the package under licenses granted by the alcoholic beverage control board upon the terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(c)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and state and federal law. 
(d)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 4, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-6. - Types of licenses to be issued. 
Only the following alcoholic beverage licenses shall be issued under this chapter: 
Class 1 - Malt beverages and wine for sale for off-premises consumption; 
Class 2 - Malt beverages and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
Class 3 - Distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
Class 4 - Wholesale dealer licenses. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 5, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-7. - General requirements for licenses. 
(a)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. County licensees are required to be familiar with and to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. All county licensees are required to obtain and maintain a county business license during the effective period of all licenses issued herein. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold in the unincorporated areas of the county, except under a license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  No outdoor signs, flyers or billboards shall be allowed anywhere in the unincorporated area of the county advertising or promoting the sale of alcoholic beverages, except for signs allowed pursuant to Georgia law regarding farm wineries and distilleries utilizing only Georgia-grown fruits and other agricultural products. 
(d)  A licensee may display at the licensee's place of business unilluminated signs, using letters not larger than eight (8) inches in height, flat against the outside of the building, below the roof line, bearing the words "liquor," "beer," "wine," "champagne," or any combination thereof, and "package store", together with the trade name of the retail dealer. In addition to such signs flat against the outside of the building, the retail dealer may display at a location on the tract of property upon which the business is located, but not affixed to the building, one (1) unilluminated sign using letters not larger than eight (8) inches in height bearing the words "package store" and the trade name of the retail dealer. 
(e)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall sell, furnish, or cause to be sold or furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to sell, serve, or furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. Licensees and their agents and employees are responsible for checking proper identification to ensure that a purchaser is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, and it shall be a violation of this chapter to reasonably fail to check such identification. For the purposes of this subsection, proper identification means any document issued by a governmental agency, which has a photograph of the person and indicates the person's date of birth. These documents shall include, but not be limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(f)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, nor shall any noticeably intoxicated person be allowed to remain upon the premises of any licensee hereunder. 
(g)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located shall comply with all county ordinances and state laws, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the state. All buildings shall be subject to inspection and approval by the county code enforcement officer or its designee, prior to final approval of a license. 
(h)  Each building in which a business will be located shall be complete and in good repair, constructed of permanent exterior materials, and be neat, clean and well maintained not only at the time of application, but continuously maintained at all times a premises is licensed, including all restrooms and sanitary facilities. In addition: 
(1)  Any exterior lighting shall be aimed at and around the premises including the parking lot and other outdoor areas so as to minimize any negative effects on neighboring properties. 
(2)  All parking areas must be maintained in good repair and in a neat and clean manner. 
(3)  Each business location shall front on a public access road, state, or county road, as provided in this chapter. 
(i)  Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. 
(j)  If the alcoholic beverage control board deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, it shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license(s) issued under this chapter. 
(k)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises or other office or headquarters located in Dade County: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine, food, fuel and other items sales separately, according to the type of license. 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports. 
(5)  Federal income tax return, with all Form 1099s. 
(6)  All invoices or other statements reflecting a record of alcohol purchases by the licensee. 
(7)  Electronic equivalents of records may be accepted, if needed, and if the county or alcoholic beverage control board agrees. 
(l)  All licensed establishments shall submit to the county at least semi-annually, on or before January 30 and July 30 of each year, or as at such other times as requested, summaries of financial records showing compliance with the required percentage sales requirements as of January 1 and July 1 respectively, together with copies of back-up documentation, or the electronic equivalent if the alcoholic beverage control board agrees. It shall be the responsibility of the licensed establishments to timely submit the required reports. 
(m)  All licensed establishments shall be subject to such inspections as the alcoholic beverage control board, Dade County Code Enforcement Officer, or law enforcement, deems necessary and appropriate in order to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(n)  Any person, including the licensee, who is engaged in selling, pouring, mixing, serving, or handling alcoholic beverages shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall apply to the alcoholic beverage control board for an alcoholic beverage service permit. The alcoholic beverage control board shall require a photo ID and make such investigation as the alcoholic beverage control board may deem necessary as to the qualification of such person before issuing an alcoholic beverage service permit to that person. This subsection is not intended to apply to persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in grocery stores from selling, stocking, or handling alcoholic beverages to be sold for consumption off premises. 
(1)  The county code enforcement officer or the alcoholic beverage control board shall arrange an investigation that shall include a GCIC (computerized) search through both Georgia and also any state where an employee holds a current driver's license, as well as a search of the GBI, and the FBI data bases. 
(2)  Applicants for an alcoholic beverage service permit shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other investigating as may be required by the alcoholic beverage control board or the sheriff. 
(3)  Such person shall not have been convicted of any violation of the laws of this state or any other state or any federal laws relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, weapons violations, or related offenses, or any offense involving moral turpitude within the past two (2) years; and shall not have had revoked, for cause, such as a violation of regulations or improper operation, within two (2) years before the date of application, any license or permit issued to the applicant by any state, county or municipality to sell pour, mix, or handle alcoholic beverages of any kind. Following any conviction of the above-listed offenses while employed, the employee and the licensee shall promptly notify the county. The alcoholic beverage control board may immediately revoke a permit and demand its surrender where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter, or becomes one (1) who adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare. It shall be unlawful for an employee whose permit has been revoked, and upon whom demand for surrender of a permit has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy the permit. 
(4)  The alcoholic beverage service permit issued to any person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age but less than twenty-one (21) years of age, shall have a distinguishing notice in color on the face of the permit indicating the age range of the employee and that the employee may not mix or pour alcoholic beverages nor be employed in any store that sells package malt beverages or wine unless there is also present a manager or person in charge who is at least twenty-one (21) years old. 
(5)  The employee who has been issued an alcoholic beverage service permit must present the permit to employer who in turn must keep a copy on file so long as it employs the employee. The permit holder should display or wear the permit at all times while on duty. The permit is personal to the permit holder who shall have the right to keep it when changing jobs and may use it simultaneously when working two (2) jobs requiring a permit. The permit shall be valid for up to three (3) years from the date of issue. 
(6)  There is hereby created a temporary alcoholic beverage service permit, effective for up to thirty (30) days, during which a new, probationary employee may work in a licensed establishment while complying with all requirements as to background checks, permit cards and training during that thirty-day period. No employee holding a temporary permit may work alone and unsupervised in any licensed establishment. The licensee shall be held strictly accountable for such probationary employee's performance and actions while holding a temporary permit and violation by such employee of any of the requirements of this chapter shall subject the licensee to fines and other enforcement procedures, including suspension or revocation of a license, as might be the case for any other violation. The county clerk or alcohol beverages control board shall issue the temporary permit which shall carry the expiration date clearly displayed. There shall be no extensions of temporary permits. 
(o)  No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who is not lawfully present in the United States or, if such person is not an individual, where the individual making the application is not lawfully present in the United States. Further, no license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who has not executed a notarized E-Verify Affidavit and is not registered to use or is not using the Federal Work Authorization Program, as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(p)  Use in any way of false, outdated or invalid documents or identification, or to fail to disclose requested or required information by any employee of a licensed establishment, shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(q)  No license shall be issued to any person owing taxes, fees, fines or other amount of money due the federal, state, or county under this chapter or any other statute or ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 6, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-8. - Regulations for the sale of malt beverages and wine for off-premises consumption. 
In addition to those regulations required of all licensees, the additional regulations pertaining to the sale of malt beverages and wine for off-premises consumption shall be as follows: 
(1)  No on-premises consumption . Persons holding a license to sell malt beverages and wine by the package shall be permitted to sell them only at retail and not for consumption on the premises. No one purchasing or obtaining malt beverages or wine by the package may open any package or container of malt beverages or wine anywhere on the premises, including but not limited to the parking lot of licensee. 
(2)  Hours of sale. No retail package dealer shall engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., on weekdays and Saturdays, and shall not permit the sale of malt beverages or wine on Sundays, Christmas Day, or any other day on which state law prohibits such sale. All persons shall be off the premises of any retail package dealer by 11:55 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, except for those retail package dealers where the sale of groceries and other non-alcoholic items constitute at least fifty (50) percent of their gross receipts annually. 
(3)  Building requirements. No license shall be granted to a retail package dealer under any provision or section of this chapter unless the front entrance to the retail package dealer outlet is clearly visible from a public street, road or highway. The front to such outlet shall have a minimum window at least three (3) feet by five (5) feet in height and width. Nothing shall be placed on or near such window so as to obstruct the view into the interior of the retail package outlet. Each retail outlet shall be lighted so that the interior of the store and outside premises are visible and fully lighted. There shall be no drive-up or drive-through sales of any malt beverages or wine by the package. Each retail package outlet shall be constructed with sufficient parking for all customers of the retail package outlet, so that no customers of the retail package outlet shall be required or permitted to park on public roads or rights-of-way. 
(4)  Distance and location requirements. No license shall be issued for the sale of wine or malt beverages for off-premises consumption in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b).; 
No license shall be issued for the sale of wine or malt beverages for off-premises consumption in or within one hundred (100) yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
a.  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale. 
b.  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for church, school, or educational purposes. 
As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of application of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(5)  Restrictions on advertising and displays. An establishment issued a license under this chapter may not display malt beverages or wine outside of the building, or within twenty (20) feet of any entrance door on the interior of the building. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 7, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-9. - Regulations for the sale of malt beverages and wine for on-premises consumption. 
In addition to those general requirements for all licenses, the regulations pertaining to the sale of malt beverages and wine for on-premises consumption shall include, but not necessarily limited to, as follows: 
(1)  On-premises consumption only. Persons holding a license to sell malt beverages and wine for on-premises consumption shall not be permitted to sell any alcoholic beverage by the package or to allow anyone to take alcoholic beverages in any form away from the building premises, except in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 which provides that notwithstanding any other contrary provision of law, any restaurant licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one (1) unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(2)  Hours for sale. Malt beverages and wine shall not be sold or served for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. until 11:55 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and excluding Christmas day. Exterior lights shall be extinguished within one (1) hour after closing, except for limited lighting necessary for security for employees and clean-up crews remaining on the entire premises including the parking lot and entire parcel of land. 
(3)  Eating establishments only. Subject to the provisions of section 6-7(l), malt beverages and wine for on-premises consumption may be sold only in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen approved by the Dade County Health Department and Code Enforcement Officer. Malt beverages and wine may only be served to those customers who also are served food to be consumed within the eating establishment. Such eating establishments will regularly serve food every hour it is open and derive at least sixty (60) percent of its gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food, and derive no more than forty (40) percent from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Building requirements. No license shall be granted for on-premises consumption unless the front entrance to the on-premises consumption outlet is clearly visible from a public street, road or highway. Eating establishments licensed to sell malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises are required to have seating for food service of at least sixty (60) patrons. 
In addition to the general building requirements, all on-premises consumption establishments shall comply with the state minimum building codes, the Life Safety Code, the accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and all applicable state and county health departments statutes, rules, and regulations. In addition, the building shall have access to a public sewer system, or such other septic system approved by the Dade County Health Department as being adequate for such eating establishment. 
Patio or open area seating shall be permitted only as allowed by the Dade County Health Department and county code enforcement officer, and further provided that the patio or open area seating is enclosed by some structure at least three and one-half (3½) feet in height allowing for non-emergency ingress/egress only through the main licensed building. 
(5)  Distance and location requirements. No license shall be issued for the sale of wine or malt beverages for on-premises consumption in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
No license shall be issued for the sale of wine or malt beverages for off-premises consumption in or within one hundred (100) yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
In special recognition of the need to police and the difficulty in providing emergency services to remote areas of the county, no license shall be issued for the sale of wine or malt beverages for on-premises consumption except for locations immediately adjacent to state highways or within two (2) miles from an exit or entrance ramp to an interstate highway. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
a.  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale. 
b.  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for church, school, educational purposes, or interstate exit or entrance ramp. 
As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of application of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(6)  Restrictions on advertising and displays. An establishment issued a license under this section may not display malt beverages or wine outside of the building, or within twenty (20) feet of any entrance door on the interior of the building. The name, brand or type of alcoholic beverage served and the price per serving may be provided to customers on a regular printed food menu. 
(7)  Minimum ages of employees. Subject to the provisions of section 6-7(n), any person, including the licensee, who pours or mixes any alcoholic beverages must be at least twenty-one (21) years old; and any person taking orders for, selling, or serving any alcoholic beverages in an eating establishment shall be at least eighteen (18) years old. 
(8)  Brown-bagging not permitted. No licensee under this section shall permit anyone from consuming or bringing onto the premises of the licensee any alcoholic beverages not purchased from the licensee at this retail consumption outlet. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 8, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-10. - Regulations for the sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption. 
In addition to those general requirements for all licenses, the regulations pertaining to the sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption shall include, but not necessarily limited to, as follows: 
(1)  On-premises consumption only. Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell any alcoholic beverage by the package or to allow anyone to take distilled spirits in any form away from the building premises. 
(2)  Hours for sale. Distilled spirits shall not be sold or served for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. until 11:55 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and excluding Christmas day. Exterior lights shall be extinguished within one (1) hour after closing, except for limited lighting necessary for security for employees and clean-up crews remaining on the entire premises including the parking lot and entire parcel of land. 
(3)  Eating establishments only. Subject to the provisions of section 6-7(l), distilled spirits for consumption on the premises may be sold only in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen which must be approved by the county health department and county code enforcement officer. Alcoholic beverages may only be served to those customers who are served food that is consumed within the eating establishment. Such eating establishment will regularly serve food every hour it is open and derive at least sixty (60) percent of its gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food, and derive no more than forty (40) percent from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Building requirements. No license shall be granted for on-premises consumption unless the front entrance to the retail consumption dealer is clearly visible from a public street, road or highway. Eating establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises, unless subject to an exception herein, are required to have seating for food service of at least sixty (60) seats. 
In addition to the general building requirements, all on-premises consumption establishments shall comply with the state minimum building codes, the Life Safety Code, the accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and all applicable state and county health departments statutes, rules, and regulations. In addition, the building shall have access to a public sewer system, or such other septic system approved by the Dade County Health Department as being adequate for such eating establishment. 
Patio or open area seating shall be permitted only as allowed by the Dade County Health Department and county code enforcement officer, and further provided that the patio or open area seating is enclosed by some structure at least three and one-half (3½) feet in height allowing for non-emergency ingress/egress only through the main licensed building. 
(5)  Distance and location requirements. No license shall be issued for the sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church, or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
No license shall be issued for the sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption in or within one hundred (100) yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
In special recognition of the need to police and the difficulty in providing emergency services to remote areas of the county, no license shall be issued for the sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption except for locations within two (2) miles from an exit or entrance ramp to an interstate highway. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
a.  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale. 
b.  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for church, school, educational purposes, or interstate exit or entrance ramp. 
As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(6)  Restrictions on advertising and displays. An establishment issued a license under this chapter may not display distilled spirits outside of the building, or within twenty (20) feet of any entrance door on the interior of the building. The name, brand or type of alcoholic beverage served and the price per serving may be provided to customers on a regular printed food menu. 
(7)  Minimum ages of employees. Subject to the provisions of section 6-7(n), any person, including the licensee, who pours or mixes any alcoholic beverages must be at least twenty-one (21) years old; and any person taking orders for, selling, or serving any alcoholic beverages in an eating establishment shall be at least eighteen (18) years old. 
(8)  Brown-bagging not permitted. No licensee under this section shall permit anyone from consuming or bringing onto the premises of the licensee any alcoholic beverages not purchased from the licensee at this retail consumption outlet. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 9, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-11. - Application and administration of licenses. 
(a)  In determining whether or not any license applied for under this chapter shall be granted, in addition to all other provisions of this chapter, the following shall be considered by the alcoholic beverage control board in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation in the community, character, and known capacity to conduct business; 
(2)  Whether or not applicant has violated any law or regulation relating to any alcoholic beverage business for which he may have previously held a license or in which he may have had an interest within the past two (2) years; 
(3)  Any manner in which the applicant conducted the alcoholic beverage business under any prior license; 
(4)  The extent of the financial interest of the applicant or any member of his or her family in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business, in that no person or family member who has any financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business in this or any other state or country shall also have any financial interest in any retail alcoholic beverage business, and no financial aid or assistance to any licensee under this chapter from any wholesaler, distributor, or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted; and 
(5)  The suitability of the premises for the conduct of an alcoholic beverage business, including its appearance, state of repair, maintenance standards, location, highway traffic problems and the difficulty or absence thereof of policing by law enforcement agencies; 
(b)  No license shall be issued, under this chapter, to any person who is, in fact, a front for any person as an initial applicant or whose license has been revoked or previously denied by the governing authority for a period of at least two (2) years, at the discretion of the alcohol board. 
(c)  The amount of initial license fees shall be set initially and from time to time by resolution of the governing authority. Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a check or cash for the full amount of the initial license fee, together with a separate check or cash for the license application, investigation, and administrative fees, and other fees which are charged to defray investigative and administrative costs (jointly "application fees"). 
(1)  If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the initial license fee shall be refunded, but the cost paid for the application fees shall be retained by the county. 
(2)  Any applicant for a license under this chapter who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this chapter shall pay an application fee of one-half the regular application fee, but shall pay a separate full initial license fee for each license. 
(3)  When an applicant is making applications for more than one (1) license at the same time, the applicant shall pay only one (1) application fee of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of a normal application fee, but shall pay a separate full license fee for each license. 
(4)  There shall be an annual license fee for each license payable in advance for the entire year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31, of each year. 
(5)  Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and an application for renewal shall be made annually on or before the first day of November each year. Any licensee must continue to annually meet the requirements set forth in this chapter in order to obtain a renewal of any license. There shall be a grace period of thirty (30) days in submitting and paying for a renewal application. Renewal applications received after November 30 shall incur a late fee of twenty (20) percent of the renewal fee as a late charge penalty with no exceptions. 
(6)  The payment of all license fees in full shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a license or a renewal unless otherwise provided by resolution of the governing authority. 
(7)  The suspension or revocation of any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall not entitle the licensee to a return of any portion of the license fees. 
(d)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files of the state crime information center for any instance of criminal activity during the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the application. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the office submitting the fingerprints. Fingerprints records which meet the requirements which were taken within one (1) year of the application shall be deemed acceptable unless the alcoholic beverage control board requires more current fingerprints for any reason. 
(e)  Any person or entity desiring to obtain an alcoholic beverage license as enumerated in this chapter, shall file with the initial application an affidavit affirming that prior to any sales or services of alcoholic beverages, all employees, managers, cashiers, and servers, or future employees, managers, cashiers, and servers will be trained in the regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages prior to being allowed to sell or serve, and that a copy of the policies and procedures for such sales and services be attached to the affidavit, which policies and procedures the employer shall prepare and promulgate to all employees, and which shall include adherence to this chapter. 
(f)  Upon a license being granted, an affidavit signed by each employee, manager, server, cashier or other person handling the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in any way, including owners who work in any premises selling alcoholic beverages, shall be filed with the alcohol board, attesting that the person has received the required training, is familiar with this chapter, and has read and agrees to follow the written policies and procedures provided to each such person. 
(g)  The intention of any person or business entity desiring to obtain an alcoholic beverage license as enumerated in this chapter shall advertise the intention to make application to the alcoholic beverage control board for the issuance of a license. 
(1)  Such advertisement shall be in such form as the governing authority may from time to time prescribe, and shall be published for at least two (2) consecutive weeks in the newspaper which shall be the legal organ of the county. 
(2)  Such advertisement shall contain a statement showing the location and name of the proposed business, and the name of the applicant. 
(3)  The advertisement prescribed in this section shall not be required of applicants for licenses where the license sought is a renewal of a prior license issued to the same applicant for the same location. 
(4)  If the same location was previously licensed to do business, but there has been a change of ownership of the business or of other interest therein, the advertisement shall be required. 
(5)  If the business ownership and location have not changed but the individual licensee has changed the advertisement prescribed in this section shall not be required again. 
(h)  A person doing business at more than one (1) establishment shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(i)  All applications by a corporation, an individual, or other business entity shall name in the application a registered agent who shall be an individual, a resident of the county at the time of serving in such capacity, and must undergo a background check to ensure that the person has not been convicted of a drug, alcohol, or gambling related offense, or any crime involving moral turpitude, within the past two (2) years, and such persons shall be available during generally accepted regular business hours to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents with respect to any license. Individuals named pursuant to this subsection will be designated to be responsible for any matters relating to the license and must remain bona fide residents of the county during all the time that such licenses and renewals thereof are in effect. The licensee shall file the name of the registered agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the alcohol board. Residency shall be proved by two (2) of the following three (3) documents: a current utility bill; a current voter registration card; or a valid driver's license. The registered agent is not required to be an employee of the licensed business but if the registered agent is also an employee, then, as for all employees, the registered agent must have a valid employee alcohol permit and meet all other employee requirements, such as training. 
(j)  Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times during the hours that the establishment is open to the public, be open to inspection by any law enforcement official, the county code enforcement officer, the county health department, or any person designated by the alcoholic beverage control board or the governing authority. 
(k)  Alcoholic beverage licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable or assignable to new owners, but where there is a change in the ownership of a business, the new owner or owners shall file an application for a new license within thirty (30) days as provided by this chapter and shall pay a new initial license fee. Changes of business interests from one (1) party at interest named in the original application to another party at interest named in the original application shall not be deemed a transfer of a license. 
(l)  In an ongoing licensed business, when there is a withdrawal, abandonment or transfer of the holder of the alcoholic beverage license, the business shall notify the county in advance if possible or at the latest immediately at the time of the change in circumstances. The new proposed individual licensee must immediately complete an application and meet all of the requirements for a license including undergoing a background check. An application fee shall be required for processing this change. In the event a business fails to timely notify the county as required, or if a new licensee applicant fails to qualify in any way for a license, the previous alcohol license, if issued to an individual who is no longer employed by the business, shall be immediately revoked and the business shall not be eligible to sell any alcoholic beverages until it meets all of the requirements of this chapter and Georgia law. 
(m)  In the case of the sudden withdrawal, abandonment or transfer of the holder of the alcoholic beverage license and upon proper and timely notification of this fact to the county, the alcoholic board may issue a temporary license to the successor in interest if such successor in interest has properly completed an application form and paid the appropriate fee. The alcoholic beverage control board must verify that the successor in interest meets the qualifications for licensure and that no ordinance violations exist. Such temporary license shall be valid for sixty (60) days or until the application for a permanent license is granted or denied by the alcohol board. A temporary license may be issued if the denial of such would create an undue hardship or cause an existing business to close. The fee for a temporary license shall be set by the governing authority and is in addition to the regular application fee. 
(n)  The application shall be in such form as shall be from time to time prescribed by the alcoholic beverage control board. The application form shall be obtained from the county clerk and filed with the alcohol board. It shall be subscribed by the applicant under oath, and shall be fully and completely executed. There shall also be attached to the application all required fees in full. 
(o)  When the advertisements required by this chapter have been published, the applicant shall obtain an affidavit of publication and shall attach the affidavit of publication to the written application for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(p)  When the verified application, affidavit of publication, and payment of the application and license fees, are submitted, the alcoholic beverage control board shall have up to forty-five (45) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. 
(1)  The alcoholic beverage control board shall refer the application to the sheriff's office and the county code enforcement officer for such investigations as are required. 
(2)  The alcoholic beverage control board may seek the advice of the district attorney or the county attorney during its consideration of the application. 
(3)  The alcoholic beverage control board shall cause an inquiry to be made into the county records to determine if the applicant, or other parties with an interest in an application for a license under this chapter, has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against other property or any other monies owing to the county, or if any taxes or assessments are owing on the property where the licensed establishment will be located. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
(q)  At the time and place that the license is to be considered by the alcoholic beverage control board, all of which meetings shall fully conform with the Georgia Open Meetings Law, the alcoholic beverage control board shall hear relevant evidence concerning the issuance of the license. 
(r)  The applicant must appear in person and may be represented by an attorney. The applicant may also have witnesses appear on the applicant's behalf. The meeting may be continued for up to ten (10) days if necessary for further investigation or clarification. At the conclusion of the evidence, and following deliberation in an open meeting, the alcoholic beverage control board shall make a decision regarding the approval or denial of the applicant's license. 
The hearing and subsequent decision shall occur as part of the agenda at a scheduled alcoholic beverage control board meeting or any continuances thereof or at a specially set called hearing. 
(s)  Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, or renewal application for any license issued under this chapter shall be unlawful, shall be just cause for a denial thereof, and may be punishable as a violation of a county ordinance or may be brought before the alcoholic beverage control board as a civil violation. If any such license has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such material omission, or untrue or misleading information shall constitute cause for the revocation of the license. 
(t)  Whenever there shall be a change in any of the facts reported to the alcoholic beverage control board in the application for a license under this chapter after such license has been granted, it shall be the duty of the licensee, within ten (10) days after such change, to report the change to the alcoholic beverage control board in writing, except that if the change of facts is a substantial change that might affect the eligibility for an alcohol license, then such change in facts shall be reported within twenty-four (24) hours by phone and immediately thereafter in person to alcoholic beverage control board. 
(u)  In addition to the provisions of this chapter, a licensee is also charged with responsibility for strictly adhering to the Dade County Adult Entertainment Ordinance and any other provisions of the Dade County Code, as well as the statutes and laws of the state and of the United States relating to the operation of the licensed business. 
(v)  Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is not in existence or not yet completed at the time of the application for the license, a conditional license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of the Dade County Code of Ordinances and Georgia law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not begun operation or has not operated or been open to the public for four (4) consecutive months. 
(w)  All applicants for licenses (in the case of pending applications) and all licensees (in the case of issued licenses) shall forthwith report to the alcoholic beverage control board any allegations of a violation of any state law or regulation or local ordinance or regulation when such allegations are made by the state department of revenue, a law enforcement officer, tax commissioner or prosecuting attorney in this state which charges the applicant or the licensee, as the case may be, with the violation of any law or regulation which could or would, in the event of a finding of guilt, result in a suspension or revocation of such license or denial or an application for such license. Similarly, an applicant or a licensee shall report to the alcoholic beverage control board all findings of such violation by any administrative agency, the tax commissioner or county which under this chapter could or would result in revocation or suspension of a license. Failure to make reports required by this section shall itself be grounds for suspension or revocation of or the denial of any application for a license as the alcoholic beverage control board shall determine. 
(x)  An applicant, by filing an application for an alcoholic beverage license, submits to all of the terms of this chapter, and agrees that the applicant will furnish such evidence, oral or written, as the alcoholic beverage control board shall find to be reasonably necessary to the determination of the application, and such applicant further agrees to continue to comply with the terms of this chapter. 
(y)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth in an act of the General Assembly known as the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Laws and Regulations 1986 Edition, as now or hereafter amended, to legalize and control alcoholic beverages, as now or hereafter amended, and those prescribed by the state department of revenue. Violation of these statutes shall be violations of this chapter. 
(z)  Application for a retail license shall be made by and the license granted to the individual or partners primarily responsible for personally supervising and conducting the operation of the business at the address specified in the application. Such individual, or, if a partnership, the partners collectively, must be regularly present on the premises during at least one-third ( 1/3 ) of the hours during which the business is open during at least two (2) months of each quarter. Any person applying on behalf of a corporation must disclose the extent of his representative capacity and the names and addresses of the officers of the corporation. The applicant must furnish the names and addresses of the owners of the premises at which the business is to be conducted and the names and addresses of all persons, firms, or corporations who have a financial interest in the ownership of the business to be conducted. An application for a manufacturing license shall provide the information requested on the form. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 10, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-12. - Special provisions for wholesalers. 
(a)  No person or entity shall sell any alcoholic beverage at wholesale unless the person or entity holds a valid and current wholesale license from the State of Georgia and from the county where the principle place of business of the wholesaler is located. 
(b)  A person or entity desiring to engage in the wholesale sale of alcoholic beverages in this county shall obtain a wholesaler license from the county and pay the license fees as set by separate resolution of the governing authority. 
(c)  No person or entity that has any financial interest, either direct or indirect, in any license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the county or in any city within the county shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale alcoholic beverage license issued by the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Farm wineries and distilleries acting as wholesalers under the provisions of Georgia law, are exempt from this provision and may, upon proper application, approval, and permitting, hold licenses as on-premises, bulk, or package sales and wholesale operations in strict accordance with Georgia law. 
(e)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler other than licensed farm wineries shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter; provided however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one (1) retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(f)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the county except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(g)  Every retailer shall maintain sufficient audit records to attribute all alcoholic beverage items for sale to a purchase from a licensed wholesaler. 
(h)  Licensed wholesalers shall only engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages during regular business hours of the retailer, Monday through Saturday, excluding Christmas day. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 11, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-13. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This chapter shall be enforced by the alcohol beverage control board, the Dade County Code Enforcement, and state and county law enforcement. Enforcement by the alcoholic beverage control board may result in additional civil fines and penalties beyond those assessed by any court. 
(b)  The alcoholic beverage control board shall have the right to make such inquiry or investigation as it may find to be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. Such investigation may consist, among other actions, of calling licensees for examination under oath, obtaining evidence under oath from other persons; their procurement of documents and records including records of the licensee, and inspection and examination of records and documents from whatever source obtainable. 
(c)  The alcoholic beverage control board shall be authorized to suspend a license previously granted under this chapter. If the alcoholic beverage control board seeks to suspend a license, the alcoholic beverage control board shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain the specifics of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least ten (10) days prior to a hearing. The licensee shall be given at least ten (10) days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  The alcoholic beverage control board, if it finds cause, shall be authorized to suspend a license in the event of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Any licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  Any licensee has knowingly allowed consumption, use, or sale of controlled substances, as defined under Georgia law, or contraband, or other illegal items on the premises, to include the entire owned parcel, by any adult or minor; 
(3)  Any licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of a county ordinance or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises, to include the entire owned parcel; 
(4)  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by the holder of a license issued under this chapter or its agents or employees, whether compensated or not; 
(5)  Any licensee has been convicted of any drug or alcohol, tobacco, or firearms related, or crime by the state or the county regarding an offense which was committed on the premises, to include the entire owned parcel, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter; 
(6)  Any licensee fails to pay any fee, tax, fine or other amount of money due to the county under this chapter or any other ordinance provision of the county; 
(7)  The performance of any act prohibited by this chapter or the failure to perform any act required by this chapter as well as the violation of any law, state or federal, relating to the business of the licensee. If such act, omission or violation is done by an agent, servant, employee, or officer of the licensee, whether paid or unpaid, the lack of knowledge on the part of the licensee or the lack of authorization for such act or omission or violation shall be no defense; 
(8)  The entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the conviction of any licensee with respect to a charge of violation of any of the laws of the United States or any state relating to alcohol, drugs, firearms, tobacco, or any crime, whether a felony or not, involving moral turpitude; 
(9)  The occurrence on two (2) or more occasions within any twelve-month period of fights, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, breach of the peace, and other similar conduct on the premises, to include the entire owned parcel, whether such conduct is committed by the licensee or by customers or others; 
(10)  Sales of alcoholic beverages to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age; or 
(11)  Any other act or omission with respect to the operation of a business licensed under this chapter which the alcoholic beverage control board shall find to be contrary to the public interest, health or welfare, or which shall render the licensee or the business location unfit for the continued operation of the business. 
(e)  In the event the alcoholic beverage control board shall suspend any license under this chapter, the suspension shall be for a period of not less than one (1) day or more than one (1) year, within the discretion of the alcoholic beverage control board. The suspended license shall be retained as revoked by the clerk until final adjudication of the suspension of the license by the alcoholic beverage control board. Any license suspended for more than one (1) year shall be considered revoked. 
(f)  Except for sales to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age, the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with this chapter. 
(g)  Law enforcement may immediately revoke a license if it is determined by law enforcement that underage persons are being provided alcohol or if there is a disturbance of the peace or any other danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, and the license shall be retrieved by the law enforcement officials and the alcoholic beverages on the premises inventoried and secured by the law enforcement officials to prevent their sale until a hearing is conducted by the alcoholic beverage control board and all state, federal, and county court charges, if any, have been resolved. The secured alcoholic beverages shall be dealt with in accordance with Georgia law. 
(h)  The alcoholic beverage control board, county code enforcement, or law enforcement shall revoke and retrieve an alcohol license in the case of there being no licensed individual available, employed or any longer connected with the business; in that case law enforcement shall ensure that no alcohol sales are made unless and until code enforcement or the alcoholic beverage control board informs law enforcement that the establishment is properly licensed. 
(i)  No applicant may apply for a license during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(j)  In the event of a first violation of this chapter and the issuance of a citation requiring an appearance in magistrate's court, any person, if convicted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, and possibly a suspension of the license to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. In the event of a second violation, the person shall be punishable by a fine of at least five hundred dollars ($500.00), not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, and possibly a permanent suspension or revocation of the license. Every day a violation continues may constitute a separate violation. An establishment which has served underage drinkers shall receive a separate citation for each underage patron served, and, if convicted, shall be fined and punished separately for each citation. 
(k)  Any fine or punishment assessed by the magistrate court, shall be separate and shall not impair or otherwise affect any actions or remedies may be taken by the alcoholic beverage control board pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 12, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-14. - Hearing; basis of determination. 
(a)  Whenever the alcoholic beverage control board finds preliminary cause to suspend or revoke any alcoholic beverage license issued under this chapter, there shall be a hearing before the alcoholic beverage control board on the matter of which at least ten (10) days' written notice shall be given to the licensee in person by a Dade County Code Enforcement Officer, by certified mail, or by sheriff's service. 
(b)  Such notice shall specify the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. At such hearing, the licensee shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney, and both the county attorney or his designee and the licensee shall have the right to present evidence under oath, introduce documentary evidence, subpoena and cross examine witnesses and generally present evidence of violation of this chapter or absence thereof. The hearing shall be conducted before the alcoholic beverage control board. 
(c)  Whether a license shall be suspended or revoked, and if suspended, for what period of time, shall be determined by the alcoholic beverage control board after consideration of the evidence in the case and in accordance with the alcohol board's finding as to the severity of the offense. Upon a determination of violation of this chapter by the alcohol board, the alcoholic beverage control board may in its discretion recommend suspension of the license for a period of time up to one (1) year and/or revocation of the license as provided in this chapter, and/or assessment of civil fines as provided in this chapter. The decision of the alcoholic beverage control board shall be conclusive unless modified by the governing authority in writing on or before the tenth day following the decision by the alcohol board. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by act or omission of the alcoholic beverage control board with respect to proceedings under this chapter may appeal to the board of commissioners of Dade County by filing such appeal with the county clerk of Dade County within fifteen (15) days of the decision or action. Such appeal shall be based upon the record previously considered by, and submitted to the alcoholic beverage control board. Further appeal shall be to the Dade County Superior Court provided such appeal is filed with the Dade County Superior Court Clerk within thirty (30) days of the final decision of the Dade County Board of Commissioners. If the applicant/licensee does not file an appeal to the Board of Commissioners or to the Dade County Superior Court within the periods provided, then the decision of the of the alcoholic beverage control board or board of commissioners of Dade County shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 13, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-15. - No new license to be issued after revocation. 
When a license has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter, no application for a new alcoholic beverage license for the same location by a different and unrelated owner following the sale of the business will be received for a period of thirty (30) days and no application for a new license from the licensee involved shall be received for a period of two (2) years in accordance with the provisions of section 6-11(b). 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 14, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-16. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any licensed establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedy or prosecution of a criminal action, the county may seek injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate relief in superior court or any courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a place for the sale of alcoholic beverages contrary to the provisions of this chapter, to enjoin, or prevent a violation of any provision of this chapter. Such action may also seek civil fines at the mandatory rates specified in this chapter for violations, and may additionally seek the costs of restitution, and any other costs associated with the action to enjoin or prevent any violation of any provision of this chapter. The county shall be entitled to its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs for bringing an action in superior court or any other court wherein any relief is granted or fine assessed. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 15, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-17. - Signage required. 
(a)  At any establishment subject to this chapter there shall be posted conspicuously at or near each entrance of the establishment, a sign which shall state the following: 
"DADE COUNTY AND THE STATE OF GEORGIA REQUIRE YOU TO BE 21 YEARS OF AGE IN ORDER TO PURCHASE AND CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, AND TO PROVIDE PROPER PROOF OF AGE PRIOR TO PURCHASE. PLEASE HAVE YOUR IDENTIFICATION READY TO PRESENT TO THE SERVER, MANAGER OR CASHIER. PERSONS PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION WILL BE PROSECUTED." 
(b)  Further, retail consumption dealers shall post, in a conspicuous place, a sign which clearly reads: 
"WARNING: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." 
(c)  Each person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall display the license prominently at all times on the premises for which the license is issued. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 16, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-18. - Excise taxes. 
(a)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three (3) percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee licensed under this chapter, and such licensee shall remit the same to the county on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the county to the same extent as required of cash sales. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under part V of the Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now written or hereafter amended provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied pursuant to this chapter, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable pursuant to this chapter, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three (3) years. 
(b)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon wholesale dealers selling malt beverages or wine to retail dealers in the unincorporated areas of the county, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each such wholesale dealer the following excise taxes: 
(1)  Upon the sale of any beer or malt beverages there is imposed an excise tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve-ounce container and six dollars ($6.00) for each container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons and in similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes as follows: 

 
(2)  Upon the sale of any wine there is imposed an excise tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  No county excise tax shall be imposed, levied, or collected in any portion of a county in which a municipality within the county is imposing the same tax. 
(d)  The excise taxes imposed shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the county by the tenth day of each month, based upon the units of beer and wine sold during the previous month. The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments and shall render a sworn statement of the records accompanying the monthly report to the county. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(e)  Wholesalers collecting excise taxes shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
(f)  Determination of deficiencies. 
(1)  If the county has cause to believe that the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly period(s). 
(2)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. 
(3)  The county shall give to the licensee or wholesaler written notice of its determination regarding a deficiency. The notice may be served personally or by mail, if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the county. Service by mail is complete when mailed with a certificate of service stamped thereon and a copy retained in county files or when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(4)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within thirty (30) days after the tenth day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within thirty (30) days after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(g)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  If any licensee or wholesaler fails to make a return, the county shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the county official. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed above. 
(2)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(h)  Any licensee or wholesaler which fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the county within the time required shall pay a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the tax owed in addition to interest as set forth above. 
(i)  The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the county, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the license of the delinquent taxpayer. The governing authority shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person or persons having possession or custody of information relating to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 17, 4-6-2017) 
Sec. 6-19. - General provisions. 
(a)  If any of the provisions of this chapter, or the application of this chapter to any person or circumstance, shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of such other provisions of this chapter. To this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(b)  Any modification of Georgia laws and regulations which would effect a change in the provisions of this chapter are hereby incorporated herein by reference made a part hereof. 
(c)  All laws and ordinances, or parts thereof, which conflict with this chapter, are repealed. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(e)  The ordinance from which this chapter derives shall take effect and shall be enforced from and after the date of its adoption. 
(f)  Those licenses previously issued by the alcoholic beverage control board still in effect at the time of the adoption of this amendment shall remain in full force and effect, but shall be administered in accordance with this amendment. All license renewals will be applied for and administered in accordance with this chapter amendment. 
( Ord. No. 04-06-17 , § 18, 4-6-2017) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all of the unincorporated areas of the county and no business or establishment shall be undertaken, commenced or maintained without prior approval and authorization pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 1.03) 
Sec. 10-32. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article include to: 
(1)  Establish rules, regulations, procedures and standards for the licensing of adult entertainment establishments. 
(2)  Foster and preserve the public health, safety, comfort and welfare, and to aid in the harmonious, orderly, aesthetically pleasing and socially beneficial development of the county. 
(3)  Regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse affect on property values and on the public health, safety and welfare of the county, and on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. 
This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests, reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 1.04) 
Sec. 10-33. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners finds that many types of criminal activity may be engendered by the types of activities which are regulated in this article. These criminal activities are a drain on law enforcement resources. A consequential result of such criminal activity is the decline of county neighborhoods and property values. In looking to neighboring jurisdiction, the board of commissioners recognizes the detrimental and deleterious effects brought about by these activities. The board of commissioners finds it to be in the public interest to vigorously, within the bounds of the law, regulate and control adult entertainment establishments to avoid, to the extent possible, the undesirable consequences of such activities. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 1.05) 
Sec. 10-34. - Unlawful operation. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted on any premises which does not comply with all zoning, building code, fire and other ordinances and laws of the county and the state or with any restrictive covenants that may apply to the property where such establishment may be located. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 1.06) 
Sec. 10-35. - Responsibility for interpretation. 
If any question arises concerning the application of the rules, regulations, definitions or any interpretation of any provision of this article, the license review board shall be responsible for such interpretation. An applicant or licensee may appeal the interpretation of the license review board in accordance with the provisions in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 1.08) 
Sec. 10-36. - Order of governance. 
Whenever the provisions and requirements of this article, or of any rule, regulation or order pursuant to this article, are more restrictive than those under any other statute, law, rule, regulation, ordinance or order of the county, state or the United States, the provisions and requirements of this article, then the rules, regulations and orders pursuant to this article shall govern to the extent permissible by law. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, law, rule, regulation, ordinance or order of the county, state or the United States are more restrictive than this article, or any rule, other statute, law, rule, regulation or order pursuant to this article, then the provisions of such other statute, law, rule, regulation ordinance or order shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 1.09) 
Sec. 10-37. - Existing establishments. 
All existing adult entertainment establishments shall obtain a license and comply with all the terms of this article within thirty (30) days of adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 1.10) 
Sec. 10-38. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade from books, printed material, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising at least five percent (5%) of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials, or at least five percent (5%) of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means an establishment, other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business or establishment that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel whose primary purpose, along with lodging, is the presentation of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons in such theater. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons in such theater. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade in videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising at least five percent (5%) of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent (5%) of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Applicant means any person who has made application under this article for a license or a work permit. 
Bathhouse or massage parlor means an establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but they shall not include a discharge under provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 42, ch. 8, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-44 et seq.), commonly called the state first offender act. 
Community center means a place established and maintained in a community where local residents gather or meet for recreational, social, political or community purposes. Community center may include a local community volunteer fire department if the uses of such comply with this definition. 
Community club means a place where any club, group, organization or association devoted to fraternal, charitable or other purposes which benefit the public meet on a regular basis. 
Distance and measurement mean the measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment (or if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point at ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry perpendicular to the ground level) to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, park, residence, hospital or other facility in issue. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, park, residence, hospital or other facility in question. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau, introduction service means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, profit or other consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Health department means the county health department and the state department of human resources. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the regulations for individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state historic preservation program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved history preservation programs. 
License review board means the board established under this article for the purpose of issuing licenses and work permits and reviewing and regulating adult entertainment establishments under the terms of this article. 
Minor , for the purpose of this article, means any person who has not attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
Park means any land or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by any county, city or federal government or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, including a government corporation, partnership, association, county, municipality, commission or political subdivision or any agency of any other state or of the federal government. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex or other multifamily housing for human dwelling, whether occupied or not, or any property zoned therefor or set aside for such use by restrictive covenants which apply to the property. 
School means a state, county, city, church or other school, public or private, which teaches the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of the state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: 
a.  Anilingus; 
b.  Buggery; 
c.  Coprophagy; 
d.  Coprophilia; 
e.  Cunnilingus; 
f.  Fellatio; 
g.  Necrophilia; 
h.  Pederasty; 
i.  Pedophilia; 
j.  Piquerism; 
k.  Sapphism; 
l.  Sodomy; 
m.  Zooerasty; 
(2)  A depiction of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or the female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 2.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-39. - Lighting. 
All areas of a licensed adult entertainment establishment shall be fully lighted both inside and outside at all times when patrons are present or when the establishment is open for business. Illumination shall be equal to three and one-half (3½) footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, §§ 2.02(8), 11.03) 
Sec. 10-40. - Admission of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or adult entertainment establishment licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors or allow a minor to remain within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 3.01) 
Sec. 10-41. - Sales to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or adult entertainment establishment licensee to sell, exchange, barter, trade, give or offer to sell, exchange, barter, trade or give to any minor any entertainment, service, material, device or thing offered for sale, or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 3.02) 
Sec. 10-42. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities shall be prohibited on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment: 
(1)  No person or licensee shall conduct any illegal activity in or upon the premises. 
(2)  No person or licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or seminude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between the patron and the employee. 
(3)  No person or licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities set forth in this section. 
(4)  No person or licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into such person's vagina or anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(5)  No person or licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
(6)  No person or licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit a clothed or an unclothed erect penis. 
(7)  No person or licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
(8)  No person or licensee, while on any licensed premises, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view, with less than full opaque covering, their genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(9)  No person or licensee, while on a licensed premises, shall be permitted to dance or perform nude or seminude in such a manner as to simulate or engage in sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or any other person. 
(10)  No person or licensee, while on a licensed premises, shall, while nude or seminude, be permitted to sit upon or straddle the leg, lap or body of any patron, spectator, employee or other person therein, or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by such patron, spectator or any other person. 
(11)  No person or licensee shall suffer or permit the use of any areas on the premises of such establishment for sexual contact or private dance performance, or any other form of adult entertainment as prohibited in this section. 
(12)  No person or licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces or promotes conduct or activities proscribed by this section. 
(13)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed on the premises. 
(14)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(15)  No person or licensee shall permit or suffer an intoxicated person to be present on the premises. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 3.03) 
Sec. 10-43. - Conflicts declared. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or full-time appointed county official, or any employee of the county, or employee of any elected or appointed official of the county who receives all or part of his salary from the county, or his spouse or minor child, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 8.01) 
Sec. 10-44. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person or adult entertainment establishment licensee violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(b)  Any person or licensee violating any of the provisions of this article subjects any license under this article to revocation or suspension as provided in section 10-115. 
(c)  Every violation of the terms of this article shall be deemed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued, and such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by state law. 
(d)  The violation of any provision of this article may be enjoined by proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(e)  Each violation of this article is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the right of any person from bringing any proper action for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 10.01) 
Sec. 10-45. - Criminal acts and penalties. 
The following are declared to be criminal acts, notwithstanding provisions elsewhere in this article: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to engage in any activities in violation of applicable requirements, rules, regulations, adult entertainment establishment license conditions and orders established under this article. 
(2)  It shall be a criminal violation of this article to furnish false or materially incomplete or misleading information on any application, investigation, hearing or proceeding under this article. 
(3)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate offense. At the discretion of the presiding judge, a violator of this article may be given a reasonable length of time to rectify or correct the violation. 
(4)  Jurisdiction over offenses under this article shall be in the county magistrate court. Any person violating the terms of this article, or any license condition, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 10.02) 
Sec. 10-46. - Civil action by private citizen. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent an adjacent or neighboring property owner to an adult entertainment establishment, who is damaged by a violation of this article, or any other person who would have standing, to bring a civil action for damages, injunctive relief, to abate a nuisance, for a writ of mandamus, or other appropriate relief. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 10.04) 
Sec. 10-47. - Visibility; sanitation; connection to other buildings; compatible construction. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted, operated or licensed if the adult entertainment activity inside the premises is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(b)  No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except to separate restrooms or offices, kitchens or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(c)  All premises shall be kept clean and in a proper sanitary condition. Premises shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. Cleaning shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the premises to meet the cleaning requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily, or more frequently if necessary, to prevent accumulation. The adult entertainment establishment licensee or his designee shall make sanitary inspections of the premises at least every fifteen (15) days and shall record his findings on forms supplied by the license review board. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain, in a readily accessible place, a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(d)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment shall have any interior connections or doors with any other place of business or with any place where gambling or other illegal activities are conducted, or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery or other dealings in alcoholic beverages, or for any immoral purposes. 
(e)  All premises shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to, compatible with or better than the surrounding neighborhood. The exterior of such premises shall be of finished building material such as brick, stone, steel or wood, but not concrete block. The licensee shall comply with all restrictive covenants, zoning, building, health and similar codes which may be in effect. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 11.01) 
Sec. 10-48. - Distance requirements. 
No adult entertainment establishment, business or use shall be located within the following distances: 
(1)  One thousand (1,000) feet of any residence. 
(2)  One thousand (1,000) feet of a church, school, governmentally-owned or -operated building, library, civic center, community center, historic structure, park, hospital, community club or prison. 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet of another establishment regulated under this article. 
(4)  One thousand (1,000) feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 11.02) 
Sec. 10-49. - Customer entrances. 
All customer entrances to an adult entertainment establishment must be clearly visible from a public street, road or highway. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 11.05) 
Sec. 10-50. - Hours of operation. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall engage in the conduct of such business except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight eastern standard time. No adult entertainment establishment shall engage in the conduct of such business on Sundays or on any state holiday. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 11.06) 
Sec. 10-51. - Change of location of building or customer entry. 
After issuance of any adult entertainment establishment license, no change in the location of the building on the premises or customer entry locations shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirements set forth in section 10-48. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 11.07) 
Secs. 10-52—10-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE REVIEW BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-136 et seq. 

Sec. 10-71. - Creation; terms of office; chairperson. 
The license review board is created to receive and consider applications for licenses to operate adult entertainment establishments and work permits for employees of such entertainment establishments. The license review board created by this section shall be the same board as the alcoholic beverage control board previously established by the alcoholic beverage control ordinance, § 6-31 et seq., of the county code of ordinances, and shall have the same composition, tenure, method or appointment, chairman, and clerk, as the alcoholic beverage control board, and shall be for all intents and purposes the same board, but with the additional powers, duties, and responsibilities as provided under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 6.01; Ord. No. 10-30-07(a), 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 10-72. - Powers and duties. 
The license review board shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities granted in this article by the terms and provisions of this article and all such powers and authority as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the responsibilities set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 6.02) 
Sec. 10-73. - Application for injunctive relief or writ of mandamus. 
Whenever, in the judgment of the license review board, any person has engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice which constitutes or would constitute a violation of this article, application may be made to the county superior court for an order enjoining such act or practice or for an order requiring compliance with this article. Upon a showing that such person has engaged in or is about to engage in any such violative act or practice, a temporary or permanent injunction, restraining order or other order shall be granted without the necessity of showing the lack of an adequate remedy at law. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 10.03) 
Sec. 10-74. - Appeals of decisions. 
All decisions of the license review board which result in the suspension or probation of an adult entertainment establishment license for a period of more than six (6) months, or the denial or termination of such license, may be appealed to the board of commissioners. Any appeal must be in writing stating succinctly the legal and factual basis for the appeal and must have attached a copy of the decision from which an appeal is sought. The appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of the date of the decision being appealed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. Such an appeal shall not serve as a supersedeas and the decision of the license review board shall stand until and unless it is reversed by the board of commissioners. The appeal shall not be de novo but shall be upon a review of the record of the proceedings in the license review board. If the board of commissioners finds there is any evidence to support the decision rendered by the license review board, the board of commissioners shall uphold and sustain the license review board and the decision shall stand. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 14.01) 
Secs. 10-75—10-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-96. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The following shall apply to all adult entertainment establishment licenses issued under this division: 
(1)  All licenses issued under this division shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this article and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(2)  All licenses under this division shall have printed on the front of such license the following words: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to suspension or revocation under the provisions of the Dade County Adult Entertainment Ordinance." 
(3)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(4)  No license shall be issued to any person who is less than twenty-five (25) years of age. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, operate, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises, an adult entertainment establishment without first having complied with the provisions of this article, or without a currently valid license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued under this division shall condone or make legal any activity if such activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States, or under any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the county. 
(b)  Any person desiring to apply for a license under this division must provide or comply with the following: 
(1)  All applications shall be in writing and on forms supplied by the license review board which shall be available at the county manager's office. 
(2)  The application must be sworn to by the applicant. 
(3)  Each application must be completed in its entirety before being accepted by the license review board for filing and processing. A nonrefundable investigation fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(4)  The application shall state the name and present address of the applicant; however, if the applicant has been at the present address for less than ten (10) years, the applicant must give all of his addresses for the past ten (10) years and the time periods at each address; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be conducted; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and shareholders; if other business entity, then the names of all persons holding any ownership or managerial interest in such business; and such other reasonable information as may be required by the license review board. 
(5)  The applicant must supply a certified copy of his birth certificate to establish compliance with the age requirements. 
(6)  For the purpose of this division, the term "applicant" shall include a person and, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, directors, principals and shareholders of such partnership or corporation. To prevent dummy or strawman applications, a second application must also provide all information for the spouse of an applicant. 
(7)  If the applicant, licensee or any owner of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, proof shall be submitted that such corporation is in good standing with the state. 
(8)  The names and addresses of all persons having a legal or equitable ownership interest of at least one percent (1%) in the proposed adult entertainment establishment. 
(9)  If either the applicant, licensee or any owner of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors must be stated. 
(10)  If either the applicant, licensee or any owner of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process and notices must be stated. 
(11)  If the applicant is anticipating doing or does business under a trade name, the applicant shall submit proof that the trade name has been properly recorded. 
(12)  State whether the applicant, licensee or any owner, director or officer has ever been convicted of a felony, and, if so, provide details, including, but not limited to, a certified copy of the conviction. 
(13)  The applicant and any full-time management personnel shall present themselves to furnish fingerprints to the county sheriff's office upon the filing of an application for a license under this division. The applicant and/or manager shall appear, upon reasonable notice, at the county sheriff's office for such purpose during normal business hours. 
(14)  State whether the applicant, licensee, owner, director or officer has ever been charged, cited or had suit brought against him/her for violation of any law, rule, regulation or order relating to adult entertainment establishments or alcoholic beverages and, if so, provide details, including, but not limited to, a certified copy of the citation, suit or notice of violation. 
(15)  Submit a detailed list of all judgments, during the previous seven (7) years, whether under appeal or not, which have been issued against the person or entity seeking the license, whether or not such judgments were in the state. 
(16)  Submit a detailed list of all litigations, during the previous seven (7) years, involving the person or organization seeking the license, whether or not such litigations were in the state. 
(17)  The applicant and/or manager shall submit with the application at least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant and/or manager or to any person having any interest in such applicant and/or manager, and who will not benefit financially in any way if the license is granted, and who has not been convicted of any felony of a crime of moral turpitude in the past ten (10) years. Each individual providing such character reference shall state his full name, current address, date of birth and that he/she is personally familiar with the requirements of this article for an individual giving a character reference and he/she meets such requirements. The facts stated in the character reference must be sworn to by the individual. 
(18)  Submit copies of all state and federal income tax returns for the owner, applicant and/or the licensee, for the three (3) years preceding the filing of the application. 
(19)  The application must contain the applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the five (5) years preceding the date of the application. 
(20)  A current audited financial statement prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles of the applicant, licensee and/or owner showing assets, liabilities, income, expenditures and a budget for the current year must be submitted. 
(21)  A detailed list of all facilities that the applicant, owner and/or licensee owns, operates or uses which are similar in character to the proposed adult entertainment establishment for which application has been made must be submitted. 
(22)  State whether or not the applicant, licensee, owner and/or any officer or director thereof has ever been denied a permit or license for a use or facility or proposed adult entertainment establishment similar in character to the proposed adult entertainment establishment for which application has been made and, if so, provide a written copy of the denial and state the name, address and telephone number of the person or entity which was denied such permit or license. 
(23)  All applicants for licenses under this division shall furnish plans and renderings of the interior of the proposed premises. These plans and renderings must demonstrate compliance with this article and show the square footage of the interior of the premises. 
(24)  The application shall be accompanied by three (3) certified plats prepared by a state registered land surveyor, drawn to scale, eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches in size or larger, with a scale of one (1) inch per two hundred (200) feet, showing the anticipated location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment, the boundaries of the property, the dimensions of the property, the location of all customer entrances, the names and addresses of the owners of the property and the names and addresses of all owners of all adjacent and contiguous property, the location of all existing county roads which abut the property, the location of all proposed drives, roads, parking facilities and all structures to be located on the property. The plats shall also depict, in relation and distance as measured as provided in this article, all such uses on such real property which fall within the distance requirements set forth in section 10-48, together with the present uses of all such real property, and the proposed location. 
(25)  If the applicant does not own the land upon which the proposed adult entertainment establishment is to be located, the applicant must present all information required of applicants for the owners of the premises. 
(26)  The applicant must state whether the premises proposed to be used for the adult entertainment establishment is owned or rented, and if rented, the applicant must state the applicant's legal basis for use and possession of the premises and provide copies of any and all documents establishing such legal right. 
(27)  If the proposed facility for use as an adult entertainment establishment shall seat more than fifty (50) people, the applicant must also include with the application a specific, detailed emergency operational plan developed in conjunction with the county emergency management agency, which states all measures to be taken if any emergency situation occurs such as fire, tornado or other such hazard, which may be reasonably foreseen or anticipated. Such plan shall anticipate the orderly evacuation of employees and guests. 
(28)  Applicants shall furnish all data, information and records required by the license review board, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. By filing an application, the applicant agrees to present for oral interrogation any person requested by the license review board or the county attorney who is considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce such person within thirty (30) days after being so requested, or the failure of such person to fully cooperate in providing relevant information, shall result in the automatic dismissal, with prejudice, of such application. 
(29)  Each application must be verified under oath to be true and correct if: 
a.  An individual, by the individual; 
b.  A partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  A corporation, by the president or chief executive officer of the corporation; or 
d.  Another entity, by the chief administrative official. 
(30)  The application must state that the applicant has reviewed this article and is familiar with its requirements and that the applicant shall abide by its terms and provisions. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.01) 
Sec. 10-97. - Citizenship and residency requirements. 
(a)  The following citizenship and residency requirements shall apply to all applicants for an adult entertainment establishment license: 
(1)  Where the applicant is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: 
a.  The majority shareholder thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the corporation. 
Each such person must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one (1) year prior to the application for a license. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: 
a.  The managing general partner thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time by the partnership in a managing capacity. 
Each such person must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one (1) year prior to the application for a license. 
(3)  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he/she is working full-time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full-time by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity. Each such person must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one (1) year prior to the application for a license. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer or manager or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor or other ownership entity. 
(c)  The licensee shall notify the license review board in writing and shall keep such notification current of the name, address and telephone number for all named licensees and any agents for the licensee at such address and a telephone number for the purpose of receiving communications and notices required under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.02) 
Sec. 10-98. - Disqualifications. 
No adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted where the application or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character, has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any previously issued license suspended or revoked. 
(3)  The applicant, as a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages or for an adult entertainment establishment, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten (10) year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant or any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse, shall have been convicted within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations, or for whom an outstanding warrant exists on which no service has been perfected. Where the violation is a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a county or municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the license review board or the board of commissioners, if appeal is filed, after hearing, may, after investigation, waive the violation as a disqualification. 
(5)  Any applicant, or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner or managing agent, is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the county or state. 
(6)  It reasonably appears another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license and such other person shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.03) 
Sec. 10-99. - Additional considerations. 
In addition to other requirements set forth in this division, the following requirements and conditions shall be considered in determining whether an adult entertainment establishment license may be approved, renewed, revoked, suspended or retained: 
(1)  There is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance requirements set forth in section 10-48, the type and number of schools or number of churches or other facilities in the vicinity cause minors to frequent the immediate area of the adult entertainment establishment premises. 
(2)  There is evidence that the location or type of structure creates difficulty in law enforcement supervision of the adult entertainment establishment premises. 
(3)  There is evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or where there is evidence that the proposed area is already adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(4)  There is evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(5)  There is evidence that a license in a location is detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking space. In addition to compliance with any other parking space requirements of this article, a licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the street or adjoining property. 
(6)  There is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been possessed, sold or consumed in violation of any law, rule, regulation or ordinance. 
(7)  There is evidence that the conduct of the business has violated any law or this article, creates a disturbance, results in a congregation of intoxicated or unruly persons, results in a congregation of minors, allows minors to be on the premises or to purchase, drink or possess alcoholic beverages on the premises, or is such that illegal activities have occurred on or in connection with the premises or business, or causes the sheriff's office to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. 
(8)  In addition to the conditions set forth in subsections (1)—(7) of this section, and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.  If the applicant is a previous holder of any special license under this division or of an alcoholic beverage license, the manner in which such licensed business is conducted as to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
d.  If it reasonably appears another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license and such other person shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant for a license under this division. 
A finding that any of the conditions set forth in subsections (1)—(8) of this section exist, or a violation of this or other sections of this article exist, shall be grounds for denial of an original or renewal application and shall authorize the license review board to suspend, revoke or place on probation, with or without conditions, the license or holder of an existing license. The license review board may specify conditions of operation of the licensee during any time of probation. Such conditions shall be in writing and remain on file with the license review board with a copy sent by certified mail or personal delivery to the licensee. No probation shall extend over a period of more than twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.04) 
Sec. 10-100. - Initial determination; denial; investigation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the license review board shall, within thirty (30) days, make a determination as to whether the minimum requirements for such license have been met. 
(b)  If the license review board finds that the application for a license, as submitted, would preclude the issuance of a license, then it may deny the application. The notice of denial shall state the reason for the denial. The notice shall further state the denial shall become final unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the license review board within ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice. The notice shall be delivered to the applicant either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  If the license review board finds that the application for a license, as submitted, meets the minimum requirements on its face for the approval of a license, then within seven (7) days of such determination the license review board shall notify the county sheriff to investigate the applicant and the information provided in the application and to render a report of such investigation to the license review board. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.05) 
Sec. 10-101. - Time periods. 
(a)  All adult entertainment establishment licenses must be obtained not later than two (2) weeks from the date of the approval of the application, and if not so obtained, the license granted shall become void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the license review board the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(c)  The license review board shall either issue a license or refuse to issue such license within sixty (60) days from the date an application is filed. The failure to issue such license within this time period shall be deemed a denial of such license. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.06) 
Sec. 10-102. - Mandatory denial. 
No adult entertainment establishment license shall be issued to an applicant if, within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of an application for such license, one (1) or more of the following shall have occurred: 
(1)  The same applicant for a license or renewal of such license has been rejected for such license at any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(2)  The location for such business has been rejected for any applicant. 
(3)  The applicant has withdrawn, without permission of the license review board, an application at any time within seven (7) days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the license review board unless at least one (1) year shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
(4)  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause. 
The twelve-month waiting period will not apply if the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding twelve (12) months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding twelve (12) months because of lack of qualification of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.07) 
Sec. 10-103. - Transferability. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment license shall be sold, given, transferred or assigned by any licensee or by operation of law, to any other person or entity. Any such sale, gift, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, gift, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation and one (1) or more of the partners or shareholders should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the licensee shall immediately notify the license review board. A license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. Any attempt to transfer or assign any interest as prohibited in this section, whether temporarily or permanently, and whether or not with reservation of rights, shall constitute a criminal violation of this article. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the name or location of an adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining a new license. 
(c)  If the license review board has cause to believe that a license has been assigned or transferred, or that an adult entertainment establishment has been sold, leased or has had control over it transferred, or that any such activity is about to occur, the license review board may immediately, or at any time, seek appropriate equitable and injunctive relief. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.08) 
Sec. 10-104. - Notice of intent to engage in business; hearing. 
(a)  Applicants for an adult entertainment establishment license shall give notice that application has been filed and of the purposes of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published following the filing of an application with the license review board. Such notice will be in the form specified by the license review board. 
(b)  The first advertisement shall not appear more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing for consideration of objections which may be filed. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten (10) point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one (1) inch column. The advertisement need not appear on the same day as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(c)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and the date, time and place of the hearing, and a statement that any objections to the issuance of such license must be made at or prior to the time of the hearing, and, if prior to the time of the hearing, that the objection must be in writing and received by the license review board on or before the date and time of the hearing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign stating the following: 
"Adult entertainment license applied for. Any objections to this application must be made prior to ________ ________.m., on the ________ day of ________, 20________, to the License Review Board, Justice Building, Courthouse Square, P.O. Box 613, Trenton, Georgia 30752, which is the date and time of the hearing and the address for objections. If prior to the hearing, any person shall desire to make an objection to the issuance of the license, such objections must be in writing and delivered to the license review board." 
The sign shall be at least eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoin the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of the public hearing by the license review board. 
(e)  The public hearing shall be at the time and place designated in the advertisement and notice. The license review board shall hear any and all objections which may have been filed in addition to any response that may be made by the applicant. The license review board may continue the hearing and request further information or evidence to be presented by the applicant, if necessary, to review objections which may have been raised. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.09) 
Sec. 10-105. - False information. 
Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in or omitted from an original or renewal application for any adult entertainment establishment license or work permit issued pursuant to this division shall be unlawful, shall be cause for a denial thereof and shall be punishable as a criminal violation of this article. If any such license or work permit has previously been granted under the circumstances set forth in this section, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of such license or work permit. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.10) 
Sec. 10-106. - Completion of premises. 
If a building where an adult entertainment establishment is to operate is, at the time of the application for an adult entertainment establishment license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly a compliance with all other provisions of this article. No business shall be conducted in such building until the premises has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article and the other ordinances of the county and laws and regulations of the state or federal government. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.11) 
Sec. 10-107. - Commencement of business. 
(a)  All holders of adult entertainment establishment licenses must, within three (3) months after the issuance of such license, open for business unless the time is expressly extended by the license review board. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the three-month period or the extended period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license, and no refund of the license fees shall be made. 
(b)  Any holder of a license who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall, for a period of three (3) consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall, upon completion of such three-month period, automatically forfeit the license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.12) 
Sec. 10-108. - Renewal. 
(a)  All renewals of adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be issued for a period of one (1) calendar year, running from January 1 through December 31. All licensees shall be required to renew their licenses annually and shall make such application on or before November 1 of each year. 
(b)  Any license holder, upon the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or any application for renewal of a license on an existing licensed location, shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in section 10-48. An application for renewal shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this division for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.13) 
Sec. 10-109. - Fees; period of issuance. 
(a)  The annual adult entertainment establishment license fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. Such fee may be adjusted by the board of commissioners, from time to time, by resolution. This shall not be deemed a material or substantial change in the ordinance from which this article is derived. Licenses shall be issued for a period of one (1) calendar year, running from January 1 through December 31, and not for any partial year. No license shall be issued or renewed until and unless all fees and penalties due the county are paid first. All such fees shall be paid over into the general fund of the county. 
(b)  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided in this article, any person or licensee who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the county, when payment is due, shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the required fee, tax or other charge, for each period of thirty (30) days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.14) 
Sec. 10-110. - Work permit applications. 
The following shall apply to applications for work permits: 
(1)  All applications shall be in writing and on forms supplied by the license review board at the county manager's office. 
(2)  The application must be sworn to by the applicant. 
(3)  Each application must be completed in its entirety before being accepted by the license review board for filing and processing. A nonrefundable investigation fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(4)  The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the name and address of the adult entertainment establishment where the applicant is to be employed; and the nature and character of the services the applicant is to render. 
(5)  The applicant must supply a certified copy of his birth certificate to establish compliance with the age requirements. 
(6)  For the purpose of this section, the term "applicant" shall include a person and, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, directors, principals and shareholders of such partnership or corporation. All persons connected in any manner with the rendition of services on behalf of the applicant shall file an application. A current photograph of all such persons shall be submitted with the application. The photograph shall be of good quality and shall be eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size. 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, proof shall be submitted that such corporation is in good standing with the state. 
(8)  The names and addresses of all persons having a legal or equitable ownership interest of at least one percent (1%) in the applicant shall be provided. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, state the names and addresses of all officers and directors of such corporation. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, state the name and address of the registered agent for service of process and notices. 
(11)  If the applicant, or any owner, director or officer thereof, has ever been convicted of a felony, this shall be stated on the application, and details of such conviction shall be provided, including, but not limited to, a certified copy of the conviction. 
(12)  The applicant shall submit himself to the county sheriff's office upon the filing of an application for a work permit to furnish fingerprints. The applicant shall appear, upon reasonable notice, at the county sheriff's office for this purpose during normal business hours. 
(13)  If the applicant or any director or officer has ever been charged, cited or had suit brought against him/her for violation of any law, rule, regulation or order relating to adult entertainment establishments or alcoholic beverages, this shall be stated on the application, and details of such, including, but not limited to, a certified copy of the citation, suit or notice of violation. 
(14)  A detailed list of all judgments, whether under appeal or not, which have been issued against the person or entity seeking the work permit during the previous seven (7) years, whether or not in the state, shall be submitted. 
(15)  A detailed list of all litigation involving the person or organization seeking the work permit during the previous seven (7) years, whether or not in the state, shall be submitted. 
(16)  The applicant and/or manager shall submit with the application at least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant and/or manager or to any person having any interest in such applicant and/or manager, and who will not benefit financially in any way if the work permit is granted, and who has not been convicted of any felony of a crime of moral turpitude in the past ten (10) years. Each individual providing such character reference shall state his full name, current address, date of birth and that he/she is personally familiar with the requirements of this article for an individual giving a character reference and he/she meets such requirements. The facts stated in the character reference must be sworn to by the individual providing such character reference. 
(17)  Copies of all state and federal income tax returns for the applicant for the three (3) years preceding the filing of the application shall be submitted. 
(18)  A current audited financial statement of the applicant, prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles, showing assets, liabilities, income and expenditures, shall be submitted. 
(19)  A list of all facilities that the applicant has previously worked for which are similar in character to the adult entertainment establishment for which application for a work permit has been made shall be submitted. 
(20)  The application must state the applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the five (5) years preceding the date of the application. 
(21)  If the applicant and/or any officer or director thereof has ever been denied a similar permit or a license for a use or facility or proposed adult entertainment establishment similar in character to the proposed adult entertainment establishment for which application for a work permit is being made shall be stated, and, if so, provide a written copy of the denial and state the name, address and telephone number of the person or entity which denied such work permit or license. 
(22)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records required of them by the license review board, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to present for oral interrogation any person requested by the license review board or the county attorney who is considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such work permit. The failure to produce such person within thirty (30) days after being so requested, or the failure of such person to fully cooperate in providing relevant information, shall result in the automatic dismissal, with prejudice, of such application. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 5.15) 
Sec. 10-111. - Investigation of applications. 
All applications required by this division shall be investigated by the county sheriff's office, which shall report its findings and recommendations to the license review board. No further action shall be taken by the license review board or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion of such investigation by the county sheriff's office. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 7.01) 
Sec. 10-112. - Power to inspect and investigate. 
(a)  The license review board or its authorized representative or agent, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspection and investigation of conditions relating to this article. 
(b)  The license review board or its authorized representative or agent, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter at reasonable times upon, into or through the premises of all persons or organizations subject to this article, or premises whereon a violation of this article is reasonably believed to be occurring or is reasonably believed to be about to occur, to investigate, take photographs and/or video or audio recordings, copy all records relating to this article and the purposes thereof, and inspect for compliance with the requirements imposed under this article to determine whether such a violation or threatened violation exists in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Determining whether any person or licensee subject to the requirements of this article are in compliance with any requirement imposed pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Investigating conditions and activities when the license review board is in possession of information sufficient to form a reasonable belief that a violation of this article is occurring or is about to occur; or 
(3)  Determining whether there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this article or any permit issued pursuant thereto. 
(c)  Each inspection or investigation authorized by this section shall be commenced and completed with reasonable promptness. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 7.02) 
Sec. 10-113. - Gross receipts report. 
No later than January 10 of each year, the adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a sworn report with the license review board showing the licensee's gross receipts for the preceding twelve-month period. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 2.02(1)) 
Sec. 10-114. - Maintenance of records. 
The adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and submit records of the operation and maintenance of the adult entertainment establishment concerning any matter relative to this article to the license review board upon request. All such records shall be maintained on-site and shall be available for inspection by the license review board or its agent, upon reasonable notice. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 7.03) 
Sec. 10-115. - Suspension; revocation; probation. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment license shall be suspended, revoked or placed on probation except for due cause and after a hearing before the license review board following written notice to the licensee of the time, place and purpose of such hearing addressed to the licensee at the last address which the licensee provided to the license review board, or to the address of the premises, and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held, except as otherwise provided in this section. Three (3) days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the circumstances may justify. 
(b)  "Due cause" for suspension, revocation or probation of such license shall consist of the violation of any local, state or federal laws, regulations or ordinances regulating such business or when the operation of the business has become undesirable, or for any reason which would authorize the refusal to issue or renew such license. 
(c)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be informal as compatible with justice: 
(1)  The license review board shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the licensee. The license review board shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the licensee. 
(2)  The license review board shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the licensee and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: 
a.  The county representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges. 
b.  The licensee shall then present his evidence. 
Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The licensee and county may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. The members of the license review board may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(d)  The license review board may suspend a business license or give three (3) days' notice that such license is subject to suspension when there is cause to believe grounds exist for revoking the license. This action shall be reviewed at the next regular meeting of the license review board or, at the request of the license holder, a special meeting of the license review board may be called within three (3) days after such request is filed with the license review board to affirm or refuse the suspension after the hearing of the evidence. A sworn accusation by a law enforcement officer shall be deemed due and sufficient cause for suspension. A license shall not be revoked except upon action by the license review board. 
(e)  The county manager or the sheriff may suspend a license or give three (3) days' notice that such license is subject to suspension when there is cause to believe that grounds exist for revoking the license. Such action by the county manager or the sheriff shall be reported, in writing, to the license review board at the next regular or called meeting of the license review board. If the license review board affirms the decision of the county manager or the sheriff, then the license may be revoked, suspended or placed on probation. A sworn accusation by an officer of the law shall be deemed sufficient cause. 
(f)  If a violation of any provision of this article occurs, the license review board shall issue an order directed to the licensee specifying the provisions of this article alleged to have been violated and shall direct that necessary corrective action be taken within a reasonable time to be prescribed in the order. Reasonable time shall not be more than thirty (30) days unless this would be unreasonable, and may be less than thirty (30) days if such lesser time is reasonable. The order shall state that it will become final ten (10) days after the date of receipt of such notice unless a request for a hearing is filed within that time with the license review board. Such notice shall be delivered to the licensee either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 9.01) 
Sec. 10-116. - Removal of signs. 
When any adult entertainment establishment license is revoked, all signs indicating that such an adult entertainment establishment business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises, both outside and inside, during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 9.02) 
Sec. 10-117. - Display. 
Each adult entertainment establishment licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the following inscription: 
"Dade County Adult Entertainment Establishment License No. ________, ________, Licensee." 
Such inscription shall be in uniform letters not less than three (3) inches in height. The license itself shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 11.04) 
Sec. 10-118. - Financial responsibility. 
No adult entertainment establishment license shall be issued to any person, and no facility requiring a license shall be constructed, operated, maintained, modified or sold by any person unless such person can demonstrate financial responsibility for taking corrective action and for compensating a third party for bodily injury and/or property damage in an annual aggregate amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The required annual aggregate coverage amount shall not be deemed in any way to limit the liability of the licensee, owner or operator. The licensee, owner or operator may use any one (1) or combination of the following mechanisms to demonstrate financial responsibility: 
(1)  Surety bond; or 
(2)  Irrevocable letter of credit. 
A licensee, owner or operator must maintain on file with the license review board all financial assurance mechanisms used to demonstrate financial responsibility. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 12.01) 
Sec. 10-119. - Expenses and costs. 
(a)  In addition to fees, applicants for an adult entertainment establishment license must pay costs associated with: 
(1)  Reviewing and acting upon any application for such license or renewal thereof. 
(2)  Implementing and enforcing the terms of the license. 
(3)  Notices or advertisements required by this article. 
(4)  Monitoring, investigation and enforcement of activities and facilities requiring a license. 
(5)  All costs of any hearings conducted under this division, including, but not limited to, the cost of court reporters, transcript preparation, copying and mailing by certified mail any notices, and other such costs associated with any hearing. 
(6)  All other expenses of the license review board in connection with this article and related federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and orders as may apply to the license. 
(b)  All fees collected under this section shall be paid into the county general fund. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 12.02) 
Secs. 10-120—10-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENTERTAINERS 

Sec. 10-141. - Erotic entertainment/dance establishments. 
In addition to all other provisions of this article, the following shall apply to erotic entertainment/dance establishments: 
(1)  No later than January 10 of each year, the adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a sworn report with the license review board showing all amounts paid to dancers or entertainers for the preceding twelve-month period. 
(2)  The licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers or entertainers by such licensee. 
(3)  All dancers and entertainers and all dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for such purpose which is raised at least two (2) feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(4)  No dancing or entertaining shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron. 
(5)  No dancer or entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(6)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 2.02) 
Sec. 10-142. - Solicitation of pay or gratuity. 
No dancer or entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 2.02(7)) 
Sec. 10-143. - Age and character of employees. 
Employees of adult entertainment establishments shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age and shall be of good moral character. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 4.01) 
Sec. 10-144. - Prior convictions. 
No person shall be employed in an adult entertainment establishment in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers and musicians, who has been convicted, in this or any other county or state or in any federal court, within ten (10) years immediately prior to the application for employment, of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, or any felony or crime involving moral turpitude or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been performed. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 4.01) 
Sec. 10-145. - Work permit required. 
(a)  A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall be required for all employees thereof. For the purpose of this section, independent contractors, such as entertainers, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees and shall be required to obtain work permits as employees. Each independent contractor shall be required to have and maintain his separate work permit. 
(b)  No person requiring a work permit may be employed by or work in an adult entertainment establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee for and obtained a work permit from the license review board. 
(c)  Any work permit for employment issued under this section shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, unless earlier revoked or suspended. The license review board may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employment. 
(d)  Employees holding work permits issued pursuant to this section shall at times during their working hours have such work permits available for inspection at the work premises. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 4.01) 
Sec. 10-146. - Employee list. 
It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment to file with the license review board the names of all employees, together with the employee's home address, home telephone number and place of employment. Any change in the list of employees must be filed with the license review board within three (3) days from the date of any such change. 
(Ord. of 3-1-1994, § 4.01) 
Secs. 10-147—10-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT GAME ROOMS 

Sec. 10-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Amusement game room. Any location where one (1) or more coin operated amusement machines or sweepstakes devices are located. 
Coin operated amusement machines. Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token plate, disc, slug, ticket or other similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: pinball machines; console machines; video games; crane machines; claw machines; pusher machines; bowling machines; novelty arcade games; foosball or table soccer machines; miniature racetrack, football, or golf machines; target or shooting gallery machines; basketball machines; shuffleboard games; kiddie ride games; skeeball machines; air hockey machines; pool tables or billiard tables; and any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in the state. 
Sweepstakes devices. Any computers, mechanical devices, or electronic devices which may be operated by the public generally for gaming purposes using no skill. This terms shall include anything that uses energy and is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism that can be viewed by a person in order to enter a sweepstakes or like contest, and engage in any activity or process associated with the sweepstakes or like contest, including viewing information which would notify the person that the person is eligible, will receive, or is entitled to receive a prize. Machines designated for use by the State Lottery Commission and machines falling under the definition of bona fide coin operated amusement machines under state law shall not fall under the definition of sweepstakes devices . 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 1, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-182. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any amusement game room to be operated, conducted or maintained without a license or otherwise contrary to the provisions of this article, or to receive any money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any coin-operated amusement machine or sweepstakes device. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 2, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-183. - License Review Board. 
(a)  The License Review Board established pursuant to § 10-71 of this Code, shall receive and consider applications for licenses, and issue such licenses, when appropriate, to operate amusement game rooms within the unincorporated limits of the county. The license application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant, and date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that address or place; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the county; and 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the county held by the applicant. 
(b)  Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the county official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of this article. The county shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. If any question arises concerning the application of the rules, regulations, definitions, or any interpretations of any provisions of this article, the License Review Board shall be responsible for such interpretation. Appeals of decisions of the License Review Board shall be as provided pursuant to § 10-74 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 3, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-184. - Distance. 
Every amusement game room in the county shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to see alcohol set in § 6-78. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 4, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-185. - Number of coin operated amusement machines and sweepstake devices at a location. 
No amusement game room shall offer to the public more than six (6) coin-operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 (d)(1)(B) or (C), or sweepstake devices at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 5, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-186. - Gross receipts from amusement machines and sweepstake devices. 
Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by county officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games, sweepstakes devices, and other products and services sold at the location. Income from the amusement game and sweepstakes devices shall not constitute more than fifty percent (50%) of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the fifty percent (50%) of income requirement. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 6, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-187. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following similar words: 
"Georgia law prohibits giving or receipt of any money for winning a game or games on an amusement machine; giving or receipt of money for free replays won on an amusement machine; giving or receipt of money for any merchandise, prize, toy, gift certificate, or novelty of a value exceeding five dollars ($5.00) for a single play of an amusement machine." 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the county conspicuously and permanently. The owner or operator of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 7, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-188. - Compliance with state law provisions related to master licenses and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in the amusement game room within the county only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. The county official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the State Commissioner of Revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-17-2 or 48-17-9. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 8, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-189. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  In addition to any penalties set forth in state law, any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of this Code. 
(b)  Additionally, and after a hearing before the License Review Board, the owner or operator of an amusement game room may be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First offense: suspension for not more than twelve (12) months of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game or sweepstakes device at the location where the violation occurred. 
(2)  Second offense: suspension for not more than twelve (12) months of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game or sweepstake device at the location where the violation occurred. 
(3)  Third offense: suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game or sweepstake device in the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the county for not more than six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 9, 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-190. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated amusement machines. 
The Magistrate Court of Dade County, Georgia is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any coin-operated amusement machine or sweepstakes device from any person owning or possessing such coin-operated amusement machine or sweepstakes device or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning or possessing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or sweepstakes device: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offenses: Fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-01-12, § 10, 4-5-2012) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 30; disposal of livestock feeding facility waste, § 46-50. 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOGS AND RABID ANIMALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

DIVISION 1. - VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 14-31. - Responsibility for interpretation. 
If any question arises concerning the application of the rules, regulations or any other provision of this article, the county magistrate court shall be responsible for such interpretation. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 5.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any domesticated animal, including, but not limited to, any dog or cat. 
Board means the county department of health board. 
Court means the county magistrate court. 
Dangerous dog means any dog, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, that, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property, or any dog that has entered upon the property of someone other than its owner and, without provocation, has threatened harm to any person or animal by growling or other menacing conduct, or inflicts injury to any animal, and such dangerous dog returns to such property subsequent to the lapse of 24 hours after such dangerous dog's owner has been given actual notice of such threatening or injurious conduct. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected by the board of commissioners pursuant to the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Local government means the county government or the local municipal government. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a vicious or dangerous dog or animal. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a vicious or dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent such dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height, and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection for the dog from the elements. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of: 
(1)  Any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; 
(2)  Any county or municipal animal control agency; 
(3)  Any county board of health; 
(4)  Any federal, state or local court, including, specifically, the county magistrate court; or 
(5)  A dog control officer. 
Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or a physical injury that results in death. 
Vaccination means protection against rabies by inoculation with antirabies vaccine given by a licensed veterinarian in a sufficient amount to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year. The term "vaccination" is synonymous with inoculation in this article. 
Vicious dog means any dog that, according to the records of the dog control officer or the county magistrate court: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being, without provocation, on public or private property at any time after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; or 
(2)  Bites, attacks or endangers the safety of a human being, without provocation, after the dog has been classified as a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 5.01(A), 7-6-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-33. - Exclusions. 
A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a vicious or dangerous dog. A dog shall not be a vicious or dangerous dog if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 5.01(B), 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-34. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The county's jurisdiction for the enforcement of this article shall be the unincorporated area of the county, except as otherwise provided by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The county may contract or enter into agreements with other local government entities for joint dog control services or for the provision of dog control services required by this article and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall designate an individual to carry out the duties of a dog control officer. one individual may carry out the duties of a dog control officer for more than one local government pursuant to a contract or agreement as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. The board of commissioners may assign the additional duties of dog control officer to any officer or employee of the county who is subject to the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. With the consent of the sheriff, the board of commissioners may assign the additional duties of dog control officer to the county sheriff or to a sheriff's deputy. With the consent of the county board of health and the rabies control officer, the board of commissioners may assign the additional duties of dog control officer to a rabies control officer appointed under O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7. A person carrying out the duties of a dog control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless the person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 6.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-35. - Designation of magistrate court. 
(a)  The board of commissioners designates the county magistrate court to conduct any and all hearings as may be required under the provisions of this article. The court is authorized and shall have jurisdiction to conduct such hearings and determine matters provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 and in this article. 
(b)  The board of commissioners may alternatively, by appropriate resolution, provide for the creation of an animal control board to hold the hearings provided for in this article and in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24, or may assign such duties to the county department of health board. If an animal control board is created, the animal control board may hear and determine matters provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. No member of the animal control board may participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. An animal control board may be created jointly by two or more local governments. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 6.01, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-36. - Investigation; classification. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a vicious or dangerous dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction from any person, law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, county board of health or other county officer or agency, the dog control officer shall make such investigation and inquiry with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. All calls by any person regarding an animal which is subject to this article shall first be made to the appropriate official of the county health department. If such agent shall not be available, calls may be made to the county manager's office, and if there is no one to take the call at the county manager's office, calls may be made to the county sheriff's office. 
(b)  When a dog control officer classifies a dog as a vicious dog or reclassifies a dangerous dog as a vicious dog, the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner, in writing, by certified mail, to the owner's last known address, of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification. The notice shall also state that if the owner desires to contest such classification, he/she must give notice, in writing, within ten days, and a hearing will be held in the county magistrate court. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 7.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-37. - Procedures for classification. 
(a)  The procedures provided for in this section for the owners of dangerous dogs must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this division against such dangerous dog owners. The procedures provided for in this section for the owners of vicious dogs shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article. 
(b)  When a vicious or dangerous dog is classified as such, the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(c)  The classification notice to the owner of such vicious or dangerous dog shall: 
(1)  Be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the dog owner's last known address; 
(2)  Include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a vicious or dangerous dog; 
(3)  Be dated and shall state that the dog's owner, within ten days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that such dog is a vicious or dangerous dog; 
(4)  State that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the county magistrate court and shall specify such court as the applicable agency which will conduct the hearing; 
(5)  State that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that such dog is a vicious or dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; 
(6)  Include a form to request a hearing before the court and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the court; 
(7)  Provide that the dog's owner shall submit with the written notice of appeal a check or money order in the amount of forty-nine dollars and fifty cents ($49.50) for the court costs of such appeal and a warning that the dog's owner will be liable for all costs and expenses if the appeal is denied. 
(d)  When the court receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The court shall notify the dog's owner, in writing, by certified mail, of the date, time and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog's owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and the court shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as may be reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the dog control officer's classification of such dog. 
(e)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the court shall notify the dog's owner, in writing, by certified mail, of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a vicious or dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(f)  If the determination by the court is that such dog is a vicious or dangerous dog, the owner of such dog shall pay to the general fund of the county the additional sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) within 30 days of such determination to defray the costs to the county. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 8.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-38. - Certificate of registration; insurance. 
(a)  It is unlawful to have or possess within the county a vicious or dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a vicious or dangerous dog if the owner of such dog presents to the dog control officer or the dog control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the vicious or dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the vicious or dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a vicious or dangerous dog on the property. Such sign shall substantially comply with the state department of natural resource's uniform symbol for the purpose of implementing O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(b)(2)(A). 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a vicious dog shall present to the county department of health board evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the vicious dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), or more, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state payable to any person injured by the vicious dog. 
(d)  The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if such dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold or donated. If such dog has been sold or donated, the owner of such dog shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of such dog within seventy-two (72) hours of such sale or donation. 
(e)  The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if such owner is moving the dog from this jurisdiction. The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog who is a new resident of the county shall register such dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident of the county. The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction within the state to this county shall register the vicious or dangerous dog in this county within ten days after becoming a resident of this county. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the county does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section are maintained by the owner of a vicious or dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  A dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Local law enforcement agencies of local governments and the county sheriff's department shall cooperate with dog control officers in enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(h)  There shall be an annual fee in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges in the office of the county clerk to register vicious and dangerous dogs, payable to the clerk of the board of commissioners. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, the clerk shall require evidence from the owner or the dog control officer shall make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the vicious or dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner of such dog is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(i)  The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog who desires to give away or donate such dog to another must first inform the other party of the dog's status under this division. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 9.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-39. - Restraint. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to permit such dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless such dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 10.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-40. - Confiscation; extermination. 
(a)  A vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer, law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the dog control officer, if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by section 14-38(c); 
(2)  The dog is not validly registered as required by section 14-38; 
(3)  The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 14-39(a). 
(b)  A dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as set forth in subsection (a) of this section for a vicious dog, if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by section 14-38; 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 14-39(b). 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(d)  The dog control officer, the rabies control officer or any county agent, officer or employee shall be authorized to exterminate any rabid animal found within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 11.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-41. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Jurisdiction over the criminal offenses set forth in this article may be in the county magistrate court. Any person violating the terms of this article may be punished, for each offense, by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail, not to exceed 12 months. The sentence imposed may also include any restitution due to any victim of the vicious or dangerous dog together with any restitution due to the county. Prosecution under this section is not exclusive. Any person violating this article or the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. may be prosecuted in either the county magistrate court or the county superior court. 
(b)  The owner of a vicious dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 14-38 or 14-39, or whose vicious dog is subject to confiscation under section 14-40(a), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for the second conviction a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed. 
(c)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 14-38 or 14-39, or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 14-40(b), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be imposed. 
(d)  If an owner of a dog who has a previous conviction for a violation of this article or a previous conviction for violating the criminal provisions order of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28, knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this article, and if the owner's vicious or dangerous dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this article, then, in addition to any penalties provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28, the vicious or dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer, law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the dog control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health, and, thereafter, the vicious dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner of the vicious or dangerous dog shall be liable for all reasonable costs associated with the enforcement of this subsection. 
(e)  No owner of a vicious dog shall be held criminally liable under this article for injuries inflicted by such owner's dog to any human being while on the dog owner's property. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false report of a vicious or dangerous dog to any local government agency or official. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 13.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-42. - Authority to go upon private property. 
Employees and agents of the county, and persons acting under their direction, control or supervision, shall have the right to go on private property within the unincorporated areas of the county to the extent that it is reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 14.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-43. - Supplement to state law. 
(a)  The provisions of this article are in addition to and supplementary to any previously existing laws of the state, and shall not be construed to supersede such previously existing laws. 
(b)  It is the intention of this article to establish minimum standards and requirements for the control of vicious and dangerous dogs and to provide for certain crimes for violations of such minimum standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 15.00, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-44. - Liability for damages. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the owner of a vicious or dangerous dog, rabid animal or uninoculated animal shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog or animal. Under no circumstances shall the county or any employee or official of the county, or any cooperating local government which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a vicious or dangerous dog, or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a vicious or dangerous dog, or by a dog that the county has failed to identify as a vicious or dangerous dog, or by a dog which has been identified as being a vicious or dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner set forth in sections 14-38 and 14-39, or by a vicious or dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in section 14-38(c), or by a rabid or uninoculated animal. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 16.00, 7-6-1995) 
Secs. 14-45—14-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 14-66. - Inoculation; tags. 
(a)  All domestic pets within the unincorporated area of the county over 90 days old shall be inoculated annually so as to provide immunity from rabies for a period of at least one year. All inoculations shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian or an authorized representative of the county department of health. All domestic pets over 90 days old must have a rabies tag. 
(b)  Rabies tags and a certificate of inoculation will be provided by a veterinarian upon inoculation of a domestic pet and collection of the fee as prescribed by the board of commissioners. The veterinarian shall remit the fees collected to the county on a monthly basis. The application for the rabies tag shall state the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, age, color and sex of the domestic pet. The rabies tag shall expire on March 31 of each calendar year and shall be renewed on or before April 1 of each year. Each rabies tag shall be so contrived as to permit it to be securely attached to the domestic pet's collar or harness and shall have its respective number, the year in which it was issued and the words "Dade County" indented and impressed thereon. The design or color of the rabies tag shall vary from year to year to permit easy ascertainment as to whether the tag is current. 
(c)  The fee charged for such rabies tag shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. The fee may be changed by the board of commissioners by appropriate resolution. 
(d)  A valid rabies tag shall be securely attached to the domestic pet's collar or harness, which collar or harness must be secured to and on the domestic pet at all times and it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of such domestic pet to see that the rabies tag is so attached and secured at all times. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, §§ 12.00(A)—(C), (E), 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-67. - Confinement; surrender of suspicious domestic pets. 
A domestic pet that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every domestic pet bitten by another domestic pet afflicted with rabies or that has been exposed to rabies shall be confined at once in a secure place by the owner or keeper of such domestic pet. A person who knows or has reason to know a domestic pet is infected with rabies or has been exposed to rabies shall immediately notify the dog control officer, the local health department or the county sheriff's department as to the place where the domestic pet is confined and shall surrender such domestic pet to the proper authorities. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 12.00(D), 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-68. - Notification; observation. 
The owner of a domestic pet that bites or scratches a person shall promptly notify the rabies control officer of the county health department. A domestic pet that bites or scratches a person shall be securely confined by its owner for not less than ten days or for such longer period as may reasonably be required by the rabies control officer. The owner of a domestic pet that bites or scratches a person shall surrender such domestic pet to the rabies control officer or dog control officer if the dog control officer shall deem it necessary to impound such domestic pet for a period of observation. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 12.00(F), 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 14-69. - Responsibility for impoundment costs. 
If a domestic pet is impounded as set forth in section 14-68 at a place other than the property of the owner, all reasonable and necessary expenses of such impoundment shall be borne by the owner of such impounded domestic pet. 
(Ord. No. O-1-95, § 12.00(G), 7-6-1995) 
Secs. 14-70—14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-91. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Animal means any live creature, both domestic and wild, commonly kept as a pet, including but not limited to, dogs and cats. The term shall not include any fish or any pest that might be exterminated or removed from a business, residence, or other structure. 
Adequate food and water means food and water sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from lack of food and water. 
Adequate ventilation means indoor housing facilities for pets which are adequately ventilated to provide for the health of the animals at all times. Such facilities must be provided with fresh air either by means of windows, vents, fans, or air conditioning, and should be ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors, and moisture condensation. 
Cruelty to animals means actions or omissions causing unjustifiable physical injury, pain, suffering, or death of an animal, including the failure to provide adequate food, water, ventilation, and sanitary conditions for animals, and that are inconsistent with what a reasonable person of ordinary knowledge would believe is the normal requirement and feeding habit for such animal's size, species, breed, age, and physical condition. 
Sanitary conditions means conditions of good order and cleanliness, and to the maximum degree practical, remove and destroy agents injurious to health. 
( Ord. No. 09-03-15 , § 1, 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 14-92. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 
(1)  Committing cruelty to an animal as defined in this article; 
(2)  Leaving an animal in a parked vehicle when temperatures inside the vehicle may adversely affect the animal's health and welfare; or 
(3)  Leaving an animal in any vehicle where it must stand, sit, or lie on extremely hot or cold surfaces, including but not limited to truck beds. 
( Ord. No. 09-03-15 , § 2, 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 14-93. - Enforcement of this article. 
The county animal control officer and other county law enforcement officers are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon in violation of this article. The animal control officers and the appropriate enforcement officers of the county are further authorized to take all steps that are reasonably necessary for the removal of any animal from a parked vehicle in violation of this article by any reasonable means under the circumstances after making reasonable efforts to locate the owner of the motor vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 09-03-15 , § 3, 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 14-94. - Penalties. 
In addition to penalties which may be imposed under state law for the violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4, any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in section 1-19 of the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia. In the event any provision of the article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation. Such penalties may also include, but not be limited, the forfeiture of such animals seized as part of the enforcement of this article and the restitution to the county for costs incurred in impounding the seized animals. 
( Ord. No. 09-03-15 , § 4, 9-3-2015) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood control, ch. 26; duties and responsibilities of the county building inspector, § 26-48; health and sanitation, ch. 30; roads, ch. 38; signs, ch. 42; signs of work under construction, § 42-38; solid waste, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 18-31. - Required. 
Any person desiring to construct, repair, enlarge, alter, improve, move or demolish any building or structure in the county, or to locate or relocate a mobile home or existing building or structure within or without the county, shall first be required to obtain a county building permit from the county building inspector. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1973) 
Sec. 18-32. - Examination of plans and specifications. 
The county building inspector shall examine all plans and specifications for any proposed construction when application is made to him/her for a building permit. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1973, § I) 
Sec. 18-33. - Ensuring safety from flooding. 
The county building inspector shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that is a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement, including prefabricated and mobile homes, must: 
(1)  Be designed, or modified, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Use construction materials and utilize equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and 
(3)  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1973, § II) 
Cross reference— Flood control, ch. 26. 
Sec. 18-34. - Minimization of flood damage and flood hazard. 
The county building inspector shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to ensure that: 
(1)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1973, § III) 
Cross reference— Flood control, ch. 26. 
Sec. 18-35. - Design of water, sewage and waste disposal systems. 
The county building inspector shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into such systems and discharges from such systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment of such systems or contamination from such systems during flooding. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1973, § IV) 
Secs. 18-36—18-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County electrical inspector means any person employed by the county manager to perform the inspections and other duties required by this article. Such person shall have a minimum of four (4) years' experience in residential and commercial electrical wiring. 
Manufactured home (mobile home) means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in such structure. Manufactured homes and mobile homes shall have the same meaning and shall be used interchangeably in this article. 
Modular home means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of building units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation as a permanent structure with the appearance of a conventional on-site constructed building and to be used for residential purposes. A modular home is not a mobile home. 
Structure means any building of any kind, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Conventional on-site constructed buildings; 
(2)  Conventional dwellings; 
(3)  Duplexes; 
(4)  Apartments; 
(5)  Commercial buildings; and 
(6)  Manufacturing facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-2-97, § I, 9-4-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-67. - Code adopted. 
For the purpose of establishing uniform rules and regulations to govern the electrical wiring of all structures in the county, the most recent edition of the National Electrical Code, with any amendments thereto, as adopted from time to time by the State of Georgia is adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-2-97, § II, 9-4-1997; Ord. No. 04-05-07, 4-5-2007) 
Sec. 18-68. - Compliance with code. 
After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall be unlawful to install, construct, alter or repair the electrical wiring in any manufactured home, modular home or new structure in the unincorporated areas of the county in violation of, or without complying with, the regulations set forth in the most recent edition of the National Electrical Code, with any amendments thereto, as adopted from time to time by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-2-97, § III, 9-4-1997; Ord. No. 04-05-07, 4-5-2007) 
Sec. 18-69. - Inspection prior to service. 
(a)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, suppliers of electrical power shall not provide temporary electrical service to any construction site for any proposed structure requiring electrical power until such time as the county electrical inspector has inspected and approved the electrical service entrance from the power supplier's point of attachment to the customer's temporary breaker box. The inspection and approval shall be evidenced by the attachment of a numbered, signed and dated county electrical inspection certificate to the meter base. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, suppliers of electrical power shall not provide permanent electrical service to any structure requiring electrical power until such time as the county electrical inspector has inspected and approved the electrical service entrance from the power supplier's point of attachment to the customer's breaker box. The inspection and approval shall be evidenced by the attachment of a numbered, signed and dated county electrical inspection certificate to the meter base. 
(c)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, suppliers of electrical power shall not provide electrical service to any manufactured home or modular home requiring electrical power until such time as the county electrical inspector has inspected and approved the electrical service entrance from the power supplier's point of attachment to the customer's breaker box. The inspection and approval shall be evidenced by the attachment of a numbered, signed and dated county electrical inspection certificate to the meter base. 
(d)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, temporary and/or permanent electrical utility connections for structures, manufactured homes or modular homes which are subject to the terms of this article are prohibited until such time as a duly authorized county electrical inspection certificate is affixed to the meter base by the county electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-2-97, § IV, 9-4-1997) 
Sec. 18-70. - Enforcement. 
The county manager or the county electrical inspector shall receive applications for electrical hookup inspections, conduct inspections, issue certificates, furnish the prescribed inspection certificates and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2-97, § V, 9-4-1997) 
Sec. 18-71. - Application for inspection; fees. 
(a)  Prior to beginning construction on any structure requiring electrical power, the owner thereof must file an application with the county manager for the required electrical inspection. Applications shall be made on forms furnished by the county manager. Fees for the required inspection shall be established by the county manager. 
(b)  Prior to installing any manufactured home or modular home requiring electrical power, the owner thereof must file an application with the county manager for the required electrical inspection. Applications shall be made on forms furnished by the county manager. Fees for the required inspection shall be established by the county manager. 
(Ord. No. O-2-97, § VI, 9-4-1997) 
Sec. 18-72. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a determination of the county electrical inspector or county manager may, within ten (10) days from the date of such determination, file a written notice of appeal with the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners, after giving adequate notice, shall offer the aggrieved person a public hearing. At the hearing, the county electrical inspector or county manager shall present evidence and the aggrieved person may present evidence. At such hearing, the board of commissioners shall either confirm, modify or set aside the determination of the county electrical inspector or county manager. Any such ruling shall be in writing and a copy shall be served on the aggrieved person by registered or certified mail. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners may appeal such decision to the county superior court by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk of the superior court within ten (10) days from the date of issuance of the written decision of the board of commissioners. Such appeal shall be heard by the judge of the county superior court at such time and at such place as the judge may designate within his lawful authority under the constitution and the laws of the state, and the superior court judge may affirm, amend, remand or reverse the order or decision of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. O-2-97, § VII, 9-4-1997) 
Secs. 18-73—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 18-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a mobile or re-locatable home transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the travelling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling or office with or without a permanent foundation; except that such term shall include any structure that meets all of the requirements set forth herein except the size requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Owner means any joint or sole owner of any legal or equitable interest in any mobile home located in the county during any portion of the year. However, excluded from this definition are dealers in mobile homes that engage in the business of selling mobile homes at a business location (so long as such business is engaged solely in the business of locating, selling, transporting, repairing and setting up or installing mobile homes); further excluded from the definition of owner are those owners who are transporting a mobile home through the county (so long as the mobile home is not located in the county for more than one (1) day). 
(Ord. No. 02-05-09, § 1, 2-5-2009) 
Sec. 18-82. - Planning rules not affected. 
The completion of an application under the provisions of this article and/or the issuance of a permit or decal shall in nowise be construed as superseding any requirement as may be contained within other county ordinances or regulations now existing or that may be adopted or amended in the future by the county or any of its boards, agencies, or officers for the location or relocation of a mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 02-05-09, § 2, 2-5-2009) 
Sec. 18-83. - Application requirements. 
(a)  No person shall own or have located within the county any mobile home unless the application available at the office of the tax commissioner shall have been completed for each mobile home owned by such person. 
(b)  No person shall relocate any mobile home into the county without having made such application unless such person has presented to the tax commissioner the certificate required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-495. 
(Ord. No. 02-05-09, § 3, 2-5-2009) 
Sec. 18-84. - Requirements of mobile home park owners and operators. 
(a)  Every owner and operator of a mobile home park is required to give the tax commissioner a written inventory of all mobile homes located in the park as of January 1 of each year. This shall be done no later than January 20 of each year. The tax office will make available an inventory of record as of January 1. 
(b)  Every manager, owner or operator of a mobile home park is required to report in writing to the tax commissioner any mobile home removal from the park prior to the mobile home's being removed, if known to the park manager, operator or owner; if not known, the manager, owner or operator shall report such removal in writing to the tax commissioner within ten (10) business days after such removal. 
(c)  Every owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park shall furnish to the tax commissioner an updated lot map at each park showing all changes in ownership of mobile homes on each mobile home lot by January 1 of each year. 
(d)  Owners of mobile homes locating their mobile homes in the county after January 1 of any year are required to report their mobile homes in writing to the tax commissioner's office within ten (10) business days after the location of such mobile home in the county. 
(Ord. No. 02-05-09, § 4, 2-5-2009) 
Sec. 18-85. - Decal location requirements. 
(a)  All persons owning a mobile home located in the county on January 1 of each year are required to obtain from the tax commissioner a decal before May 1, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493. This requirement shall include all mobile homes even if exempt from taxation because of homestead exemption or in accordance with state law. 
(b)  The decal shall be displayed on the outside of the mobile home that faces the nearest driveway, road or street. 
(Ord. No. 02-05-09, § 5, 2-5-2009) 
Sec. 18-86. - Penalties and procedures. 
(a)  Any person who shall do any act prohibited in any section of this article or who fails to do any act required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. 
(b)  Any owner, whether sole, joint or otherwise, of any legal or equitable interest in any mobile home is responsible for compliance with this article; and any such owner can be charged individually or jointly for noncompliance with this article with any owners. 
(c)  Upon a violation of any section or subsection of this article (except that requiring the obtaining of a decal), summons may issue and be served by personal service or tacking upon the door of the mobile home. This summons may provide that a hearing will be held, may list the address of the property, and may require the adult addressees domiciled in the mobile home to appear in court to answer the delinquency in ad valorem tax payment. Such addresses may be required in the summons to be and appear in magistrate court of the county to answer the summons and show cause why they should not be required to pay the fines set and comply with the provisions of this article. In lieu of such court appearance, the addressee may pay such delinquent ad valorem tax and pay a fine in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each year of noncompliance. The addressee shall provide written evidence at such hearing of the ownership of the mobile home, together with the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners of the mobile home. If no evidence of ownership is produced at the hearing, the hearing may be continued in the discretion of the magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 02-05-09, § 6, 2-5-2009) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the functions listed in this definition. 
(Res. of 12-2-1991, § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 22-31. - Established; duties. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is established the Trenton/Dade County Emergency Management Agency. The county commissioner, with concurrence of the mayor of the City of Trenton, shall nominate for appointment by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county and cities therein on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the Trenton/Dade County plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the City of Trenton for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by county and city governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of county and city governing officials, a facility to be used as the Trenton/Dade County Emergency Operation Center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Res. of 12-2-1991, § II) 
Sec. 22-32. - Department assignments. 
The Trenton/Dade County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing county and city departments and the emergency functions listed in section 22-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of departments set forth in the table in this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local emergency operations plan for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Res. of 12-2-1991, § III) 
Sec. 22-33. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the county commissioner jointly with the mayor of the City of Trenton, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, probate judge and vice-mayor, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the power to: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  Seize or take temporary use of any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Res. of 12-2-1991, § IV) 
Sec. 22-34. - Compensation; volunteers. 
All persons other than officers and employees of the county and cities therein, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county and city officers and employees. 
(Res. of 12-2-1991, § V) 
Sec. 22-35. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Res. of 12-2-1991, § VI) 
Secs. 22-36—22-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS) 

Sec. 22-41. - Adoption of NIMS. 
The county hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5, and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57, as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents. The county directs all incident managers and response organizations in the county to train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. No. 08-07-08(b), 8-7-2008) 
Secs. 22-42—22-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND DISASTER RESPONSE 

Sec. 22-51. - Declaration of local emergency and response powers. 
(a)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local department and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the Chairperson/County Executive of Dade County may declare a local emergency for Dade County. 
(b)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the Chairperson/County Executive may request the Governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately, and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(c)  Continuation of declaration. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the Chairperson/County Executive finds that the emergency condition no longer exist, at which time, the Chairperson/County Executive shall execute and file with the County Clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state or local emergency shall continue for longer than thirty (30) days, unless renewed by the Chairperson/County Executive. The Dade County Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(d)  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the Chairperson/County Executive is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the Chairperson/County Executive may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapters as appropriate: § 22-51 (closed or restricted areas and curfews); § 22-52 (overcharging for goods or services); and § 22-53 (registration of building and repair services). 
(Ord. No. 05-01-11, § 1, 5-1-2011) 
Sec. 22-52. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, parks, or any other public place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the Chairperson/County Executive until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the Chairperson/County Executive shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters and essential emergency response personnel; 
(6)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (EMA); 
(7)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(8)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(9)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated by the EMA or Sheriff of Dade County. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-11, § 2, 5-1-2011) 
Sec. 22-53. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before the building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, or structures or fixtures, and further including but not limited to the cutting or removing of trees, within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the Dade County Commission and secure a building permit that is to be posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per annum. Registration is nontransferable. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, compete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal Employer Identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business with the past twelve (12) months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the Secretary of State, if required; 
(10)  Proof of maintenance of worker compensation insurance coverage as required under state law; and 
(11)  An executed affidavit, in a form acceptable to the county, verifying compliance with the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) Program. 
(d)  Nothing in this section is intended to require any person or other entity from performing any activity described in this section on a volunteer basis, and when no compensation for such services is expected or required. 
(e)  This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the Governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the Board of Commissioners, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-11, § 3, 5-1-2011) 
Sec. 22-54. - Overcharging for goods or services prohibited. 
(a)  In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(b)  The term overcharging as used in this section is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(c)  The term subsequent recovery period as used in this section is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six (6) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the Governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-11, § 4, 5-1-2011) 
Sec. 22-55. - Penalty. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of this Code. In addition to other remedies, the county may institute an action for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-01-11, § 5, 5-1-2011) 
Chapter 26 - FLOOD CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; ensuring safety from flooding, § 18-33; minimization of flood damage and flood hazard, § 18-34; health and sanitation, ch. 30; roads, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Statutory authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 1, § A, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 1, § B, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 1, § C, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 1, § D, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the code enforcement officer 's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in § 26-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before May 5, 1989. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 5, 1989. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced on or after May 5, 1989 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 5, 1989. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) , as corrected in 1988, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement occurs within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. The market value of the structure would be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement officer, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 6, 1-3-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-6. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § A, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 17, 1989, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated May 17, 1989, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the county code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § B, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § C, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § D, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, except as otherwise specifically provided herein. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § E, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § E, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § G, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-13. - Penalty for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or imprisoned, or both, as provided in § 1-19, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 2, § H, 1-3-2008) 
Secs. 26-14—26-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 26-46. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The code enforcement officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 3, § A, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-47. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the code enforcement officer on forms furnished by the county prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed. 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of § 26-82(2). 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the code enforcement officer an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The code enforcement officer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 3, § B, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-48. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the code enforcement officer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with § 26-7, then the code enforcement officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of §§ 26-81 through 26-86. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with § 26-47(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with § 26-47(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the code enforcement officer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with § 26-47(1)c. and §§ 26-82(2) or 26-85(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the code enforcement officer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the code enforcement officer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 3, § C, 1-3-2008) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Secs. 26-49—26-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 26-81. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 4, § A, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-82. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of § 26-81(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in § 26-48(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: individual lots or parcels, in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. § 26-81(6)) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 26-7, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§ 26-81 through 26-86. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 4, § B, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-83. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 26-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in sources, then the following provisions ((2) and (3)) shall apply: accordance with § 26-7, then the code enforcement officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§ 26-81 through 26-86. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one (1) foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of § 26-81(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The code enforcement officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 4, § C, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-84. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 4, § E, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-85. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in § 26-7, may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of § 26-81(4). The code enforcement officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in § 26-47(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 4, § D, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-86. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 4, § F, 1-3-2008) 
Secs. 26-87—26-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 26-116. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the code enforcement officer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners may appeal such decision to the county superior court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The code enforcement officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-08, art. 5, 1-3-2008) 
Chapter 30 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health authority rules and regulations for alcoholic beverages, § 6-83; animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; flood control, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health officer means the county director of health or his authorized representative. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 30-2—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-31. - Adopted. 
The following rules and regulations of the state department of human resources are adopted: 
(1)  Chapter 290-5-26, On-Site Sewage Management Systems, April 27, 1984. 
(2)  Chapter 290-5-14, Food Service, revised September 10, 1986. 
(3)  Chapter 290-5-18, Tourist Courts, revised April 27, 1984. 
(4)  Chapter 290-5-57, Public Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1989, § 1; Ord. No. 7-06-02, 6-6-2002; Ord. No. O-7-07-02, 1-2-2003) 
Sec. 30-32. - Issuance of citation. 
(a)  Upon information of a violation of any of the rules and regulations adopted in this article being made known to the county health officer or to his designee, there shall cause a citation to be issued requiring such violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for such violation. 
(b)  Citations issued under this section shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused of such violation. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(c)  Dade County Environmental Health Specialists are hereby authorized to issue citations for the enforcement of the provisions of this article as authorized by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1989, § 1(1-4); Ord. No. 0-2-00, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 30-33. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-19. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1989, § 1(1-5)) 
Sec. 30-34. - Inspection fee. 
A yearly inspection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) payable to the county shall be paid in full on or before July 1st of each year. Said fee may be modified by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 0-2-00, § 2, 8-3-2000) 
Secs. 30-35—30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HYDRAULIC FRACKING 

Sec. 30-51. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all county-owned real property and all of the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Authority: Ga. Const., Art. 9, § 2, ¶¶ I, III; O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-30.4(f), 36-1-20; Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. 391-3-13-.16. 
( Ord. No. 01-05-17 , 2-5-2017) 
Sec. 30-52. - Purpose. 
The board of commissioners seeks to protect the citizens of the county from the dangers associated with hydraulic fracturing for natural gas. The purpose of this article is to prohibit hydraulic fracturing for natural gas and the storage and transport of hydraulic fracturing fluid and hydraulic fracturing wastewater within the county in order to preserve and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the county's citizens. 
( Ord. No. 01-05-17 , 2-5-2017) 
Sec. 30-53. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
County road shall mean a highway, road, street, avenue, toll road, toll way, drive, detour, or other way open to the public, and intended for use for its enjoyment and for the passage of vehicles in the county, including but not limited to the following public rights, structures, sidewalks, facilities, and appurtenances incidental to the construction, maintenance, and enjoyment of such rights-of-way: surface, shoulders, and sides; bridges; causeways; viaducts; overpasses; underpasses; railroad grade crossings; tunnels; signs, signals, markings or other traffic control devices; way-side parks; parking facilities; drainage ditches; canals and culverts; and scenic easements and easements of light, air, view, and access. 
Flowback shall mean the hydraulic fracturing fluid that flows back through the wellbore to the surface after the hydraulic fracturing process is completed but before natural gas begins to flow to the surface. 
Hydraulic fracturing or fracking shall mean the injection of fluid through a well into a rock formation at a pressure that fractures the rock through which oil and natural gas can be released and captured for further processing and use. 
Hydraulic fracturing fluid or fracking fluid shall mean the fluid, including the applicable base fluid, chemical additives, and proppant, used to perform the hydraulic fracturing procedure. 
Hydraulic fracturing wastewater or fracking wastewater shall include both the flowback and produced water that flow back through the wellbore to the surface after the hydraulic fracturing procedure is completed. 
Natural gas shall mean any gaseous substance, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarified state at standard temperature or pressure conditions, and/or gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or other hydrocarbons. 
Person shall include a natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, company, business, trust, and any other group acting as a unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of such, as well as an individual. 
Produced water shall mean any fracking fluid and/or naturally occurring water that flows through the wellbore to the surface along with natural gas after the fracking procedure is completed and flowback is removed. 
Proppant shall mean sand or any natural or manmade material that is used in a hydraulic fracturing procedure to prop open the artificially created or enhanced fractures once the procedure is completed. 
Well means any boring drilled in the search for or production of oil, gas, or other minerals or water. 
( Ord. No. 01-05-17 , 2-5-2017) 
Sec. 30-54. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners finds that hydraulic fracking in Dade County endangers the health, safety, and welfare of residents, neighborhoods, and the environment. The storage and transport of fracking fluid and fracking wastewater likewise threaten the health, safety, and welfare of residents, neighborhoods, and the environment. Fracking operations have been linked to drinking water contamination, air pollution, and soil contamination. Spills of fracking fluid and fracking wastewater are not uncommon, whether onsite or during the transportation of these products. Fracking fluid and fracking wastewater contain chemicals of varying toxicity, some of which are known carcinogens. The discharge of these products into surface water and groundwater may endanger the health and property of surrounding and downstream water users. Other concerns associated with fracking activities include the massive quantities of water involved, impacts on local roads from increased traffic and use of heavy machinery, potential impacts on the local landscape, possible adverse impacts upon personal property rights, and noise pollution. The Georgia General Assembly has not enacted a general law that regulates fracking. Existing state laws and regulations addressing natural gas exploration and production were adopted long before the widespread use of modern fracking technology and do not adequately protect against the risks associated with fracking. Accordingly, the board adopts this article as an appropriate exercise of its police powers to protect the county's residents, neighborhoods, and natural environment. 
( Ord. No. 01-05-17 , 2-5-2017) 
Sec. 30-55. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities shall be prohibited on all county-owned real property and in all of the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  No person shall perform hydraulic fracturing of any well; 
(2)  No person shall store fracking wastewater in pits, whether lined or unlined, or in above-ground containment systems; 
(3)  No person shall transport fracking fluid or fracking wastewater on any county road; 
(4)  No person shall apply fracking fluid or fracking wastewater, whether treated or untreated, on any county road; and 
(5)  No person shall place any machinery or equipment on land for the purpose of hydraulic fracturing. 
( Ord. No. 01-05-17 , 2-5-2017) 
Sec. 30-56. - Penalty for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or imprisoned, or both, as provided in section 1-19 of the Dade County Code, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. 01-05-17 , 2-5-2017) 
Chapter 33 - MASSAGE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 33-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the license review board established by this chapter. 
Exempt person means: 
(1)  A physician, osteopath, physical therapist, chiropodist, podiatrist or chiropractor licensed in the state, and an assistant of any such professional working in the same office and under the direct supervision of such professional; 
(2)  A registered nurse or licensed practical nurse licensed in the state, who performs massage services only in the normal course of performing nursing duties; 
(3)  Any athletic trainer working as such within the athletic department of any accredited school, college, university or seminary; and 
(4)  Hospitals, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes and other similar facilities licensed under the laws of the state, and dedicated to medical or nursing practices where massage services may be given, and the employees and/or independent contractors of such facilities who perform the massage services for the patients at such facilities in the normal course of carrying out their duties at such facility. 
Licensee means the person or entity to whom a license is issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Massage means the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment of soft tissues of the body, including the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches and any other soft tissue manipulation, whether manual or by mechanical or electrical apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy and hot and cold packs. 
Massage business means the business of owning, operating, conducting and carrying on the offering or providing of massage services to members of the public. 
Operator's license means a license to own, operate, conduct and carry on the business of offering or providing massage to members of the public, which license is issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
Premises means one physically identifiable place of business of one (1) or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name where massages are performed. This term shall include reception rooms, guest rooms, office areas, patio areas and any other areas located within the property lines of the land on which the massage business is located. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 1, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-2. - Operator's license required. 
Any person, other than an exempt person, desiring to own, operate, conduct and carry on, in the unincorporated areas of the county, the business of offering or providing massage services, before doing so, shall apply for and obtain a current operator's license from the license review board. All such licenses shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Any non-exempt person that does not maintain an office in the county, but which sends a massage therapist into the county to provide massage services on an outcall basis, must possess an operator's license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 2, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-3. - Qualifications for operator's license. 
In order to obtain an operator's license under this chapter, the applicant must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and have received a high school diploma or graduate equivalency diploma. 
(2)  Must be a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. Where an applicant is other than a natural person, such applicant must be an entity organized and existing under the laws of the United States or one (1) of its states, and the natural persons who are required to join in the application must meet the qualifications of this subsection. 
(3)  If the applicant is a general partnership, the application must be made jointly by the partnership, any managing partner and all other partners owning at least a twenty percent (20%) interest in the assets or revenues of the partnership. If there is no managing partner and there is no partner meeting the ownership requirements, then the application must be made jointly in the name of the partnership and the general partners owning the greatest percentage interest in the assets and revenues of the partnership. At least one (1) of the applicants shall be a natural person. If none of the applicants required in this subsection is a natural person, then the natural person having primary responsibility for the operation of the business for which the license is sought shall join in the application. 
(4)  If the applicant is a limited partnership or a limited liability partnership, the application shall be made jointly by the limited partnership or limited liability partnership, its general partners and any other partner owning at least a twenty percent (20%) interest in the assets or revenues of the limited partnership or limited liability partnership. At least one (1) of the applicants must be a natural person. If none of the applicants required in this subsection is a natural person, then the natural person having primary responsibility for the operation of the business for which the license is sought shall join in the application. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the corporation and its president or vice-president, and any stockholder owning at least twenty percent (20%) of the total outstanding capital stock of the corporation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the limited liability company and its managers, and any member owning at least a twenty percent (20%) interest in the assets or revenues of the limited liability company. 
(7)  If the applicant is an entity other than a natural person, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, corporation or a limited liability company, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the entity, the natural person having chief executive officer authority over the business activities of the entity and any other person having at least a five percent (5%) interest in the assets or revenues of the entity. The application shall further disclose the type of entity making the application and every person having an ownership interest in the assets or revenues of the entity. 
(8)  Licenses issued to corporations, limited liability companies, general partnerships, limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships or other types of entities must be issued jointly to the entity, and all of the other persons required by this section to join in the application. 
(9)  No person shall be granted a license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the license review board that such person shall be of good moral character, or in the case of an entity which is not a natural person, that such entity has a good reputation. In no event shall a license be granted to any person who has been convicted or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any charge involving a crime of moral turpitude, prostitution, masturbation for hire or any other sexual service crime within a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. In the case of partnerships, corporations, limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited liability companies or other business entities, an operator's license shall not be issued to the partnership, corporation, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or other entity if any partner, officer, director, shareholder, member or other person required to be listed on the application cannot meet the requirements set forth in this subsection. At the time an application is submitted for an operator's license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit: 
a.  Certify that all of the requirements of this section have been met by the applicant and the other persons required to be listed on the application as specified in this subsection (9); and 
b.  Consent to a criminal background check and release the county, its commissioners, elected officials, officers, agents, employees and representatives from any liability resulting from any criminal background check performed on the applicant. 
After the license has been issued, should any person in whose name such license is issued be convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a charge involving a crime of moral turpitude, prostitution, masturbation for hire or any other sexual service crime, the operator's license shall be immediately revoked and canceled. 
(10)  No operator's license shall be issued to any person convicted of or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to any charge under any federal, state or local law constituting a felony, within ten (10) years prior to the date of the filing of the application for the operator's license. 
(11)  No operator's license shall be issued to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the county revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application for an operator's license. 
(12)  The license review board may decline to issue an operator's license when any person having any ownership interest in or control over the land or building in which the establishment to be operated pursuant to the license will be located does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(13)  If a person in whose name an operator's license is issued is not a resident of the county, such person must appoint and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served. The registered agent must be a resident of the county. If the licensee is not a natural person, the licensee will be required to appoint and maintain a registered agent in the county if it does not have an agent in the county upon whom process can legally be served on such entity under the laws of the state. The licensee shall file the name of such registered agent, along with such registered agent's written consent to serve as such agent, with the director of administrative services. 
(14)  An application for an operator's license may be denied where it appears to the license review board that the applicant does not have adequate financial strength or adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended or likely to be a surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for an operator's license. 
(15)  At the time of filing the application for an operator's license and thereafter, the applicant must at all time have in his or her employ or under a binding contract, a person who holds a massage license issued by the state who has agreed to perform the massage services for the applicant if the operator's license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 3, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-4. - Establishment of license review board. 
A license review board is created to receive and consider applications for licenses to operate massage businesses and for all other purposes necessary to administer this chapter. The license review board created by this chapter shall be the same board as the alcoholic beverage control board previously established by §§ 6-31 et seq., of the county code of ordinances, and shall have the same composition, tenure, method of appointment, chairman, and clerk, as the alcoholic beverage control board, and shall be for all intents and purposes the same board, but with the additional powers, duties, and responsibilities as provided under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 4, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-5. - Revocation, suspension of license. 
(a)  Any license granted under this chapter shall be subject to revocation or suspension for cause. Whenever, in the opinion of the license review board, there is cause to revoke or suspend an operator's or massage license, a written notice of intention to revoke or suspend such license shall notify the holder thereof not less than ten (10) days before a scheduled hearing with the license review board, at which time the holder of the license may make such showing as the licensee may deem proper. After a hearing, the license review board may revoke or suspend the license if, in its discretion, it is in the best interest of peace and good order of the county, or there has been any violation of the ordinances of the county or of the laws of the United States or the State of Georgia in the conduct of the massage business or on the massage business premises, or in the performing of massage services to members of the public. 
(b)  Cause for revocation or suspension of a license under this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, the following actions: 
(1)  Conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of prostitution, masturbation for hire or any other sexual service crime involving the engaging in sexual activities for compensation or sexual misconduct of any kind by an employee of the massage business operated pursuant to such license, in the course of business. 
(2)  Providing false or forged information in the application to obtain a license under this chapter. 
(3)  Impersonating a license holder. 
(4)  Using or attempting to use a license that has expired or been revoked. 
(5)  Failure to maintain in employ or under a binding contract at least one (1) person who holds a massage therapy license issued by the state. 
(6)  Violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 5, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-6. - Appeal procedures. 
In all instances in which an application for a license is denied, or a license is revoked, suspended, or not renewed, under the terms of this chapter, the applicant or licensee may appeal the decision to the county board of commissioners by filing with the county clerk a request for such appeal within ten (10) days of the date that notice was mailed to the applicant or licensee of the license review board's decision. The request for such appeal must be dated, in writing, and must state the grounds and reasons for the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 6, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-7. - Automatic license forfeiture of nonuse. 
Any licensee holding an operator's license under this chapter, who shall, for a period of three (3) consecutive months, cease to operate the massage business as authorized in the operator's license, shall automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. If the massage business operation is interrupted as a result of damage to the premises where the massage business is located which makes it impractical to operate the massage business, and if repairs of such damage are commenced within such three-month period and diligently pursued to completion, or as a result of the premises being remodeled, then this section shall not apply to such cessation of operation. If a license is issued for the operation of a massage business in a building which has not yet been completed, the license will not be forfeited unless the licensee fails to begin operations of the massage business within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 7, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-8. - Initial application; expiration; renewal of license. 
(a)  Each initial application for an operator's license shall make written application to the license review board. Such application shall be on a form approved by the clerk or the deputy clerk. 
(b)  The license application shall be filed with the clerk with a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk for the processing and investigation of the application. Such fee is not refundable; but the application fee shall be credited to the fee amount due for the initial license, if granted. 
(c)  Each license granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which the license was issued, and shall be renewable at the option of the license review board. A licensee who desires to renew his license shall file a written application on the form provided for license renewal on or before November 1 of each year. If a renewal application is received after November 1, the county cannot assure the applicant that a renewal license will be considered by January 1 of the following calendar year, and the licensee will have to cease operations from such January 1 until the renewal license is issued. If a license renewal application is received after the December 31 expiration date, such application shall be treated as an application for a new license and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules, regulations and fees for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued. 
(d)  Any person applying for renewal of a license must pay the license fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk for the processing and investigation of the license renewal application. Failure to pay such fees at that time shall result in the application for renewal being treated as not filed or as being withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 8, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-9. - Location of business; hours of operation; separate application and operator's license for each business location. 
(a)  Prohibited location. No operator's license shall be granted under this chapter to a business premises located within the following areas of the county: 
(1)  Within a measured five hundred (500) feet of any church building. The word building , as used in this section, shall mean a structure used at the time of filing of the application for a license under this chapter for the purposes of church. For the purpose of this chapter, a church shall mean an organization for the purpose of preaching the gospel and other related religious activities located within a permanent structure either owned or leased by such organization, and shall consist of at least ten (10) adult members on the official rolls that meet on a regularly scheduled basis not less than one (1) time per week at such location. 
(2)  Within five hundred (500) feet measured in a straight line from the nearest property line of any school or schoolhouse to the nearest corner of the premises on which the massage business is to be operated. 
(3)  In any existing building or establishment having a history or reputation, within the six (6) months preceding the filing of the application, for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing, or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law. 
(b)  All massage businesses licensed under this chapter shall remain closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(c)  Each operator's license under this chapter shall be limited to the operation of a massage business at a specific premises. A separate application must be made and separate operator's licenses must be obtained for each location at which a massage business is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 9, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-10. - Display of license. 
(a)  An operator's license shall, at all times, be kept plainly exposed to public view at the premises for which the license was granted. 
(b)  A massage license shall, at all times, be kept plainly exposed to public view at the place where the holder of the massage license is performing massage services. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 10, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-11. - Report of licensed employees. 
Within ten (10) days after a written request of the license review board, a holder of an operator's license under this chapter shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those individuals holding a massage therapy license from the state and who are in the licensee's employ or under a binding contract with the licensee issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 11, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-12. - Enforcement of other laws not limited; severability; effective date. 
(a)  This chapter shall not limit the authority of any state, local agency, or county department to enforce any other laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. 
(b)  In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is declared or adjudged to be unconstitutional, or otherwise contrary to law, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. 
(c)  Any person operating a massage business upon the effective date of this chapter shall have ninety (90) days from such effective date to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 12, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-13. - Transferability. 
No license under this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 13, 10-30-2007) 
Sec. 33-14. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the license review board may revoke or suspend a license for violation of this chapter as set forth in § 33-4, which shall be a distinct and separate penalty. Any violation of this chapter, or any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any and all licenses held by the licensee regardless of the number of licenses or locations involved, and regardless of whether or not the licensee knew of or contributed to such violation. It is the intent of this subsection, without limiting the generality thereof, to grant to the license review board the right to suspend or revoke any and all licenses held by a licensee when any violation of this chapter occurs at any place of business operated by the licensee pursuant to a license. 
(Ord. No. 10-30-07(b), § 14, 10-30-2007) 
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); criminal code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SMOKING 

Sec. 34-1. - Smoking in county-owned facilities. 
It is resolved by the board of commissioners that no smoking will be permitted in the county justice building, county courthouse and county health department building. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993) 
Sec. 34-2. - Smoking in county parks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the county parks and recreation department, a department under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
Parks means all parks and all facilities located thereon, owned and/or controlled by the county and operated under the jurisdiction of the county parks and recreation department. 
Person means any individual, citizen, group, association, firm, corporation or other legal entity who is authorized to use and enjoy the county's parks and any structure or facility located therein. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or to otherwise use tobacco products in all parks, except in those areas specifically designated and marked as smoking areas by the county parks and recreation department. 
(c)  Violation; penalties. In addition to penalties which may be imposed under state law for the violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2, any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. 
(d)  Enforcement of other laws not limited; severability; effective date. 
(1)  This section shall not limit the authority of any state, county, or other governmental agency to enforce any other applicable laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. 
(2)  In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this section is declared or adjudged to be unconstitutional, or otherwise contrary to law, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. 
(3)  This section shall become effective immediately upon its adoption, and all ordinances in conflict with this section are repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 12-03-09, §§ 1—4, 12-3-2009) 
Secs. 34-3—34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 34-21. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua-cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry; eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guideline; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on the property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-10, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 34-22. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The Dade County Enforcement Officer and the Dade County Sheriff's Department shall be the enforcement authorities for this article. The Dade County Chairperson/County Executive may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the Magistrate Court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-10, § 2, 12-2-2010) 
Secs. 34-23—34-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 34-41. - Sale or distribution of methadone. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, institution, or any other legal entity, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, own or operate a business having as its purpose the sale or distribution of the controlled substance within the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with federal and state laws and regulations for establishing, owning or operating such business. 
(c)  Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by those penalties set forth in the federal or state laws or regulations violated, except that no penalties shall be in excess of or more severe than those set forth in § 1-19 of this Code. In addition to other remedies, the county may institute an action for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-11(a), §§ 1—3, 4-7-2011; Ord. No. 08-04-11, §§ 2, 3, 8-4-2011) 
Secs. 34-42—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SAFETY REGULATIONS AND OTHER REQUIRMENTS FOR USE OF COUNTY PARKS 

Sec. 34-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the county parks and recreation department, a department under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
Parks means all parks and all facilities located thereon, owned and/or controlled by the county and operated under the jurisdiction of the county parks and recreation department. 
Person means any individual, citizen, group, association, firm, corporation or other legal entity who is authorized to use and enjoy the county's parks and any structure or facility located therein. 
( Ord. No. 12-03-2015 , § 1, 12-3-2015) 
Sec. 34-62. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Pet leash required . No person who shall have in his or her possession or be responsible for any dog or other canine animal, whether or not the person be the owner of that animal, allow the same to run at large in any county parks, except as may otherwise be provided by law and this Code section. The health regulations and all other provisions appertaining to the control of domestic animals, including dogs, shall remain in full force and effect in county parks. It shall be the responsibility of any person bringing a dog into a county park to clean up any matter excreted by the dog. Nothing in this action shall amend or otherwise affect the penalties for violation of any law, ordinance, or regulation dealing with control of domestic animals which violation shall have occurred in areas other than within designated county parks. 
(b)  Conducting commercial activity. Except with written permission of the county, and only at the locations and times authorized by the county, no person may place or display any sign or advertisement in the parks, sell or offer for sale any merchandise or concessions, or engage in any other commercial activity in a county park. This provision shall not apply to county sponsored or authorized programs, festivals, or other events occurring in the parks. 
(c)  Participating in dangerous or destructive activities. No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, or other non-motorized vehicle in or on any park, except upon such trails or paths specifically designated for bicycling or other uses. No person shall play, practice, or otherwise participate in any game, sport, or other activity that is destructive to the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, or to the health and safety of others reasonably using the park, except at or upon places designated for that game, sport or recreational activity. By way of example, these activities shall include but not be limited to skateboarding, treasure hunting, or golf. This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as an auxiliary aid on county-owned or county-operated trails and paths. 
(d)  Entering closed ball fields. The county may close to the public particular ball-fields or other areas of county parks for maintenance purposes. Such closings shall be posted, and it shall be unlawful for any persons to enter a closed field or area until the ballpark or other area has been reopened. 
(e)  Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, creeks, or other body of water in any county parks. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the county park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. For purposes of this section, litter shall mean garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash, and all other waste material, whether natural or artificial. 
( Ord. No. 12-03-2015 , § 1, 12-3-2015) 
Sec. 34-63. - Violation; penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in section 1-19 of the Code of Ordinances of Dade County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 12-03-2015 , § 1, 12-3-2015) 
Chapter 35 - PARADES AND PUBLIC EVENTS 
ARTICLE I. - PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 35-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade or special event: Any organized for-profit or nonprofit activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation, fund raising, and/or education which takes place on state or county roads or rights of way in the unincorporated areas of Dade County, Georgia, and which requires or requests the temporary closing of state or county roads or rights of way. By way of example, special events include, but are not limited to, walks, races, parades, marches, processions, rallies, assemblies, festivals, concerts, holiday celebrations, bicycle runs, and block parties. 
Producer. Any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 1, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-2. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any parade or special event in unincorporated Dade County without having obtained a valid permit for such event. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 2, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-3. - Application; fee. 
(a)  A producer of a special event shall make application of a permit for such event at the office of the county executive on a form prescribed by the county executive. Application forms may be obtained from the office of the county executive. 
(b)  An application for a special event shall be filed with the county executive at least sixty (60) days prior to the date that event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one (1) year prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is filed. Such fee shall be payable to Dade County by cash, money order, or cashier's check. 
(d)  Events that are to occur along a route, including but not limited to, races, walks, runs, parades, marches, or processions, shall submit a map with the application for the permit, showing the exact route of the course for the event. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 3, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-4. - Administrative review. 
The county executive shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the county executive determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the county executive in facilitating the event and services required. For parades and special events, the county executive also shall cause the application to be forwarded to the district engineer of the Georgia department of transportation for review. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 4, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-5. - Special conditions on permit. 
Each county department reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the department, the county executive may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit, and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this article. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 5, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-6. - Final approval of permit. 
The county executive is authorized to approve and issue a permit for a parade and special event after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed events described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs, and receiving the approval of the Georgia department of transportation when applicable. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 6, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-7. - Emergency issuance of permit. 
In extraordinary circumstances, the county executive shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a special event permit upon payment by the producer of all applicable fees and costs for such event. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 7, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-8. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The fee for a permit to conduct a special event shall be based on all services to be provided by the county for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the county to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each county department or agency The county executive may require a security bond or a cash deposit be provided by a producer, if it is determined that a security bond or deposit is necessary to provide for unanticipated expenses in connection with the event. 
(b)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 8, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-9. - Liability. 
The producer of any special event shall indemnify and hold harmless the government of Dade County, Georgia, its officers, department, constitutional officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such indemnification and waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing liability insurance that may be necessary for any special event. The amount of liability insurance shall be based on the size of the event and shall designate the county as an additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 9, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-10. - Transferability and duration of permit. 
No permit under this article shall be transferable. No permit issued under this article shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 10, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-11. - Violation; penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. In the event any provision of the article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 11, 11-5-2009) 
Sec. 35-12. - Enforcement of other laws not limited; severability; effective date. 
(a)  This article shall not limit the authority of any state, county, or other governmental agency to enforce any other applicable laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. 
(b)  In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is declared or adjudged to be unconstitutional, or otherwise contrary to law, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. 
(c)  This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption, and all ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-09, § 12, 11-5-2009) 
Chapter 38 - ROADS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-13(6); any resolution or ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such local improvements saved from repeal, § 1-13(9); any resolution or ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county saved from repeal, § 1-13(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; flood control, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ACCEPTANCE OF ROADS 

Sec. 38-31. - Subdivision development roads and rights-of-way. 
Subdivision development roads and rights-of-way proposals shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Proposals must be platted with base flood elevation data certified by a licensed surveyor. 
(2)  The development must have a minimum six-inch water main available for all lots if public water is available. Fire hydrants must be installed within one thousand (1,000) feet of any planned development. 
(3)  Drainage slopes must include adequate structures of concrete or metal culverts and drainage ditches which are a minimum of fifteen (15) inches deep. 
(4)  Access of a minimum of three (3) lots or five (5) mobile home lots for every one-third (⅓) of a mile. 
(5)  The development must have a dedicated sixty-foot right-of-way, thirty (30) feet each side of a road centerline; minimum twenty-four-foot roadbed with a five-foot shoulder on each side and thirteen (13) feet on each side available to ensure proper space for slopes, fills, drainage and utilities, for maintenance. 
(6)  Curbs and guttering are required if the development is designed with a fifty-foot right-of-way. The roadbed must be twenty-eight (28) feet, including curb and guttering, with eleven (11) feet each side available for utilities, slopes and shoulders, for maintenance. 
(7)  Eight (8) inches of compacted base which shall consist of six (6) inches of chert and two (2) inches of stone. 
(8)  The roadbed shall be graded smooth with minimum cuts or outcroppings. 
(9)  If the grade is less than six percent (6%), the roadbed shall be made of asphalt with two-inch E-mix. If the grade is higher than six percent (6%), a nonskid mix must be approved by the county road superintendent. 
(10)  Entry to a public road should be at a ninety-degree angle, where possible; however, the angle shall not exceed sixty (60) degrees. A landing for sixty (60) feet is required at no more than a two percent (2%) grade. 
(11)  A minimum of three (3) inspections must be completed by the county road superintendent at stages of development critical to excellent road construction. Final inspection will be after twelve (12) months. 
(Res. No. R 1-95, § I, 1-5-1995) 
Sec. 38-32. - Existing county road extensions (dead-end roads). 
Existing county road extensions (dead-end roads) shall have the following requirements: 
(1)  No utility relocations by the county. 
(2)  A minimum of a sixty-foot clear right-of-way deeded to the county, fee simple, after the twelve-month final inspection, and subsequent approval. 
(3)  The surface of the roadbed must conform to or exceed existing roadbed specifications as follows: 
a.  Six (6) inches of chert plus two (2) inches of stone or six (6) inches of compacted aggregate base. 
b.  Triple surface treatment according to county specifications. 
c.  The county road superintendent shall inspect the roadbed a minimum of two (2) times during construction. 
d.  The cul-de-sac shall be completed using roadbed and surface requirements as required by county specifications and shall have a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet. Additionally, the minimum radius of the right-of-way for the cul-de-sac shall be sixty-three (63) feet. 
(Res. No. R 1-95, § II, 1-5-1995; Res. No. R-20-07, 8-2-2007) 
Sec. 38-33. - Existing road extensions to another county road. 
Existing road extensions to another county road shall have the following requirements: 
(1)  The same requirements as set forth in section 38-32 but also must conform to the roadbed that has the higher specifications in place. 
(2)  If asphalt (E-mix) is required, the inspection must be performed a minimum of three (3) times during construction by the county road superintendent. 
(3)  A minimum of five (5) homes or eight (8) mobile homes must be in place for a minimum of five (5) years at the time of petition for acceptance. 
(Res. No. R 1-95, § III, 1-5-1995) 
Sec. 38-34. - State graded roads. 
State graded roads are required to have eighty-foot rights-of-way. The roadbed will conform to the twenty-four-foot requirement with five-foot shoulders on each side. 
(Res. No. R 1-95, § IV, 1-5-1995) 
Sec. 38-35. - Generally. 
(a)  The final inspection of any petitioned road must be completed by the county road superintendent a minimum of twelve (12) months after the last construction inspection. Drainage problems and poor quality construction will be considered prior to recommendation for county acceptance. 
(b)  Petitioners are not allowed to promise that the county will accept the road. If such promise is made, the petitioner must pay damages to the purchaser in such amounts prescribed by statute. 
(c)  The county will not accept any road that has a grade greater than ten percent (10%). 
(d)  Crossfalls must be a minimum of one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot on all finished surfaces. Super-elevated sections must be determined by the county road superintendent. 
(e)  The county may not desire to accrue a new road; therefore, even when the minimum standards have been met, the county may exercise its right not to accept a road into the system. 
(f)  Unless the county specifically desires to obtain a road, all efforts to obtain rights-of-way will be the responsibility of the party desiring to turn the road over to the county. 
(g)  When the county manager determines that a road qualifies for acceptance by the county, he/she will bring the matter before the board of commissioners. If the board of commissioners agrees that the road should be accepted, it will do so contingent on delivery of completed right-of-way deeds, within sixty (60) days. 
(h)  Alterations in the roadbed on existing roads must be presented to the county road superintendent and the county manager. If the determination is made to alter the roadbed for good reason, the petitioner must present a deed as required within sixty (60) calendar days after the board of commissioners has agreed to make such alterations. 
(Res. No. R 1-95, § V, 1-5-1995) 
Secs. 38-36—38-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD ADDRESSING 

Sec. 38-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address program administrator means the official of the county charged with the administration of this article, including his authorized representative. The address program administrator shall be the 911 administrator of the county. 
Building means a structure for residential or business use, having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter of persons. When separated by division walls from the ground up, without openings, each such enclosure may be deemed a separate building. 
Concurrence means the board of commissioners shall have the right to disapprove any action of the address program administrator by a majority vote. If the board of commissioners shall fail to act within two (2) regular meetings after the action of the address program administrator, the board of commissioners shall be deemed to have concurred with such action of the address program administrator. 
Driveway means any private way, beginning at the property line of a lot abutting a public road, private road, easement or private right-of-way, giving access from the public road, private road, easement or private right-of-way, and leading to a building, lot or physical location. 
Private road means any one-way or two-way road for ingress and/or egress, not for use by the general public, that serves two (2) or more properties. 
Public road means any road, street, highway, thoroughfare or other way of passage that has been irrevocably dedicated to the public, or in which the public has acquired rights by prescription, without regard to whether such road is open for travel. 
Road address means the combination of numbers and road names assigned under the terms of this article which identifies a particular building, lot or other physical location. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 3, 12-7-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-67. - Administration and application. 
The address program administrator, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, will be responsible for the interpretation and administration of this article, including: 
(1)  Assigning all numbers for properties and buildings. 
(2)  Compiling a database of addresses of each property and building. 
(3)  Recommending change of existing addresses, when necessary, to facilitate sequential house numbers. 
(4)  Designating individual unit addresses within multiple housing units in conformity with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 4, 12-7-1995) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 38-68. - Display of road address numbers. 
(a)  Every owner of improved property shall purchase and display official address numbers so that they are clearly visible from the street or road on which the property fronts. The following criteria shall be used to properly display such address number: 
(1)  Address numbers must be a minimum of three (3) inches in height for residential uses so as to be seen easily from the road. 
(2)  Numbers for multiple dwelling units and nonresidential buildings shall be at least six (6) inches in height and shall be placed on the front of the building facing the road or on the end of the building nearest the road. Individual units shall be required to display a unit number which shall be at least three (3) inches in height on the front door or immediately adjacent to the door. 
(3)  Address numbers must be set on a background of a contrasting color. 
(4)  On a corner lot, the house number should face the street named in the address. 
(5)  If a building is more than seventy-five (75) feet from any road, the address number shall be displayed on a sign attached to a fence gate, lawn stake, mailbox, etc., adjacent to and clearly visible from the road right-of-way. 
(6)  Address numbers shall be plain block numeric numbers and not in alpha or cursive style print. 
(b)  The address program administrator, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, will have the right to authorize and approve alternate methods of displaying numbers which meet the intent of this article, when strict adherence to this article cannot be met. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 5, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-69. - Types of numbers. 
The following types of numbers are to be used under this article: 
(1)  A primary number is to be assigned to each street frontage of each parcel of land, whether or not the parcel is occupied. The primary number is required to be posted only if the parcel is occupied by a dwelling unit, structure or active use and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified as set forth in section 38-68. Other primary numbers are reserved for future development of the numbered parcels and will be assigned at the time of development. 
(2)  Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures and uses coexist on the same parcel of land. Examples of parcels requiring secondary numbers include apartment projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit developments, recreational vehicle parks, recreational areas, shopping centers and other uses where the use of secondary numbers would clarify the location of a unit or use for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers, the address program administrator shall work with the owner, manager or person in charge of the project to determine a logical numbering system under the following guidelines: 
a.  A building on a single parcel with more than one (1) and less than five (5) units may be given either letter (preferred) or number designations as requested by the owner of the property. 
b.  A single building on a single parcel of land with five (5) or more units may be given numerical designations such as suite number, apartment number or similar designations, if so desired. 
c.  Multiple buildings on the same parcel of land may be given secondary numbers consisting of number designation if the buildings are accessed from a main entrance to the project. The number designations should increase in a clockwise direction from the main entrance. 
d.  Mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks and similar uses shall be given letter designations for lots or section and number designations for individual lots or sites. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 6, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-70. - Exempt structures. 
The intent of this section is to exclude from this article those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life if destroyed by fire or other events. The following structures shall be excluded from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address such as a barn, poultry house, outbuildings or equipment storage buildings. Buildings used as a dwelling unit, office or nominal work station of an employee shall not be exempt. 
(2)  Storage and accessory buildings for the use of the occupant of another building on the property. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices or the nominal work station of an employee, or requiring a separate mailing address, shall not be exempt. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 7, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-71. - Existing road names. 
The names of roads listed on the official county road map sheet as developed by 911 that are located within the unincorporated areas of the county, whether public or private, shall not be changed by any methods except those set forth in this article. A copy of this article, and a list of road names, shall be forwarded to the department of transportation. The official county 911 road registry shall cross reference the old road names. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 8, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-72. - New road names. 
(a)  No new public roads in the unincorporated area of the county shall be named without approval of the address program administrator with the concurrence of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No new private road names shall be recognized by this article or added to the county's list of road names without prior approval of the address program administrator with the concurrence of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The name of any new road, public or private, shall not duplicate or be confusingly similar to any other road name already named by this article or any subsequent ordinances or amendments thereto. This subsection shall not apply to an extension of existing roads. 
(d)  New subdivision roads, whether public or private, shall be named when created through the subdivision process which shall include submission of the road names to the address program administrator for approval. 
(e)  Developers establishing new public roads shall pay the county for the actual cost of purchasing and erecting street signs which meet the standards of the department of transportation. 
(f)  Developers desiring to use any type of sign, other than the style which meets standards set forth by the department of transportation, on a public road, shall have the style and design approved by the address program administrator with the concurrence of the board of commissioners. 
(g)  The names of private roads, including mobile home roads, which require naming to facilitate postal delivery and emergency response, shall be recognized by the county at the request of the citizens who own property adjacent to the road. Such road must serve at least three (3) households. The name of the private road shall be commonly known to the community. If there are two (2) or more recommendations of names for such road, the county will recognize the name preferred by at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the property owners on the road; however, this recognition shall not constitute acceptance of dedication of the road by the county for maintenance or other purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 9, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-73. - Numbers for future structures and lots. 
All residential and business buildings erected after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be assigned a number prior to the issuance of a building permit. Owners shall purchase and display such number as provided in section 38-68. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 11, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-74. - Utility company compliance. 
(a)  Following the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, all utility services regulated by the state public service commission, or any utility cooperative service organization providing service in the unincorporated area of the county, shall withhold service from any building, dwelling, mobile home or other structure not exempt under this article, until the owner or other requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid assigned number. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the address program administrator to notify each affected utility of each implementation area by issuing maps and lists of official numbers assigned each structure or use. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 12, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-75. - Implementations by county departments. 
Every department and official under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners shall not render any nonemergency service until the occupant, owner or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid assigned number. Nonemergency service includes any service, except law enforcement, fire, rescue or emergency medical service. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 13, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-76. - Renaming roads. 
The provisions of the Road Renaming Resolution adopted on July 6, 1993, shall be amended to provide as follows: 
(1)  Property owners who want to have the name of a road changed shall submit a petition to the address program administrator. The address program administrator will make recommendations to the board of commissioners after the following criteria have been met: 
a.  A nonrefundable fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk for each road shall accompany any petition requesting that an existing road name be changed. 
b.  The petition shall be in substantial conformity with the provisions of such resolution. 
c.  If the address program administrator approves the request, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, the petitioners shall be required to pay the county for the cost of purchasing new signs and erecting such signs, including labor. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 10, 12-7-1995) 
Sec. 38-77. - Enforcement; penalty. 
Owners or occupants of buildings already constructed which do not comply with this article will be notified and requested to meet the requirements of this article within sixty (60) days from the date of notification. A warning notice will be issued after sixty (60) days if the requirements have not been met. The owner or occupant who does not voluntarily comply with this article within thirty (30) days after delivery of a warning notice by registered or certified mail shall be subject to criminal prosecution. Any person violating a provision of the county road addressing ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-19, and if such violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. Violation of this article may also be enforced by seeking an order to compel compliance of civil remedies against the violator. Prosecutions for violation of the county road addressing ordinance shall be upon citation as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63 in the magistrate court of the county. The address program administrator is authorized to issue citations for the enforcement of the provisions of the county road naming and addressing ordinance in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. 
(Ord. No. O-4-95, § 14, 12-7-1995) 
Secs. 38-78—38-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATIONS IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 38-86. - Title; definitions. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Dade County Utility Accommodations in Rights-of-Way Ordinance". 
(b)  As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Applicant means a person submitting all required information necessary for the director of public works to consider issuance of a permit to conduct excavation or construction activity within the public right-of-way or county road. 
Construction means the planning, location, surveying, designing, supervising, inspecting, paving, striping, modifying, grading, relocating, fixing, and the actual installation of a utility facility within the county road or county right-of-way. 
County means the unincorporated areas of Dade County, Georgia, and any division, department, agency, authority, instrumentality, or branch thereof, or the county governing authority, its board of commissioners, director of public works, or other county officers in charge of the roads, bridges and revenues of the county. 
County road means a highway, road, street, avenue, toll road, toll way, drive, detour, or other way open to the public, and intended for use for its enjoyment and for the passage of vehicles in the county, including but not limited to the following public rights, structures, sidewalks, facilities, and appurtenances incidental to the construction, maintenance, and enjoyment of such rights-of-way: surface, shoulders, and sides; bridges; causeways; viaducts; overpasses; underpasses; railroad grade crossings; tunnels; signs, signals, markings or other traffic control devices; way-side parks; parking facilities; drainage ditches; canals and culverts; and scenic easements and easements of light, air, view, and access. 
Damage means any impact or exposure that results in the need to repair utility facilities due to the weakening or the partial or complete destruction of a facility, including, but not limited to, the protective coating, lateral support, cathodic protection or the housing for the line, device, or facility. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within the public right-of-way, in which a sub-condition set forth in this article and the permit document. 
Utility means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term utility may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, provider, servicer, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
Utility facilities means pipes, mains, conduits, cable wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, of any utility, in, on, along, over, or under the county roads or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § I) 
Sec. 38-87. - Standards for utility facilities in rights-of-way. 
(a)  Adopted . All utilities maintaining or locating their facilities on or in county roads or rights-of-way shall maintain or locate their facilities in accordance with the state department of transportation's utility accommodation policy and standards, as they may be amended from time to time and which are hereby adopted for all county roads and rights-of-way. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director of public works or his designee and the clerk of the board of commissioners, and shall be open for public inspection. 
(b)  Amendments . The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time, adopted in subsection (a) of this section, is amended in order to equate state definitions and provisions with their appropriate and equivalent county counterparts, such that a policy shall be implemented to reflect the intent and effect of the state right-of- way policy as it would logically apply to county roads or rights-of-way, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Commissioner = county director of public works; 
(2)  Department = county department (of public works); 
(3)  District engineer = county director of public works or his or her designee; 
(4)  Highway = any road that is part of the county road system; 
(5)  State = county; 
(6)  State bridge and structural design engineer = county director of public works or his or her designee; 
(7)  State highway (chief) engineer = county director of roads or his or her designee; 
(8)  State utilities engineer = county director of roads or his or her designee; 
(9)  Telephone booth = shall include any booth or structure, to be used by the public at large, which houses a communications link for local or long distance communications, including but not limited to data communication ports, terminals, kiosks, structures or jacks for connection with local or long distance communications; 
(10)  Utility = shall be defined as stated in § 38-86. 
(c)  Administration . The director of public works shall have the authority to administer the state department of transportation's utility accommodation policy and standards, as amended from time to time by the state or county, on county roads and rights-of-way in accordance with any policies and procedures the director of public works may establish hereunder and as approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § II) 
Sec. 38-88. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct, maintain, renew, remove, or relocate utility facilities in, on, along, over, or under county roads or rights-of-way without having first complied with all county ordinances regulating the use of county roads and rights-of-way and without having first applied for and received a utility permit from the director of public works allowing such utility usage of the county roads and rights-of-way. 
(b)  The director of public works shall adopt permitting policies and procedures, pursuant to approval by board of commissions, as deemed necessary to implement the requirements of this article. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall be authorized to charge permit application fees in accordance with the state department of transportation's utility accommodations policy and standards and any other applicable laws that exist now or may be enacted in the future. Fees shall be determined by the director of the public works and subject to the approval of and publicly disclosed by the board of commissioners. Any fee schedule shall be posted at the offices of the director of public works or his designee and the clerk of the board of commissioners and open for public inspection. 
(d)  After work approved under this section has been completed, the utility shall repair the pavement, or portion of rights-of-way, that has been encroached upon. Repair work shall be completed in accordance with all of the work specifications on file with the director of public works and to the director's satisfaction. 
(e)  The rights-of-way shall be kept clear of any form of unnecessary obstruction. Anyone not having written permission from the director of public works to place any type of structure or material, including junk or debris, on the rights-of-way shall be subject to legal action and/or prosecution as provided by law. 
(f)  The issuance of a permit under this article is a license for a permissive use only and shall not be construed so as to give the grantee any permanent right or exclusive easement. A permit issued under this chapter shall only authorize that construction specifically shown in the application, and construction shall be in strict compliance with the plan submitted with the application, unless the county has granted an exception. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § III) 
Sec. 38-89. - Facilities. 
Each utility with facilities located on county roads or rights-of-way shall furnish the department of roads with a map or drawing showing the county roads or rights-of-way on which the utility's facilities are located, and shall furnish the map or drawing within sixty (60) days if the same is requested by the director of public works. Each utility furnishing such map to the director of public works shall be entitled to receive notice from the director of public works before the issuance of any permit to another utility for construction work that might, in the opinion of the director of public works, effect the operations or services of the utility so notified. The applicant for any permit, upon request of any utility so notified, shall meet with such utility at the proposed location of construction work and review the proposed construction work as set out in the application. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § IV) 
Sec. 38-90. - Removal, relocation or repair. 
(a)  The county shall have superior rights to the use of its public roads and public right-of-way. 
(b)  The county reserves the right to subsequently require any utility hereunder to remove, relocate, or repair the utility facility at the sole cost of the utility so that the county may make future improvements or operations in the county road system or any road right-of-way of the county road system, and each utility shall remove, relocate, or repair same as so requested by the county within sixty (60) days after receiving written notice with reference to the same from the county. Should the utility fail to remove, relocate, or repair any such utility facility, the county may so remove, relocate or repair the same and submit a statement of the total costs for the same to the utility. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such statement, the utility shall pay to the county the full cost of such removal, relocation or repairs. By the placement or maintenance of any utility facility hereunder, the utility agrees that in the event the utility fails or refuses to pay such costs incurred by the county for such removal, relocation or repairs, and it becomes necessary for the county to commence an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover such cost, the county shall be entitled to recover, in addition to the statutory court costs and disbursements, such additional sums as the court may adjudge reasonable for attorneys' fees to be allowed the county in any such action or proceeding. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § V) 
Sec. 38-91. - Liability for damages. 
(a)  Any and all damages to county roads or rights-of-way caused by a utility must be repaired immediately by the utility to the satisfaction of the director of public works. If satisfactory repairs are not made, any costs or expenses incurred by the county in repairing or replacing the structure which are not left in the original condition by the utility shall be chargeable to the utility, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such costs or expenses. The maintenance of a utility's facilities on county roads or rights-of-way shall be deemed as that utility's agreement to pay for such attorneys' fees as provided in this section. 
(b)  The county, its officers, employees, contractors, or other agents, shall not be held responsible or liable for injury or damage that may occur to facilities covered by a permit issued under this chapter, or to any connection or connections thereto, by reasons of road maintenance or construction activities or road contractors or utilities operations. The county, its officers, employees, contractors, or other agents shall not be held liable for any damages that may occur to utility facilities if the utility has been notified of the construction conflict and given reasonable time to mark or relocate its facilities and has failed to do so. 
(c)  The utility shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and all of the officers, employees, or other agents of the county, against any and all claims, damages, demands, actions, causes of death, costs and expenses, of whatever nature, which may result from any injury to or the death of any person(s) or from the loss of, or damage to, property of any kind or nature, if such injury, loss, or death arises out of the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, removal or relocation of facilities pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § VI) 
Sec. 38-92. - Violations; penalties; authority to stop work. 
If any provision of this chapter is violated, the county may cause all work to be stopped, the utility facility under construction to be removed, and the roadway to be repaired to its original condition. In addition to other remedies or penalties set forth in this article, any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the county magistrate court, and shall be punished as provided in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § VII) 
Sec. 38-93. - Enforcement of other laws, rules, or regulations not limited; severability. 
This article shall not limit the authority of any state, local agency, or department of the county to enforce any other laws, rules, regulations or ordinances relating to utilities. In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is declared or adjudged to be unconstitutional, or otherwise contrary to law, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, or not originally a part hereof. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2005, § VIII) 
Secs. 38-94—38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DRIVEWAY PIPE INSTALLATION 

Sec. 38-101. - Title; definitions. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Dade County Driveway Pipe Installation Ordinance". 
(b)  As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
County means the unincorporated areas of Dade County, Georgia, and any division, department, agency, authority, instrumentality, or branch thereof, its board of commissioners, director of public works, or other county officers in charge of the roads, bridges, or rights-of-way of the county. 
Driveway includes any new ingress or egress to private or public property from a county road right-of-way, and shall include ingress or egress for temporary or permanent use. 
Permit means authorization from the county to connect a driveway to a county road right-of-way and/or to install driveway pipe on the county road rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-07, § I, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 38-102. - Permit required; actions prohibited. 
(a)  A permit shall be required before connecting a driveway to county roads or before installing driveway pipe in the county road rights-of-way. This requirement shall be applicable to all driveways located in the county, whether the driveways be for residential, commercial, temporary, or permanent use, and shall include without limitation access driveways. 
(b)  Drainage ditches along county road rights-of-way shall not be temporarily filled for access to building sites. No debris, excavation, building materials or other such things shall be placed on the county right-of-way at the construction sites. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-07, § II, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 38-103. - Permit conditions. 
A permit shall be issued under this article subject to the following terms: 
(1)  Applications for a permit for a driveway and/or driveway pipe installation shall be made with the county building official or public works department. 
(2)  The application shall include the name and telephone number of the applicant, the exact address or detailed description of the location for which access to the county road right-of-way is requested, and such other information as may be requested by for the public works director or county building official in the furtherance of the required duties under this article. 
(3)  The applicant shall be advised that two (2) inspection phases, as required by this article, shall be as follows: 
a.  Initial investigation of the site to determine the proper pipe size and installation procedures required; and 
b.  Final inspection prior to pouring or laying the permanent driveway surface. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-07, § III, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 38-104. - Specifications for pipe installation. 
(a)  Prior to installation, all pipes to be installed on county road rights-of-way must be approved for use by the county. 
(b)  Pipe to be installed under this article must meet the following minimum requirements and such other characteristics as required by the county: 
(1)  All pipes shall be either class 3 reinforced concrete or corrugated metal. The public works department will determine which type pipe is to be installed on the initial inspection. 
(2)  Metal driveway pipe shall be a minimum of twelve-gauge galvanized corrugated pipe. 
(3)  The diameter of the pipe required is to be determined upon the initial site inspection by a representative from the public works department. 
(4)  Pipe culverts for residential driveways must be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length, plus any additional length requirements due to special conditions such as ditches over two (2) feet in depth, high fills or other safety considerations. 
(5)  Arch pipe will be required when the depth of the ditch is not sufficient to handle standard round pipe. 
(6)  Pipe culverts for commercial driveways shall be determined individually to suit conditions, use and safety. 
(7)  The material used to cover pipes shall be required to be of a good grade of chert, sandy clay, or its equivalent, and shall be free from particles over two (2) inches in size. All cover materials shall be well compacted. 
(8)  The pipe shall be laid on a well-compacted true-to-line grade with a uniform bearing throughout the line. The line must have a minimum of one-tenth foot of fall per ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-07, § IV, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 38-105. - Enforcement; penalties for violations. 
(a)  If any provision of this article is violated, the county may cause all work to be stopped, the driveway pipe or other installation be removed from the county right-of-way, and the roadway be repaired to its' original condition. In addition to other remedies or penalties set forth in this article, any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership violating any provision of this article as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the county magistrate court, and shall be punished as provided in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. In the event any provision of this article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or date such violation. 
(b)  Any and all damages to county roads rights-of-way caused by violation of this article must be repaired immediately to the satisfaction of the director of public works. If satisfactory repairs are not made, any costs or expenses incurred by the county in repairing the county right-of-way shall be chargeable to any individuals or entity violating this article, including reasonable attorneys fees incurred in connection with such costs or expense. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-07, § V, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 38-106. - Enforcement of other laws not limited; severability. 
This article shall not limit the authority of any state, local agency, or department of the county to enforce any other laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is declared or adjudged to be unconstitutional, or otherwise contrary to law, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption, and all ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-07, § VI, 5-3-2007) 
Chapter 42 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, display of prices and inside sales of alcoholic beverages, § 6-40; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERSTATE SIGNS 

Sec. 42-31. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs in the county, abutting or visible from Interstate 24 and Interstate 59 rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § I(1)) 
Sec. 42-32. - Compliance. 
No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § I(2)) 
Sec. 42-33. - Construction; condition. 
Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition and shall not be permitted to become dilapidated. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § I(3)) 
Sec. 42-34. - Conformance. 
All signs located on sites abutting or visible from Interstate 24 and Interstate 59 rights-of-way shall conform with the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Code, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq., and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under such code. In instances where the sign controls of this article are more strict, this article shall then apply. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § I(4)) 
Sec. 42-35. - Removal upon cessation of business. 
Any on-premises sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six (6) months of the discontinuance of such activity, business, product or service. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § I(5)) 
Sec. 42-36. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; nor shall any sign use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
(b)  No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(c)  Signs painted or attached to natural features, such as trees or rocks, telephone poles, utility poles or fence poles, are prohibited. 
(d)  Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. 
(e)  Signs within three hundred (300) feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § II) 
Sec. 42-37. - Home occupation signs. 
One nonilluminated professional or business nameplate, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, is permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(1)) 
Sec. 42-38. - Signs of work under construction. 
One nonilluminated sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area, displaying the name of the building, the contractor, the architect, the engineer, the owner and the financial, selling and development agencies, is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration or removal. Such signs shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days after the completion of the project. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(2)) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 42-39. - Temporary subdivision signs. 
Temporary signs, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area, announcing a land subdivision development, are permitted on the premises of a land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than three hundred (300) feet apart. Such signs shall be removed when seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots are conveyed. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(3)) 
Sec. 42-40. - Roof signs. 
Not more than one (1) roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one (1) building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than twenty-five (25) feet above the elevation of the roof. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(4)) 
Sec. 42-41. - Wall signs. 
Signs on the walls of a building, including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs on the front surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the front surface of the building. 
(2)  Signs on the side and rear surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of a building shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the exterior side or rear surface of the building. 
(3)  Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may not extend more than twenty-four (24) inches from the wall. Signs attached at an angle to a wall may not extend outward from the wall of a building more than five (5) feet. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(5)) 
Sec. 42-42. - Illuminated signs. 
Illumination devices shall be placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping room in any district or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(6)) 
Sec. 42-43. - Outdoor advertising signs. 
Outdoor advertising signs shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Uniform size. The outside measurements of all outdoor advertising signs shall be twelve (12) feet in height and fifty (50) feet in length, with or without trim. 
(2)  Illumination. All illuminated outdoor advertising signs shall use base-mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including, but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. 
(3)  Height above interstate grade. All outdoor advertising signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet above the adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. Two (2) outdoor advertising signs in the same location, back-to-back or V formation, shall be the same height above the interstate's surface. 
(4)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of an outdoor advertising sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(5)  Number of signs per location. Only one (1) outdoor advertising sign shall be allowed to face the same direction at any location. Back-to-back or V formation signs shall be permitted but two (2) signs, side-by-side, facing the same direction shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Spacing. Outdoor advertising signs shall be no less than five hundred (500) feet apart measuring from the two (2) closest points as measured along the nearest edge of the pavement. 
(7)  Setback. Outdoor advertising sign structures shall be no less than ten (10) feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
(8)  Number allowed. Three (3) outdoor advertising signs per quadrant of any interchange adjacent to an interstate highway shall be allowed. Such signs must be within six hundred (600) feet of an ongoing commercial or industrial activity as specified in state law and are restricted to an area one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet long beginning five hundred (500) feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. 
(9)  Marshland and historic area locations prohibited. No outdoor advertising sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or an area of designated historic interest. 
(10)  Advertisement limitations. Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Travel service facilities including lodgings, gas, food and camping; 
b.  Areas of scenic beauty; 
c.  Public attractions including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities; and 
d.  Any combination of the facilities listed in subsections (10)a.—c. of this section. The content of all outdoor advertising shall be directional in nature. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(7)) 
Sec. 42-44. - On-premises signs. 
On-premises signs located within one hundred (100) feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located on the same property, and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(8)) 
Sec. 42-45. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this article shall be allowed to remain until purchased by the department of transportation or the county, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1983, § III(9)) 
Chapter 45 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL 

Sec. 45-01. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Dade County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § I, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § I, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-02. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board. The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission. The state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department. The department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District. The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division. The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in § 45-04(c) of this chapter. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in § 45-03(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale . A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, plan means an announcement, piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Property designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia . 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20 et seq., in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia . 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § II, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § II, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 12-07-17 , § II, 12-7-2017) 
Sec. 45-03. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority. 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, definitions, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products, farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in § 45-04(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision at the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section. 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § III, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § III, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-04. - Minimum requirements for soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm-water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms proper design and properly designed mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm-water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than the state in (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provisions, the term ephemeral stream means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5, part 6 of Article 5, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: stream crossings for water lines; or stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short at the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: stream crossings for water lines; or stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § IV, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § IV, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-05. - Application process; permits. 
(a)  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm-water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the unincorporated areas of the county without first obtaining a permit from the code enforcement officer to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the code enforcement officer and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provision of § 45-04(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six (6) copies of the applicant's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  The primary permittee for larger common plans of development or sale or for stand alone sites more than one (1) acre shall be charged a minimum fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) or twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each acre or fraction thereof in the total project, whichever is greater. The primary permittee for stand alone sites and secondary permittee for larger common plans of development or sale with twenty (20) lots or less shall be charged a fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per lot. For larger common plans of development or sale with between twenty-one (21) lots to one hundred (100) lots, the secondary permittee shall be charged a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot. For larger common plans of development or sale with one hundred (100) lots or more, the secondary permittee shall be charged a fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per lot. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by § 45-04(c)(15) and (16), all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in § 45-04(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land distributing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits . 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by § 45-04(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him/her as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § V, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § V, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-06. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permitted is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he/she shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The code enforcement officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § VI, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § VI, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-07. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, shall be subject to revocation of the business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designated, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, the person shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited the performance bond, if required to post one (1) under the provisions at § 45-05(b)(7). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § VII, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § VII, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-08. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of the entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph (b)(4). 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § VIII, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § VIII, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-09. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county commission or its designee within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § IX, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § IX, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 45-10. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 03-06-08, § X, 3-6-2008; Ord. No. 06-03-10, § X, 6-3-2010) 
Chapter 46 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Landfills and hazardous waste. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, institution, or any other legal entity, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person within the unincorporated areas of the county to: 
(1)  Construct, install, operate or substantially alter any composting facility, land disposal facility, landfill, municipal solid waste disposal facility, municipal solid waste landfill, private sanitary landfill, or incinerator; or 
(2)  Engage in the storage or disposal of any biomedical waste, containment, designated hazardous waste, hazardous chemical substance or mixture, hazardous constituent, hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, oil, pesticide, solid waste or special solid waste. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following activities are specifically exempt from this section: 
(1)  Any individual disposing of solid waste originating from the individual's own residence onto land or facilities owned by that individual; 
(2)  Individuals, farmers and other persons using pesticides and fertilizers on land under their ownership or control for the purpose of regulating and promoting plant growth; 
(3)  Incinerators at retail facilities; and 
(4)  Incinerators and composting as used for agricultural purposes or poultry house operations. 
(d)  Penalty. Any violation of the provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of this Code. In addition to other remedies, the county may institute an action for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-11(b), §§ 1—4, 4-7-2011) 
Secs. 46-2—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAZARDOUS WASTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 

Sec. 46-31. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all the unincorporated areas of the county and no use or facility shall be undertaken, commenced or continued without prior approval and authorization pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.02) 
Sec. 46-32. - Purpose. 
This article is designed for various purposes, including to: 
(1)  Establish rules, regulations, procedures and standards for the approval of special use permits for controlling hazardous wastes. 
(2)  Foster and preserve the public health, safety, comfort and welfare, and to aid in the harmonious, orderly, aesthetically pleasing and socially beneficial development of the county. 
(3)  Adopt a review process that is: 
a.  Efficient, in terms of time and expense; 
b.  Effective, in terms of addressing the natural resources and public facility implications of proposed hazardous waste developments; and 
c.  Equitable, in terms of consistency with existing regulations, respect for the rights of property owners and consideration of the best interests of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.03) 
Sec. 46-33. - Findings. 
Controlling the location, design and construction of hazardous waste facilities and uses within the unincorporated areas of the county is necessary to maintain and improve the quality of life in the county and to protect the environment and property of the county and the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.04) 
Sec. 46-34. - Rules and responsibility of interpretation. 
(a)  In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes stated in this article, and shall be deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers or authority granted under state statutes. 
(b)  If any question arises concerning the application of the rules, regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria or any other provision of this article, the special use permit board shall be responsible for such interpretation. An applicant may appeal the interpretation of the special use permit board in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.05) 
Sec. 46-35. - Creation of special use permit board. 
The special use permit board of the county (hereinafter referred to as the "board") is created to receive and consider applications for special use permits. The board shall consist of three (3) members of the county board of commissioners, appointed by the chairman of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.06) 
Sec. 46-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The terms used in this article shall be given their ordinary and customary meanings as defined in a standard dictionary, except those specifically defined in this section and as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62, and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the state department of natural resources. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM), with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Board means the special use permit board. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable odorfree humus. 
Designated hazardous waste means any solid waste designated as being hazardous in regulations promulgated by the state board of natural resources. The board may identify as designated hazardous waste any solid waste which the board concludes is capable of posing a substantial present danger or would present a danger if improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed, based on the factors set forth in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are codified as 40 CFR 261.11(a)(3), in force and effect on February 1, 1991, if such solid waste contains any substance which is listed on any one (1) or more of the following lists: 
(1)  List of hazardous constituents, codified as 40 CFR 261, appendix VIII, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(2)  Groundwater monitoring list, codified as 40 CFR 261, appendix IX, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(3)  List of hazardous substances and reportable quantities, codified as 40 CFR table 302.4, and all appendices thereto, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(4)  List of regulated pesticides, codified as 40 CFR 180, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(5)  List of extremely hazardous substances and their threshold planning quantities, codified as 40 CFR 355, appendix A, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; or 
(6)  List of chemicals and chemical categories, codified as 40 CFR 372.65, in force and effect on February 1, 1991. 
Disposal means the final disposition in or at a landfill, incinerator, composting site or facility, surface impoundment site or facility, waste pile, injection well, land treatment or facility, including the operation, closure and postclosure of such location or facility, of any materials requiring a special use permit with the intent that such materials and constituents thereof shall or may thereby be permanently disposed of and with the intent that such materials and constituents thereof will thereafter, regardless of time, without vehicular or other such transportation from the site or facility where the disposal has occurred or been completed, except for activities or occurrences normally associated with closure and postclosure, either be permanently embedded at such site or facility or enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater. 
Dispose means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or hazardous waste, or any constituent thereof, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater, burning, incinerating or by any other means of depositing hazardous or toxic waste onto or into the air, land or water, including groundwater. 
Dwelling means a building designated, arranged or used for permanent living quarters for one (1) or more persons. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Hardship means an unusual situation on the part of an individual property owner, which will not permit him/her to enjoy the full utilization of his property which is given to others within the county. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created or not economic in nature. 
Hazardous chemical substance or mixture means a chemical substance or mixture that does, or will present, an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment within the meaning of 15 USC 2605(a) and rulings pursuant thereto by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Hazardous constituent means any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Hazardous substance means any substance designated pursuant to the Clean Water Act 311(b)(2)(a), 33 USC 1321(b)(2)(A); any element, compound, mixture, solution or substance pursuant to section 102 of 42 USC 9602; any hazardous waste having the characteristics identified under or listed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act 3001, 42 USC 6921, but not including any waste the regulation of which under the Solid Waste Disposal Act has been suspended by an act of Congress; any toxic pollutant listed under the Clean Water Act § 307(a), 33 USC 1317(a); any hazardous air pollutant listed under the Clean Air Act § 112, 42 USC 7412; any imminently hazardous chemical substance or mixture with respect to which the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has taken 15 USC 2606. The term "hazardous substance" does not include petroleum, including crude oil, or any fraction thereof, which is not otherwise specifically listed or designated as a hazardous substance in this definition, and the term "hazardous substance" does not include natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural gas, synthetic gas usable for fuel or mixtures of natural gas and synthetic gas. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1991, codified as 40 CFR 261.3 and any designated hazardous waste. 
Hazardous waste facility means any property or facility that is intended or used for storage, treatment or disposal of any hazardous waste, any hazardous chemical substance or mixture, any hazardous constituent or any designated hazardous waste, with the exception of the following businesses, which shall not be defined as hazardous waste facilities because of their history in this county for safety, and because of the familiarity of emergency response entities to respond to incidences at the following facilities: 
(1)  Service stations where liquids are used as motor fuels and are stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles; 
(2)  Oil change businesses which service the changing of oil on automobiles, motorcycles and other motor vehicles; 
(3)  Automotive mechanic shops; 
(4)  Automotive body shops; 
(5)  Automotive garages; 
provided that such excepted facilities use the tract of land upon which such businesses are located exclusively for the excepted uses or uses incidental thereto, such as convenience stores, food markets, facilities for the sale and service of tires, facilities for the sale and service of batteries and accessories and the sale of gifts and other crafts. 
Health department means the county health department and the state department of human resources. 
Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the county or the state, or an authorized agent of such. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the regulations for individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places. 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior to qualify as a registered historic district. 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior. 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Landfill means a disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing of solid waste in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading and compacting to the smallest volume and applying cover materials over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, governmental or institutional establishments, except such solid waste disposed of in a private waste facility. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including other waste allowed under subtitle D of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, and includes, but is not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including other waste allowed under subtitle D of the Federal Resource and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Oil means and includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Gasoline, crude oil, fuel oil, diesel oil, lubricating oil, sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with wastes and any other petroleum related product; and 
(2)  Petroleum oil and other hydrocarbons, regardless of gravity, which are produced at the well in liquid form by ordinary production methods and which are not the result of condensation of gas after it leaves the reservoir. 
Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, including a government corporation, partnership, association, county, municipality, commission or political subdivision, or any agency of any other state or of the federal government. The county shall not be included within this definition of a "person." 
Private sanitary landfill means a disposal site not owned by a governmental entity, designed and employing engineering methods of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume and applying cover material over all exposed material at the end of each operating day. 
Property owner means the person who has legal title to real estate located in the county. 
Screening means the use of any vegetative planting, fencing, ornamental wall of masonry or other architectural treatment or device, earthen embankment, or any combination thereof, which will effectively shield or buffer any activity or facility requiring a special use permit from adjoining tracts of land. 
Setback line means a line parallel to the property line in front of which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project with the exception of roof overhangs and the subsurface projection of footings. 
Significant groundwater recharge area means those areas mapped as such by the department of natural resources in the Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based upon outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst and potentiometric surfaces. 
Solid waste means solid waste as defined by regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1991, codified as 40 CFR 261.1, 40 CFR 261.2(a)—(d) and 40 CFR 261.4(a). Solid waste also means discarded putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except water-carried body waste and recovered materials, and shall include garbage; rubbish, such as paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tin cans, glass, crockery or dunnage; ashes; street refuse; dead animals; sewage sludges; animal manure; industrial operations; residue from solid waste thermal treatment technology; food processing waste; demolition waste; abandoned automobiles; dredging waste; construction waste; and other waste material in a solid, semisolid or liquid state, not otherwise defined in this definition. Solid waste shall not include any material which is regulated pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2 or the Georgia Air Quality Control Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 9. 
Special solid waste means any solid waste not otherwise regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 8, art. 3 and regulations promulgated under such article originating or produced from or by a source or generator not subject to regulation under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Spill or release means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, emitting, releasing, leaking or placing of any substance requiring a special use permit by any person or from any property under the ownership or control of that person into the air or into or on any land or water, including groundwater, of the county, except as specifically authorized in the special use permit pertaining to that person regardless of the state of mind of such person with respect to such occurrence and regardless of ultimate liability for such occurrence. Accidental discharges of oil made by a person during maintenance of that person's personal vehicle or farm machinery shall be exempt, provided the activity engaged in by that person prior to the discharge is otherwise exempt. 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, PL 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 360 days of the building permit date. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Storage means the containment or holding of hazardous waste, either on a temporary basis or for a period of years, in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such hazardous waste. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, and also includes manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks or other manmade facilities or infrastructures, but does not include fences. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement of this article would result in an unnecessary hardship. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do or would support, a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life typically adapted for life, growth and reproduction in saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas such as sloughs, potholes, wet meadows, river overflows, mud flats and natural ponds. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. The term "wetlands" shall be further defined by 33 CFR 32.93, the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Wetlands, and Criteria for Wetlands Protection ch. 391-3-16.03 of the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental division. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.07) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-37. - Abrogation. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or interfere with any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions duly recorded in the public records of the county. Nothing in this article shall be construed to give the board of commissioners the responsibility for enforcing private covenants or deed restrictions. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.08) 
Sec. 46-38. - When special use permit required; application; issuance. 
(a)  Uses and facilities controlled in this article are prohibited unless and until a special use permit is first obtained from the special use permit board. 
(b)  An application for a special use permit shall be submitted to the special use permit board on such forms and in such manner as the special use permit board may prescribe and shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(c)  A special use permit shall be issued to an applicant on evidence, satisfactory to the special use permit board, of compliance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.09) 
Sec. 46-39. - Unlawful practices. 
Without first obtaining and possessing a special use permit, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Engage in the disposal of any biomedical waste, contaminant, designated hazardous waste, hazardous chemical substance or mixture, hazardous constituent, hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, oil, pesticide, solid waste or special solid waste. 
(2)  Construct, install, operate or substantially alter any composting facility, land disposal facility, landfill, municipal solid waste disposal facility, municipal solid waste landfill, private sanitary landfill or incinerator. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.10) 
Sec. 46-40. - Information required for a special use permit. 
(a)  Any person, entity or organization desiring to apply for a special use permit must provide the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant, permit holder or any owner of the proposed use or facility is a corporation, proof shall be submitted that any such corporation is in good standing with the state. 
(2)  The names and addresses of all persons having a legal or equitable ownership interest of at least one percent (1%) in the business or enterprise proposing the use or facility. 
(3)  If either the applicant, permit holder or any owner of the proposed use or facility is a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors of such corporation. 
(4)  If either the applicant, permit holder or any owner of the proposed use or facility is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process and notices shall be stated. 
(5)  State whether the applicant, permit holder or any owner, director or officer has ever been convicted of a felony, and, if so, provide details, including, but not limited to, a certified copy of the conviction. 
(6)  State whether the applicant, permit holder, owner or any director or officer has ever been charged, cited or had suit brought against him/her for violation of any law, rule, regulation or order relating to the protection of the environment, and, if so, provide details, including, but not limited to, a certified copy of the citation, suit or notice of violation. 
(7)  Submit a detailed list of all judgments, whether under appeal or not, which have been issued against the person or organization seeking the special use permit during the previous seven (7) years, whether or not in the state. 
(8)  Submit a detailed list of all litigation involving the person or organization seeking the special use permit during the previous seven (7) years, whether or not in the state. 
(9)  Submit copies of all state and federal income tax returns for the owner, applicant and/or the permit holder, for the three (3) years preceding the filing of the application for a special use permit. 
(10)  Submit a current audited financial statement, prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles, of the applicant, permit holder and/or owner, showing assets, liabilities, income, expenditures and a budget for the current year. 
(11)  Submit a detailed list of all facilities that the applicant, owner and/or permit holder owns, operates or uses, which are similar in character to the use or facility for which the application has been made. 
(12)  State whether or not the applicant, permit holder, owner and/or any officer or director thereof has ever been denied a permit for a use or facility, or proposed use or facility, similar in character to the use or facility for which application has been made, and, if so, provide a written copy of the denial and state the name, address and telephone number of the person or entity which was denied such permit. 
(13)  Provide certified copies of all necessary applications and permits, licenses and approvals from state and federal environmental regulatory agencies for the use or facility for which the application is being made. 
(14)  Provide a detailed list of materials identified in section 46-39 which are anticipated to be stored or handled at the facility. For each such item listed, any known deleterious medical effects must be stated and copies supplied to any entity located in the county which renders medical care and to any ambulance service operating within the county. 
(15)  The application shall be accompanied by three (3) certified plats, prepared by a state registered land surveyor, drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of the various different uses of the property, the boundary lines of the property, the dimensions of the property, the names and addresses of the owners of all adjacent properties, the location of all existing county roads which abut the property, the location of all proposed drives, roads, parking facilities and structures to be located on the property and any measurements, illustrating compliance with the setback, screening and other provisions contained in this article. 
(16)  The application shall also include a topographical map and grading plan, the type and location of drainage and sewerage, water, electrical, gas and other utilities to serve the proposed facility. 
(17)  The applicant must also include with the application a specific, detailed emergency operational plan developed in conjunction with the county emergency management agency, which states measures to be taken if a loss of containment of any of the materials which are anticipated to be stored occurs. This plan shall anticipate the orderly evacuation of surrounding residents, if necessary. 
(b)  The special use permit board may require such other plans, data, specifications, engineering reports, designs and other information it deems necessary, at the cost of the applicant, to make a determination of compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.11) 
Sec. 46-41. - Initial determination of application; denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a special use permit, the special use permit board shall, within forty-five (45) days, make a determination as to whether the minimum requirements of this article have been met. 
(b)  If the special use permit board finds that the application, as submitted, would preclude the issuance of a special use permit, then it may deny the application. The notice of denial shall state the reason for the denial. The notice shall further state the denial shall become final unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the special use permit board within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice. The notice shall be delivered to the applicant either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.12) 
Sec. 46-42. - Weighing of advantages and disadvantages in making final determination; applicability to certain sensitive environments. 
(a)  Before a special use permit can be granted, the special use permit board must find, after a public hearing in accordance with section 46-43, that the public benefits of, and need for, the proposed use or facility are greater than any negative effects upon and risks to the environment, public health and safety. 
(b)  The special use permit board shall give careful consideration to any reasonably foreseeable negative effects upon, and risks to, the environment and public health and safety for a use or facility that is or would be located within a significant groundwater recharge area, wetland or water supply watershed. The special use permit board may order such studies and investigations, at the cost of the applicant, as the special use permit board may deem necessary to make such determination. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.13) 
Sec. 46-43. - Publication of notice of application; posting of sign; location and time of hearing. 
(a)  Within fifteen (15) days after the initial approval of an application for a special use permit, the special use permit board shall cause a notice of such application to be published in at least one (1) local newspaper of general circulation in the county, once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks, which notice shall state, at a minimum, that an application for a specified use or facility has been received, the name of the applicant, the date, time and location of a public hearing before the special use permit board and that the hearing shall be held for the purpose of receiving comments and suggestions concerning the location and requirements for the operation of the use or facility. 
(b)  The special use permit board shall, within fifteen (15) days of the initial approval of an application for a special use permit, cause to be posted a sign at or near the main entrance to the proposed site, visible from the public roadway at such entrance, stating substantially the same information as required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The hearing shall be held after the final publication of such notice of application for a special use permit, but not more than forty-five (45) days after the first publication of such notice. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.14) 
Sec. 46-44. - Conditions of issuance. 
(a)  A special use permit may be issued, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Adequate space for off-street parking shall be provided. 
(2)  A seven hundred fifty-yard setback buffer distance shall be maintained from the nearest corner of the nearest dwelling or structure intended for use as a dwelling, whether actually occupied or not. 
(3)  A five hundred-yard setback buffer distance shall be maintained from the nearest building line of a nondwelling building or structure used for human occupancy, such as businesses, industrial buildings, commercial offices, etc. 
(4)  A two hundred fifty-yard setback buffer distance shall be maintained from private property lines for aesthetic purposes. 
(5)  Other provisions of any zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, type of zoning at the site, setback buffers and screening, applying to the particular use and the type of use shall be complied with. 
(6)  The proposed use shall not occur within a two-mile radius of any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(7)  The proposed use must be capable of being served by adequate public utilities. 
(8)  Adequate traffic routes and entrances must be established, including consideration of the deterioration of the existing roadway, expenditure of public funds to maintain roadways, adequacy and safety of road intersections, road widths on roads within and leading to the property, pavement conditions (material, thickness, age, etc.), width and length of property boundaries at road access areas and type of vehicles that may be used on the property. 
(9)  The lot size must be sufficient in order to provide the operational space needed for the proposed use or facility to carry out all business related transactions without infringing on setback and other requirements of this article. 
(10)  The owner and/or permit holder must provide adequate screening of the entire premises. The screening must effectively screen the premises on a yearround basis and must be compatible with the facility's surroundings. All screening must meet the criteria set forth in section 46-51. 
(11)  The owner and/or permit holder must provide proof that the use or facility shall not be located in an area which would be subject to a 100-year flood. 
(12)  Once the special use permit board has determined that all of the requirements of subsections (1)—(11) of this subsection have been satisfied, it must further find that the benefits of, and need for, the proposed use are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to the neighboring properties before a special use permit for such uses can be granted. 
(b)  Each special use permit shall contain such terms and conditions as are deemed necessary by the special use permit board to protect the environment, public health and safety. The special use permit board may require such testing and construction supervision as it deems necessary to protect the environment and public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.15) 
Sec. 46-45. - Special use permit related fees. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any activity or facility requiring a special use permit, including an activity or facility granted interim status, shall pay, as a condition of such special use permit, fees, in addition to the application fee, sufficient to cover the reasonable costs and expenses of: 
(1)  Reviewing and acting upon any application for a special use permit or renewal thereof; 
(2)  Implementing and enforcing the terms of the special use permit; 
(3)  Notices required by this article; 
(4)  Monitoring, investigation and enforcement of activities and facilities requiring special use permits; 
(5)  Preparing generally applicable regulations and guidance; 
(6)  Modeling, analyses and demonstrations; and 
(7)  All other expenses of the special use permit board in connection with this article and related federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and orders. 
(b)  The fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk per ton or volume equivalent of substances received by a site or facility for disposal under this article. All fees shall be paid monthly. 
(c)  All fees collected under this section shall be paid into the county general fund. 
(d)  Fees under this section may not be assessed prior to September 1, 1995, against the holder of a valid special use permit with interim status. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.16) 
Sec. 46-46. - Duration and renewal of special use permits. 
(a)  Each special use permit shall have a duration of one (1) year. 
(b)  The holder of each special use permit may seek renewal of a special use permit by submitting to the special use permit board an application for renewal on such forms as may be prescribed by the special use permit board not more than sixty (60) nor less than thirty (30) days before the expiration of the special use permit, along with a fee for renewal in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(c)  The special use permit board shall conduct such inspections and investigations as it may deem necessary or useful in determining whether to renew a special use permit. 
(d)  The special use permit board shall not be required to renew the special use permit of an activity or facility that is not in full compliance with this article and all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and orders. 
(e)  If the special use permit board denies an application for renewal, it shall send written notice of such denial to the permit holder setting forth in the notice the reason for such denial. Such notice shall state that the denial will become final unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the special use permit board within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice. The notice shall be delivered to the permit holder either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.17) 
Sec. 46-47. - Application for modification of special use permit. 
(a)  Any permit holder may file an application for amendment or modification of a special use permit with the special use permit board. All modifications of existing special use permits shall be classified by the special use permit board as major or minor modifications. All modifications of existing special use permits to allow vertical or horizontal expansion of existing disposal facilities shall be classified as major permit modifications. Upon receipt of an application for a major permit modification, the procedures of this article shall be followed as if an original permit were sought. A modification may be granted only in accordance with this article. 
(b)  An application for amendment for a special use permit shall be submitted on such forms as may be prescribed by the special use permit board and shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.18) 
Sec. 46-48. - Financial responsibility. 
No special use permit shall be issued to any person, and no facility requiring a special use permit shall be constructed, operated, maintained, modified or sold by any person, unless such person can demonstrate financial responsibility for taking corrective action and for compensating a third party for bodily injury and/or property damage in an annual aggregate amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). The required annual aggregate coverage amount shall not be deemed in any way to limit the liability of the owner or the operator. The owner or operator may use a surety bond and/or an irrevocable letter of credit to demonstrate financial responsibility. An owner or operator must maintain evidence of all financial assurance mechanisms used to demonstrate financial responsibility until released from the requirements of this section by the special use permit board. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.19) 
Sec. 46-49. - Interim status. 
(a)  Any person who owns or operates a facility required to have a special use permit, which facility was in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall be deemed as having been issued an interim status special use permit, provided that such person notifies the special use permit board of the existence of such use or facility and general character thereof. Such notification may be in plain language and shall not require technical specificity, however, it shall be substantially accurate. 
(b)  Interim status for any use or facility required to file an application under this article shall expire within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  The maintenance of interim status shall require full compliance with all county, state and federal laws, statutes, rules, regulations and orders, regardless of whether environmentally related in their nature. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.20) 
Sec. 46-50. - Exempt activities; disposal of livestock feeding facility waste. 
(a)  A special use permit shall not be required for the following persons and activities, provided that federal and state laws are complied with and the activity does not adversely affect the natural resources or public health and safety of the county: 
(1)  Any individual disposing of solid waste originating from his own residence onto land or facilities owned by that individual; 
(2)  Individuals, farmers and other persons using pesticides and fertilizer on land under their ownership or control for the purpose of regulating and promoting plant growth; 
(3)  Existing facilities, sites and activities otherwise requiring a special use permit that are owned or operated by the county or the municipal corporation of Trenton, or the state; 
(4)  Incinerators at retail facilities and those used for religious ceremonies or crematorium purposes; 
(5)  Incinerators and composting used for agricultural purposes or poultry house operations; and 
(6)  Facilities which are shortterm collection and storage points for waste oil destined for recycling facilities located outside the county, provided such storage facility meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-13-1 et seq., where applicable. 
(b)  A special use permit shall not be required for a person disposing of livestock-feeding facility waste from his own facility with a maximum total capacity of one thousand (1,000) cattle or five thousand (5,000) swine, provided that such activity does not adversely affect the natural resources or public health or safety of the county. If such person shall provide an approved waste disposal system which is capable of properly disposing of the runoff from a ten-year storm, such person shall be further exempt regardless of total per head capacity. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the right of any person to use poultry or other animal manure for fertilizer; nor shall any part of this article be construed to limit any person's or organization's right to file a suit for nuisance against any person engaged in such enterprises. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.21) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 46-51. - Screening. 
(a)  A special use permit may be issued, provided, in addition to all other conditions, that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Screening criteria. 
a.  The screening shall be located on the owner's land and not on any part of the highway or road right-of-way. 
b.  The screening shall be in place prior to the time any hazardous materials are brought upon the premises. 
c.  At no time after the screen is established shall any hazardous materials be stacked high enough to be visible above the screen. No hazardous materials shall be placed outside the screen. 
d.  No hazardous materials shall be placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any highway or road right-of-way or any adjoining property line. 
e.  Fences must be located in such a manner as not to lessen visibility for the traveling public utilizing the public roads, nor to be a hazard or danger to the traveling public. 
f.  The construction of fences shall be uniform and no patchwork type of construction shall be permitted. 
g.  When fences are painted, the paint used shall be of a color so as to blend into the environs of the highway or road right-of-way. 
h.  The fence enclosing the premises shall not be used for advertising purposes, except that a space no larger than six (6) feet by twelve (12) feet may be used to advertise the business. 
i.  The side lot lines must be screened if any hazardous material storage would be visible from the highway or road. 
j.  Facilities proposed to be established subsequent to this article, which are located on hills or valleys, which cannot be adequately screened, shall not be permitted. 
k.  The maximum height of any required fencing shall not exceed eight (8) feet. 
(2)  Acceptable fencing materials. Acceptable fencing shall include fences of steel or other metals, durable woods such as heart cypress, redwood or other wood treated with a preservative, or walls of masonry. Some of the types of fencing acceptable are as follows: 
a.  Chainlink with aluminum, steel, plastic or wooden slat inserts. 
b.  Wooden types of basket weave, palisade, louver or other suitable design. 
c.  Walls of masonry, including plain or ornamental concrete block, block, brick, stone or other suitable material. 
d.  An earth wall, if properly designed, grassed and landscaped. 
(3)  Plant material. All plant material shall be predominantly evergreen. The minimum size of plant material at the time of planting shall be as follows: 
a.  Evergreen shrubs: One and one-half (1½) feet to three (3) feet in height. 
b.  Evergreen trees: Four (4) feet to five (5) feet in height (pinus, Magnolia). 
c.  Small trees: Four (4) feet to five (5) feet in height (Hawthorn, Crepe Myrtle). 
d.  Large trees, deciduous: One (1) inch to one and one-half (1½) inches caliper (Maples, Sycamore, Sweetgum). 
(4)  Maintenance. The owner of any premises shall maintain the screening and shall do such painting and repairs as may be necessary to keep fences, walls or other structural material in good appearance. Plant material shall be maintained in a good, healthy condition. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.21) 
Sec. 46-52. - Grant of variance. 
(a)  Unless otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the special use permit board may grant a variance from the rules and regulations governing special use permits if the special use permit board makes a finding that compliance with any provision would: 
(1)  Result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property; 
(2)  Result, in effect, in the closing and elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity without sufficient corresponding benefit or advantage to the public; 
(3)  Cause an unnecessary and material hardship; 
(4)  Not substantially further the purposes of this article because of extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography, or for other reasons; or 
(5)  Not substantially further the purposes of this article considering other relevant factors, provided that no variance shall be granted where such variance would permit the continuation of a condition which poses an undue present or potential threat to the environment or to the public health and safety; and provided, further, that any variance so granted shall not be construed to relieve any person from any liability imposed by any law, rule, order or regulation. 
(b)  Any person seeking a variance must file a request for a hearing in writing to the special use permit board. 
(c)  If the special use permit board denies a request for a variance, the notice of denial shall state the reason for the denial. The notice shall further state that the denial shall become final unless a request for a hearing is filed with the special use permit board within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice. The notice shall be delivered to the person seeking the variance either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.22) 
Sec. 46-53. - Maintenance of records. 
The special use permit board may require the holder of a special use permit to maintain and submit records of the operation and maintenance of the use or facility concerning any matter material to this article. All such records shall be maintained on-site and shall be available for inspection by the special use permit board or its agents, upon reasonable notice. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.23) 
Sec. 46-54. - Assignability and transferability of special use permits. 
(a)  All special use permits, including, but not limited to, interim status permits, are nonassignable and nontransferable. Any attempt to transfer or assign a special use permit, including, but not limited to, an interim status permit, whether temporarily or permanently, and whether or not with reservation of rights, shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of the special use permit and shall constitute a criminal violation of this article. Any sale, lease or transfer of control of a use or facility holding a special use permit or an interim status permit from the entity possessing the special use permit or interim status permit prior to the issuance of a new permit allowing such sale, lease or transfer, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation of the special use permit or interim status permit and shall also constitute a criminal violation of this article. For the purpose of this section, the sale of a controlling interest in stock in a corporation owning or possessing a special use permit or interim status permit shall constitute an assignment or transfer of such special use permit or interim status permit. 
(b)  If the special use permit board has cause to believe that a special use permit has been assigned or transferred, or that a facility requiring a special use permit has been sold, leased or has had control over it transferred, or that any such activity is about to occur, it may immediately or at any time seek appropriate equitable and injunctive relief. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.24) 
Sec. 46-55. - Inspection and investigation. 
(a)  The special use permit board or its authorized representative or agent, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspection and investigation of conditions relating to this article. 
(b)  The special use permit board or its authorized representative, upon presentation of credentials, shall have a right to enter upon, into or through the premises of all persons or organizations subject to this article, or premises whereon a violation of this article is reasonably believed to be occurring or is reasonably believed to be about to occur, to investigate, take samples, take photographs and/or video or audio recordings, copy all records relating to this article and the purposes thereof, and inspect, for compliance with the requirements imposed under this article, to determine whether such a violation or threatened violation exists for the purpose of: 
(1)  Determining whether any person or organization subject to the requirements of this article is in compliance with any standard or requirement imposed pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Investigating conditions and activities when the special use permit board is in possession of information sufficient to form a reasonable belief that a violation of this article is occurring or is about to occur; or 
(3)  Determining whether there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this article or any permit issued pursuant thereto. 
(c)  Each inspection or investigation shall be commenced and completed with reasonable promptness. If the special use permit board or its authorized representative or agent obtains any samples prior to leaving the premises, such representative or agent shall give to the owner, operator, permit holder or agent in charge a receipt describing the sample obtained, and upon request, a portion of each sample in equal volume or weight to the portion retained. If any analysis is made of such samples, a copy of the result of such analysis shall be furnished promptly to the owner, operator, permit holder or agent in charge. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.25) 
Sec. 46-56. - Applicability to subject matter and other ordinances. 
This article shall apply to all subject matter that is regulated both by this article and other ordinances, including, but not limited to, ordinances for the development and maintenance of land; and such other ordinances are amended to reflect this. The board of commissioners may attach statements to such other ordinances to the effect that compliance with this article is required by such other ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.30) 
Sec. 46-57. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions and requirements of this article, or of any rule, regulation or order pursuant to this article, are more restrictive than those under any other statute, law, rule, regulation, ordinance or order of the county, the state or the United States, the provisions and requirements of this article, then the rules, regulations and orders pursuant to this article shall govern to the extent permissible by law. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, law, rule, regulation, ordinance or order of the county, the state or the United States are more restrictive than this article, or any other statute, law, rule, regulation or order pursuant to this article, then the provisions of such other statute, law, rule, regulation, ordinance or order shall govern. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.31) 
Sec. 46-58. - County not guarantor of acts or omissions of other entities. 
No act or omission of the county or of the special use permit board shall be an assurance or guarantee that the United States, or any department or agency thereof, or the state, or any department or agency thereof, or any other county or municipality, or any department or agency of any other county or municipality, has taken, is taking or will take any action, or has made, is making or will make any omission. No act or omission of the county or the special use permit board shall be construed as the rendering of advice or an opinion as to the status of legal requirements, policies, acts or omissions of any of the other entities set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.33) 
Sec. 46-59. - Personal service of notice. 
The county board of commissioners or the special use permit board may serve, or cause to be served, copies of this article upon any person or organization believed to be an owner or operator of a facility or activity subject to this article. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.34) 
Sec. 46-60. - Criminal acts; continuing offenses; penalties; jurisdiction over offenses. 
(a)  The following are declared to be unlawful and criminal acts, notwithstanding other provisions of this article: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to engage in any activity in violation of applicable requirements, rules, regulations, permit conditions and orders established under this article. 
(2)  It shall be a criminal violation of this article to furnish false or materially incomplete or misleading information to the special use permit board or a lawful designee of the special use permit board, on any application, investigation or proceeding regarding special use permits. 
(b)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate offense. At the discretion of the presiding judge, a violator of this article may be given a reasonable length of time to rectify or correct such violation. 
(c)  Jurisdiction over offenses under this article shall be in the county magistrate court. Any person violating the terms of this article or any permit condition, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished as provided in section 1-19, for each offense. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.35) 
Sec. 46-61. - Civil action by private citizens. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent an adjacent or neighboring property owner who is damaged by a violation of this article, or any other person who would have standing, to bring a civil action for damages, injunctive relief, to abate a nuisance, for a writ of mandamus or other appropriate relief. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.36) 
Sec. 46-62. - Amendments. 
If the board of commissioners desires to take action resulting in the adoption of an amendment to this article, it shall provide for a public hearing on the proposed action. At least fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days, prior to the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation, within the territorial boundaries of the county, a notice of the hearing, stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.37) 
Sec. 46-63. - Appeals of decisions. 
All decisions of the special use permit board may be appealed to the county board of commissioners. The appeal process shall be governed by the rules and regulations set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1.38) 
Secs. 46-64—46-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 46-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, used tires, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway and county waste transfer station, and body of water or watercourse thereof, any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area, and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
(Ord. of 1-3-1992, § 1-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-97. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving, of litter on any public or private property in the county, or any waters in the county, unless the: 
(1)  Property is designated by the county, or political subdivisions located within the county, for the disposal of litter, and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  Litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  Person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 1-3-1992, § 1-4) 
Sec. 46-98. - Punishment. 
Any person who violates section 46-97, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine as provided in section 1-19; 
(2)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street, highway or right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile, any litter he/she has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of such sentence; or 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, and private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he/she has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of such sentence. 
(Ord. of 1-3-1992, § 1-5) 
Sec. 46-99. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 46-97, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article, is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 1-3-1992, § 1-6) 
Sec. 46-100. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of the state, or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of the state, or any political subdivision thereof, is authorized, empowered and directed to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 1-3-1992, § 1-7) 
Secs. 46-101—46-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DUMPSTERS 

Sec. 46-131. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all the unincorporated areas of the county and to any incorporated area of the county where the county maintains a dumpster for the use of county residents. 
(Ord. No. O-3-95, § 1.02, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 46-132. - Purpose and findings. 
The disposal of common household waste or garbage of the residents of the county is of critical concern. The county currently owns and maintains dumpsters located throughout the county for the receipt of common household waste or garbage. Expenses related to the purchase of dumpsters and disposal areas and their maintenance, together with transportation costs and fees paid at landfills by the county, make it necessary and essential for the county to closely monitor and regulate the use of county dumpsters. Such regulation is necessary to maintain and improve the quality of life in the county and to protect the environment and property of the county and the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. No. O-3-95, § 1.03, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 46-133. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Common household waste means any solid waste generated or derived from everyday household use, including garbage and trash from single-family or multifamily residences, but specifically excluding, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Tires; 
(2)  Furniture; 
(3)  Appliances; 
(4)  Carpet; 
(5)  Construction debris; 
(6)  Batteries; 
(7)  Gas, oil or other petroleum products or byproducts; 
(8)  Brush; 
(9)  Leaves; 
(10)  Dead animals; 
(11)  Any contents or matter from any septic tank, wastewater holding tank or grease trap; 
(12)  Any commercial or industrial solid waste; 
(13)  Yard trimmings or solid waste from landscaping, gardening or agricultural activities; or 
(14)  Waste from home commercial activities. 
Dumpster means any container placed in the county by the county board of commissioners for the receipt of common household waste. 
Recovered materials mean those materials which have a known use, reuse or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing and resale or reuse of recovered materials. 
Resident means any person residing in a single-family or multifamily residence located in the county. 
(Ord. No. O-3-95, § 1.05, 7-6-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-134. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  Who is a resident, to directly or indirectly dump, place or otherwise deposit any matter into a county dumpster other than common household waste. 
(2)  Who is not a resident, to directly or indirectly dump, place or otherwise deposit any matter, including common household waste, into a county dumpster. 
(3)  To directly or indirectly dump, place or otherwise deposit any common household waste, or any matter other than recovered materials, into a recovered materials processing facility. 
(4)  To directly or indirectly dump, place or otherwise deposit any matter, including common household waste, onto the grounds surrounding a county dumpster. 
(5)  Who gathers or collects common household waste for compensation or remuneration of any kind to dump, place or otherwise deposit such common household waste into a county dumpster. 
(Ord. No. O-3-95, § 1.06, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 46-135. - Prima facie evidence. 
It shall be prima facie evidence that the garbage or waste was dumped, placed or deposited by the person whose name appears on documents, correspondence or other writing discovered within the garbage or waste. 
(Ord. No. O-3-95, § 1.07, 7-6-1995) 
Sec. 46-136. - Penalty. 
Jurisdiction over offenses under this article shall be in the county magistrate court. Any person violating the terms of this article may be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-19, for each offense. Any sentence may also include restitution to the county or to any other appropriate person or entity. 
(Ord. No. O-3-95, § 1.08, 7-6-1995) 
Chapter 49 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 49-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into five (5) or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites, or other divisions, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes any multifamily residential development, re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(a)  The combination or recombination of previously platted lots or portions thereof where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform to the standards of these rules; 
(b)  The division of land into parcels, all of which are three (3) acres or more where no new street is provided, the extension of public sewer and water lines is not required, and where said three-acre tracts front on existing roads approved and adopted by the county commission; and 
(c)  The division of land among heirs. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 1, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-2. - Applicability. 
This article applies to any subdivision of property made after the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 2, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-3. - Plat approval required. 
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful to record a plat of land subdivision in the office of the Dade County Superior Court Clerk unless the plat shall have the approval of the Dade County Code Enforcement Officer inscribed thereon. Further, it shall be unlawful to transfer, sell, offer for or agree to sell, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a lot or lots in a subdivision unless a plat of land subdivision has been given approval by the Dade County Code Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 3, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-4. - Essential services required. 
In order that prospective lot purchasers may get useable products and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, the sub-divider shall install or construct the improvements as required by law, including but not limited to those described below, prior to having released financial assurances which guarantee installation of required improvements. All required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in applicable federal, state, and county statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Utilities. Placement of all utility lines underground is encouraged. When the lines of electrical, telephone, other communications, natural gas or other utility providers are located in a street right-of-way, the main trunk lines shall be located outside the portion of the street to be surfaced to prevent having to cut into the paved surface to serve abutting properties. 
(b)  Water supply. The distribution system shall be designed and constructed to meet or exceed the federal and state minimum standards adopted for water systems, including those which may be utilized for fire protection. The location and placement of all fire hydrants shall be in accordance with federal, state, and county statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer. Sanitary sewers or other sewage disposal systems shall be installed according to the plans and specifications approved by the Dade County Board of Health, and all other federal, state, county, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. When the sewer line is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
(d)  Curb and gutters. Curbs or gutters where required shall be installed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by an engineer, and approved by the county road superintendent. 
(e)  Streets. Every lot in the subdivision shall front on a street constructed in accordance with the county road ordinance that is served by a public street or highway. No street shall dead-end without a permanent cul-de-sac with at least a one hundred twenty-foot diameter. No street crossing a dam shall be accepted by the county as a county road. 
(f)  Utilities in streets. All water mains, sanitary sewers and laterals, utilities, and storm sewers shall be installed as necessary to prevent the future cutting of the pavement of any street, sidewalk or other required pavement. 
(g)  Street pattern. All subdivisions shall provide for safe, all-weather, and convenient access and circulation by emergency and other vehicles. Georgia Department of Education policy is to locate school bus stops within one-quarter (¼) mile (1,320 feet) of every residence and that the street layout does not require buses to back up. This may be accomplished by a street layout that employs one (1) or more of the following techniques: (a) looped street patterns; (b) turnarounds designed for school buses (and fire trucks) not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart in long streets or cul-de-sacs; (c) cul-de-sac turnarounds meeting the requirements of the road ordinance. 
(h)  Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan approval. The development of land usually necessitates some degree of grading, excavating or the removal of topsoil, trees, and vegetation. Such soil disturbance shall be performed only in compliance with federal, state, and county statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(i)  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary swales, open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed by the sub-divider according to plans and specifications in compliance with federal, state, and county statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(j)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision and in accordance with state and county statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(k)  Subdivision entrances. The entrances, driveways, or curb cuts on all state and county roads shall comply with all federal, state, and county statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 4, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-5. - Plat review and approval procedure. 
The prospective sub-divider is strongly encouraged to meet early and informally with the code enforcement official to obtain advice and assistance before conducting any land disturbance or preparing the preliminary plat. This will enable the sub-divider to become familiar with federal, state, and county standards for subdividing land and constructing improvements, detailed procedures for plat approval, and the conditions under which the county will accept new public roads and utilities. 
The procedure for approval of a subdivision plat consists of two (2) separate steps. The initial step is the preparation and submission to the code enforcement officer, prior to making any street improvements or installations of utilities, of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision prepared by a Georgia registered surveyor in a form acceptable to the county. 
The second step is submission of a final plat, together with the required certificates, as the preliminary plat or portions of it are constructed or included in the letter of credit. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and shall be in a form acceptable to the code enforcement officer. This final plat, upon approval, shall be recorded as the official plat of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Dade County within ten (10) days of its signing by the code enforcement officer. 
Preliminary plat requirements. The preliminary plat for all subdivisions shall meet the minimum standards of design and the general requirements set forth in the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources Regulations for Subdivision and Mobile Home Parks and the Department's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, as may be amended by the State of Georgia from time to time. Additionally, the Preliminary Plat shall include a plat of the subdivision drawn at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, and showing the following: 
(a)  Street plan, including the location of all existing and proposed streets within the subdivision and adjacent to it; widths and purpose of existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements; identification of right-of-way location and width for any street which is considered part of the sketch thoroughfare plan; proposed street names subject to approval; and typical cross section of proposed streets, showing natural and finished grades; 
(b)  Feasible connections to existing or proposed utility systems and any proposed improvements requested of the county; 
(c)  Plans of all proposed utility layouts and easement, including but not limited to a preliminary plan of sanitary sewage systems, with grade, pipe size and points of discharge; preliminary plan of the water supply system, with pipe sizes and location of hydrants; preliminary plan of the storm sewer system, with grade, pipe sizes and location of outlets; and preliminary plan of the location of all communication systems; preliminary plan for gas and electricity supply systems; and 
(d)  Location and dimension of land to be dedicated or reserved for parks, open space or other public use. 
Within forty-five (45) days after the submission of the preliminary plat, the code enforcement office shall review the plat with pertinent utilities, county departments, and other governmental entities, and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to any required modifications. If the plat is disapproved or is approved subject to modifications, the reasons for such disapproval of the required modifications shall be indicated in writing on two (2) copies of the plat. 
One (1) copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained in the code enforcement officer's files, and one (1) copy shall be returned to the sub-divider at the time of approval or disapproval. 
Final plat requirements. The final plat shall comply with all of the requirements for the preliminary plat, and any modifications thereto and in addition shall include: 
(a)  Final as-built survey data on property lines, easements, streets, lots, storm sewer system, utilities, and other improvements; 
(b)  Certifications evidencing ownership of the subject property, satisfactory provision of financial assurances sufficient to assure completion of all required improvements, and accuracy of the survey and plat and placement of all required monuments, health department approval, and other required information. 
The applicant shall submit five (5) copies together with any street profiles or other plans which may be required by the code enforcement officer. When the plat has been approved by the county, one (1) copy shall be submitted for filing with the clerk of the superior court within ten (10) days as the official plat of record. One (1) copy containing all required certifications shall be retained by the county, and one (1) copy shall be given to the sub-divider for his records. The acceptance of the final plat does not constitute acceptance of sub-divider's streets or roads as a county road. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 5, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-6. - Financial assurances required. 
Following the approval of the preliminary plat, but prior to approval of the final plat, the sub-divider shall obtain all permits; construct and install all public improvements and lot improvements as required by federal, state, or county statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations; request approval of the subdivision plat from the codes enforcement officer; and request county acceptance of any public improvements, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements. 
In lieu of the completion of required improvements prior to the final approval of a plat, the county may accept cash, a certified check, or an irrevocable letter of credit, in such an aggregate amount as is estimated by the county to be the total cost of the construction and installation of all public improvement which are the responsibility of the sub-divider. Any certified check or letter of credit shall be made payable to Dade County, with a bank satisfactory to Dade County, and shall contain conditions and terms providing for and securing to the county the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the incomplete portion of the required improvements. 
If the construction, repair, or replacement of any improvements or facilities for which the financial assurance is provided is not completed within one (1) month after substantial completion of any building or structures which said improvements or facilities are designed to serve, or within one (1) year after the date of recording the final plat, whichever is sooner, or if said construction, repair, or replacement is not in accordance with applicable standards, the county may proceed to construct, install or modify said improvements or facilities in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements using the proceeds from such financial assurances to pay for such work. The financial assurance shall be released when the required improvement(s) is accepted and when the other construction, installation and dedication is completed. The form of the financial assurance is subject to approval by the county. 
After the furnishing of financial assurances to the satisfaction of the county, the sub-divider may proceed with the recording of lots, sale of lots, application for building permits, and application for county acceptance of streets and rights-of-way and other lands to be dedicated to the public. Nothing in this article shall constitute a guarantee by the county that the required improvements will be performed. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 6, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-7. - Private streets. 
(a)  Dade County may approve the construction of a private street within a subdivision. A private street is a street that is not accepted by the county as part of the county road system and is privately owned and maintained. Such streets or roads shall be constructed to the same standards and shall meet all other requirements with regard to road construction as is required for acceptance of such roads as public streets or roads. In addition, the developer shall: 
(1)  Provide the county with a written release of maintenance agreement, acceptable to the county manager, releasing the county from responsibility for present or future maintenance and upkeep of the roadway; 
(2)  Erect a sign indicating the existence of a private street at the intersection of each public street with a private street; 
(3)  Include a disclosure statement on all sales agreements, deeds and plats relating to the subdivision or its lots indicating that the street or road is a private street, that the county has no responsibility for its maintenance or upkeep, the nature of the ownership of the street and responsibility for its maintenance and upkeep, and the rights of purchasers of lots in the subdivision to enforce such provisions. 
(b)  Such private streets shall be platted and deeded to a responsible association or entity, such as a homeowners' association. Dade County may require, as a condition to approval of a private street or road: 
(1)  That the sub-divider provides a specific maintenance plan or financial guarantee of proper maintenance and repair; 
(2)  Access easements in favor of the county and its various departments and agencies; or 
(3)  Such other concessions as are deemed appropriate for the public good and the benefit of the lot owners. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 7, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-8. - Common areas. 
All common areas within the subdivision, including, but not limited to, private streets or roads, retention or detention ponds, playgrounds, clubhouses, pools and the like, shall be conveyed to a responsible association or entity, such as a homeowners' association, which has the responsibility for maintenance and upkeep of the common area. The county shall have no liability with regard to or responsibility for the maintenance or repair of such common areas. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 8, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-9. - Access required. 
A subdivision shall not be approved in a location where the existing roads providing primary access are inadequate to serve the additional traffic generated by the development. Where existing roads are inadequate to serve the additional traffic, the county shall require paved access to the subdivision from an existing paved state or county road. If the ditches on existing county roads are to be used for drainage from the subdivision, the developer shall re-grade such ditches and provide an all-weather drainage outlet. All re-grading and drainage outlets shall be approved by the board of commissioners or its authorized representatives. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 9, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-10. - Variances; appeals of decisions of the code enforcement officer. 
(a)  Variances. The code enforcement officer may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the article will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship and shall be set forth in writing by the code enforcement officer. In determining whether or not to grant a variance, the code enforcement officer shall consider, along with other relevant facts, whether there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; whether the application of this article to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; whether such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and whether relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article. 
(b)  Appeals. Decisions made by the code enforcement officer pursuant to this article may be appealed to the Dade County Board of Commissioners. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the county clerk within seven (7) calendar days of the decision of the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 10, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-11. - Violation; penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. In the event any provision of the article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation, and may refuse to issue any and all permitting relating to such sub-dividing of land, including building permits thereon, until such violations are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 11, 11-19-2009) 
Sec. 49-12. - Enforcement of other laws not limited; severability; effective date. 
(a)  This article shall not limit the authority of any state, county, or other governmental agency to enforce any other applicable laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. 
(b)  In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is declared or adjudged to be unconstitutional, or otherwise contrary to law, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. 
(c)  This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption, and all ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 11-19-09, § 12, 11-19-2009) 
Chapter 50 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-13(2); any appropriation resolution or ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-13(7); any resolution or ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such local improvements saved from repeal, § 1-13(9); any resolution or ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-13(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-251 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Gross premiums tax. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer doing business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to two and one-half percent (2½%) of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). The term "gross direct premiums" shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. of 9-27-1983, § 1) 
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; general assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c). 
Sec. 50-2. - State cable and video service franchise fees. 
The county, by and through its Board of Commissioners, shall hereby require collection of franchise fees at the rate of five percent (5%) of annual gross revenues generated by any cable or video service provider providing cable or video services within the unincorporated areas of the county pursuant to a state franchise or the maximum that may be subsequently allowed by law. 
(Res. No. R-43-14, 8-7-2014) 
State Law reference— Consumer Choice for Television Act, O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 76. 
Secs. 50-3—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 50-31. - Business license tax on financial institutions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county, at a rate of one-fourth percent (¼%) of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 9-30-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 50-32. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 50-31 shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Res. of 9-30-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 50-33. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the business license tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the sole commissioner of the county on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The sole commissioner of the county shall assess and collect the tax levied in this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Res. of 9-30-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 50-34. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than thirty (30) days after filing of the return prescribed by section 50-33 unless extended by the sole commissioner of the county. 
(Res. of 9-30-1983, § 4) 
Secs. 50-35—50-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 50-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer. Shall have the meaning as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Local sales and use tax. Shall have the meaning as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Purchaser. Shall have the meaning as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 1, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 50-52. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. §§ 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 2, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 50-53. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to fifty percent (50%) of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to seventy-five percent (75%) of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 (c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in subsection (b)(1),(2), and (3) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in subsection (b)(4) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph (b)(4). 
(d)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of the county shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). 
(1)  Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent (2%), excepting that the rate would be no more than three percent (3%) should the city levy an optional water and sewer tax. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent (2%) to one percent (1%), the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent (1%) to two percent (2%), the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 3, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 50-54. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. §§ 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of the county by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 4, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 50-55. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county, or the collecting officer appointed under § 50-58 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this article when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 5, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 50-56. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of the county monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 6, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 50-57. - Allocation, distribution and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of the county at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent (1%) of such proceeds collected by the county shall be paid into the general fund of the county to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two (2) local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half (½) of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one (1) such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of the county may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 7, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 50-58. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-12, § 8, 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 50-59—50-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 50-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings assigned to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Administrative fee is a component of the occupation tax which pays in part the cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means any and all persons, who, within the unincorporated areas of the county, engage in or cause to be engaged in and/or represent themselves to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit or advantage either directly or indirectly. Any and all persons advertising by any means, including, but not limited to, signs, cards, telephone books, circulars and newspapers, that they are engaged in any business of any kind, shall be liable for the appropriate occupation tax required under this article and the appropriate fee therefor. For purposes of this article, the term "business" includes peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants. 
County means Dade County, a political subdivision of the state. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. "Employee" also includes owners, partners, officers or managers who work for a business, whether or not such person is salaried. Also, for the purposes of this article, leased employees shall be counted as actual employees of the county business. 
Location or office means the physical location of the business and shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The term "location" as used herein shall not include county rights-of-way. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize at least 80% of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 1, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-72. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal, or reopening of such account. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 2, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-73. - Registration and occupation tax required for businesses in the county. 
(a)  For each year, every person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall register said business, trade, profession or occupation and pay an administrative fee and an occupational tax, as set forth in the county fee schedule, duly approved by resolution of the county. 
(b)  Charitable solicitors, while required to comply with all regulatory provisions of this article, are exempt from registration fees. 
(c)  All peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants shall be required to comply with all regulatory provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 3, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-74. - Required registration information; occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  All businesses and practitioners doing business in the county shall be required to register the business with the County Commission prior to commencing business in the county. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide such information to the county as necessary to administer this article, to include at least the following: 
(1)  The address of any location or office maintained by such business or practitioner in the county; 
(2)  A description of the business or lines of business conducted or occupation or profession performed at such locations, and an identification of the dominant line of business; 
(3)  The total number of employees of the business; and 
(4)  The payment of any business or occupation tax or regulatory fee to any other city or county. 
(c)  Provide the county with an affidavit or other evidence establishing compliance with the SAVE and/or E-Verify requirements as may be required by federal and state laws. 
(d)  After registration with the county, submission of required evidence of compliance with federal and state immigration laws, and upon payment of the applicable occupation tax, an occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the County Commission, which occupation tax certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous location in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent location in the county, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any agent of the county upon request. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 4, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-75. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the county. 
When a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 5, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-76. - Classification rule for businesses or practitioners with more than one type of service or product. 
Businesses or practitioners with more than one (1) type of service or product shall be classified for occupation tax purposes according to the dominant service or product. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 6, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-77. - Occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax shall be imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business or practitioner's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 7, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-78. - Allocation of employees of business with locations in multiple jurisdictions. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside the county, the number of employees used to determine the occupation tax assessed would be only those employees who work in the county's jurisdiction. 
(b)  Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction shall provide to the county information necessary to determine the number of employees who work in the county's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 8, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-79. - Compliance with state and federal law; display of licenses required. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county occupation tax certificate may be issued. In addition, all businesses subject to this chapter must comply with county, state and federal requirements including, but not limited to, sales tax registration and county health permit requirements where applicable. 
(b)  The county registration issued under this article and all required state licenses shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of business of the licensee or, in the case of licensees without permanent business premises, be displayed or kept on the person and displayed upon request. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 9, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-80. - Method of calculating number of employees. 
For purposes of determination the number of employees, the total annual hours of all employees that work less than forty (40) hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by forty (40) to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 10, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-81. - Amount of occupation taxes; proration. 
(a)  The amount of tax liability shall be based on the number of employees calculated as provided herein in the amount set forth in the county fee schedule. 
(b)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the county on or after July 1 in any year, the amount of occupation tax due under this article shall be equal to one-half that of a total year. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 11, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-82. - Use of county rights-of-way prohibited; proof of location required. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize any person, including peddlers, solicitors, or transient merchants, to make sales on the county road rights-of-way. Any peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant making application under this article and having no physical business premises in the county shall, at the time of registration, present proof of authority to use an intended business location other than the business's own property. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 12, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-83. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)  Any administrative fee or occupation tax due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually within thirty (30) days following January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the county after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for ninety (90) days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax or fee due or such other amounts as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 13, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-84. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, to administer and enforcement the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the Magistrate Court. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to apply for and pay the administrative fee and occupational tax, or who provide false information in the levying or assessment of the occupational tax, or who fail or refuse to provide or make available truthful and accurate information requested by the county for determining the applicability or amount of the occupation tax, shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(c)  In addition to all other penalties as set forth in this article, any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as forth in § 1-19 of this Code. 
(d)  Any individuals, businesses, and practitioners violating this article shall be the subject to suspension or revocation of the right to conduct business within the county, as provided in § 50-85 of this Code. 
(e)  The Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, 1% per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by Code Enforcement Officer of the county upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the county and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code and the laws of the state. 
(f)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 14, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-85. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as defined hereunder, and only after a hearing before the commission of the county upon a prior written notice to the licensee at the address shown on the license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the reason the license would be suspended or revoked. Three (3) days' notice prior to the hearing shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the commission may deem the circumstances justify. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the following, to-wit: 
(1)  A licensee engages in any fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of this state; 
(2)  Violation of any laws, ordinances or resolutions regarding such business or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted by the purpose of regulating such business; 
(3)  A licensee supplies false information to the Code Enforcement Officer, building official, his or her deputies, any Sheriff's deputy, police officer or the County Clerk, regardless of when the false information is discovered; 
(4)  The licensee has failed to obtain or has suffered the expiration, suspension or revocation of any paper or document by any officer, agency, authority or department of the county, State of Georgia, any other state or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the county, State of Georgia, any other state or the United States regulating such business; or 
(5)  The licensee has failed to comply with any provision of this article. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceeding for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies exist at law. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of this county or in the name of the county. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 15, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-86. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(10)  Charitable, nonprofit organizations which utilize at least 80% of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
(11)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor operating under a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 2-2-8. 
(12)  Real estate brokers, unless the broker maintains a principal or branch office in the county. 
(13)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, an instrumentality of the United States, the state, the municipality or the county. 
(14)  Depository financial institutions governed under O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 16, 1-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-87. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon the date of its final adoption, except that §§ 50-83(b) and 50-84 shall become effective on January 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 12-04-14, § 17, 1-1-2015) 
Chapter 51 - TIMBER OPERATIONS 

Sec. 51-01. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Dade County Timber Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 2005, § I) 
Sec. 51-02. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures, rules and regulations governing persons and businesses engaged in timber harvesting operations in the county so as to protect its citizens and environment and to assure the public safety. 
(Ord. of 2005, § II) 
Sec. 51-03. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Board means the county board of commissioners, and successors in office, being the governing authority of the county. 
County means Dade County, Georgia. 
Harvesting operations means buying, selling, cutting, harvesting and/or hauling standing timber in the county, for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips. 
Public property means any property either owned in fee simple or otherwise titled or held by the county, including roads, ditches, bridges, and rights-of-way. 
Timber means softwood or hardwood trees. 
Timber harvesting operator means any person, firm, business, company, corporation or other legal entity engaged in buying, selling, cutting, harvesting and/or hauling standing timber in the county. 
(Ord. of 2005, § III) 
Sec. 51-04. - Notification required. 
(a)  All persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside the state shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the county prior to cutting any such timber. 
(b)  Notice requirements shall be applicable to any such timber harvested on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2005, § IV) 
Sec. 51-05. - Forms and content of notice. 
(a)  The required notice of harvesting operations for such timber shall describe each separate tract to be harvested, shall be on such form as provided by the Georgia Forestry Commission, shall be delivered to the county commission or its designee, prior to the inception of the harvesting operation, and shall consist of: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(b)  County personnel is authorized to issue timber permits upon the receipt of a resident's application for such permits and upon payment by the resident of a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. of 2005, § V; Res. No. R-14-10, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 51-06. - Delivery of notice. 
Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile or such other means as may be approved by the county, or by mail. 
(Ord. of 2005, § VI) 
Sec. 51-07. - Duties of the timber harvesting operator. 
(a)  No persons or firms engaged in harvesting operations shall allow dirt, mud, or other debris resulting from harvesting operations to accumulate in ditches and drainage areas on public rights-of-way to such an extent that the usual flow of water or runoff is stopped, disturbed, changed or interrupted. 
(b)  No equipment, trucks, or trailers, which are part of the harvesting operations shall be left unattended or parked in any public road or right-of-way. 
(c)  All persons or firms conducting harvesting operations shall display a minimum of four (4) warning signs, two (2) in each direction, on the road entrance of the harvesting operation. Two (2) signs, one (1) in each direction, shall be located five hundred (500) feet in each direction from the operation entrance and shall provide notice of logging operations ahead and/or that slow traffic is entering the highway. Two (2) signs, one (1) in each direction, shall be located one thousand (1,000) feet in each direction from the operation entrance also providing notice of logging operations ahead and/or that slow traffic is entering the highway. Each sign shall be at least thirty-six (36) inches by thirty-six (36) inches, orange in color, and shall be posted at least three (3) feet from the travel surface of the applicable roadway. 
(d)  All harvesting operations shall be conducted at a load site off the county right-of-way and behind the established ditch line of county roads. 
(e)  Loading or skidding of logs will not be permitted on county roads. 
(f)  County roads at the harvesting operations entrance shall be kept serviceable at all times for the passing public, emergency vehicles, school buses, mail carriers, and other users of the public rights-of-way. 
(g)  The timber harvesting operator shall maintain and ensure that the public property is returned to a state at least equal to that existing immediately prior to the instituting of the harvesting operations. 
(h)  The timber harvesting operator shall give the county written notice within seventy-two (72) hours after the completion of the harvesting operation. If it is determined by the county that the public property used by the harvesting operation is not in an at least an equal condition to that existing immediately prior to the instituting of the harvesting operations, then the county shall provide written notice to the timber harvesting operator specifying the repair actions needing to be taken by the person or firms engaged in the harvesting operation. The timber harvesting operator shall complete all repairs within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice. 
(i)  If the necessary repairs to the public property are not completed within the required period of time, or if the said repairs are not in accordance with applicable standards and acceptable to the county, the county may proceed to remedy said defects in accordance with applicable specifications and requirements using the proceeds from any surety bond or letter of credit to pay for such work. The timber harvesting operator shall be responsible and liable for all costs in excess of the surety bond or letter of credit. 
(Ord. of 2005, § VII; Ord. No. 03-05-09, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 51-08. - Bond or letter of credit required. 
All persons or firms subject to the notice requirement shall deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided by this section, and notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the county board of assessors a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in Georgia, protecting the county against any damage caused by such person or firm in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. For purposes of this section, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-09, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 51-09. - Duration of notice. 
Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within the county upon receipt of the same by the county and compliance with the requirements of § 51.08 until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the county within three (3) business days after such change. 
(Ord. of 2005, § VIII; Ord. No. 03-05-09, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 51-10. - Violation; penalties. 
Each day of a violation of this chapter will be deemed to be a separate violation. This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances, excepting that violations of the notice requirements of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. of 2005, § IX; Ord. No. 03-05-09, 3-5-2009) 
Chapter 54 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county, as if set forth in full in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-3-2-98, 5-7-1998) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 54-2. - Speed limits. 
The following speed zones in the county are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
(1)  On-system. Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation shall include the following: 
State Route 58 (U.S. 11). 
From mile point 0.00 (Alabama state line) to mile point 3.70 (0.08 mile north of C.R. 184, Hanna Cemetery Road), a distance of 3.70 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
From mile point 3.70 (0.08 mile north of C.R. 184, Hanna Cemetery Road) to mile point 4.45 (0.14 mile south of C.R. 118, Castleberry Lane), a distance of 0.75 mile, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. 
From mile point 4.45 (0.14 mile south of C.R. 118, Castleberry Lane), to mile point 11.28 (0.01 mile south of C.R. 104, Cedar Lane; south Trenton city limit), a distance of 6.83 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
From mile point 14.16 (0.18 mile north of C.S. 604, Ferguson Street; north Trenton city limit), to mile point 22.78 (Tennessee state line), a distance of 8.62 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
State Route 136. 
From mile point 0.00 (Alabama state line) to mile point 0.87 (0.43 mile east of C.R. 4, Gass Road), a distance of 0.87 mile, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
From mile point 0.87 (0.43 mile east of C.R. 4, Gass Road) to mile point 4.48 (0.03 mile west of C.S. 621, Page Avenue; west Trenton city limit), a distance of 2.18 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. 
From mile point 6.48 (C.R. 99, Cherokee Trail; east Trenton city limit) to mile point 14.18 (Walker County line), a distance of 7.83 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
State Route 157 Scenic Highway 
From mile point 0.00 (Walker County line) to mile point 1.49 (Walker County line), a distance of 1.49 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
From mile point 16.35 (Walker County line) to mile point 16.66 (State Route 189), a distance of 0.31 mile, the speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour. 
From mile point 16.66 (State Route 189) to mile point 18.41 (0.07 mile south of C.R. 247, Wayside Lane), a distance of 1.75 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. 
From mile point 18.41 (0.07 mile south of C.R. 247, Wayside Lane) to mile point 18.66 (0.10 mile north of C.R. 161, Martin Lane), a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be forty (40) miles per hour. 
From mile point 18.66 (0.10 mile north of C.R. 161, Martin Lane) to mile point 20.04 (Walker County line), a distance of 1.38 miles, the speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour. 
State Route 189 Lookout Mountain Road 
From mile point 0.00 (State Route 136) to mile point 2.32 (Walker County line), a distance of 2.32 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. 
From mile point 2.71 (Walker County line) to mile point 11.01 (State Route 157), a distance of 8.30 miles, the speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour. 
From mile point 11.01 to mile point 14.37, this segment of roadway runs common with State Route 157. 
From mile point 14.37 (State Route 157) to mile point 15.01 (Walker County line), a distance of 0.64 mile, the speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour. 
State Route 299 
From mile point 0.00 (State Route 58/U.S. 11) to mile point 1.08 (0.06 mile north of C.R. 241, Burrel Road), a distance of 1.08 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
From mile point 1.08 (0.06 mile north of C.R. 241, Burrel Road) to mile point 3.50 (Tennessee state line), a distance of 2.42 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
State Route 301 Poplar Springs Road 
From mile point 0.00 (Alabama state line) to mile point 10.34 (Alabama state line), a distance of 10.34 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
State Route 301 School Zone 
From mile point 5.28 (0.17 mile south of C.R. 26, Davis School Road) to mile point 5.72 (0.08 mile north of C.R. 182, Hughes Road), a distance of 0.44 mile, at Davis Elementary School, the speed limit shall be forty (40) miles per hour during school zone hours, effective in the a.m. from thirty (30) minutes prior to the earliest commencement time to thirty (30) minutes after the latest commencement time within this school zone, and in the p.m. from thirty (30) minutes prior to the earliest dismissal time to thirty (30) minutes after the latest dismissal time within this school zone, on school days only. 
State Route 406 Interstate I-59 
From mile point 0.00 (Alabama state line) to mile point 10.93 (0.64 mile south of State Route 136; south Trenton city limit), a distance of 10.93 miles, the speed limit shall be seventy (70) miles per hour. 
From mile point 10.93 (0.64 mile south of State Route 136; south Trenton city limit) to mile point 13.65 (0.56 mile north of C.R. 141, Dusty Road; north Trenton city limit), a distance of 2.72 miles, the speed limit shall be seventy (70) miles per hour. 
From mile point 13.65 (0.56 mile north of C.R. 141, Dusty Road; north Trenton city limit) to mile point 20.15 (State Route 409, I-24), a distance of 6.5 miles, the speed limit shall be seventy (70) miles per hour. 
State Route 406CO I-59CO 
From mile point 0.00 (State Route 406, I-59) to mile point 0.60 (State Route 409, I-24), a distance of 0.60 mile, the speed limit shall be seventy (70) miles per hour. 
State Route 409 Interstate I-24 
From mile point 0.00 (Tennessee state line) to mile point 4.10 (Tennessee state line), a distance of 4.10 miles, the speed limit shall be seventy (70) miles per hour. 
(2)  Off-system. Signs to be erected by the county shall include the following: 
Alsobrook Road (92) 
From Long Branch Road to Yankee Road shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Back Valley Road (52) 
From State Route 136 to Byrd's Chapel Road, C.R. 55, a distance of 3.85 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
Brow Road (200) 
From State Route 301 to Hales Gap Road, C.R. 200, a distance of 4.70 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
Burkhalter Gap Road (175) 
Beginning at the junction of Scenic Hwy., C.R. 206, at the top of the mountain, shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour for one thousand (1,000) feet, then increase to forty-five (45) miles per hour for one thousand (1,000) feet and then increase to fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
Cloverdale Road (97) 
From the Alabama state line to State Route 58, U.S. 11, a distance of 3.94 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
District Line Road (3) 
From the Alabama state line to State Route 301, a distance of 1.59 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
Dogwood Road 
From Ralph Moore Road circling back to Ralph Moore Road shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
Gordon Forester Road (94) 
From the junction of Griff Johnson Road and Head River Ranch Road to Yankee Road shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Griff Johnson Road (90) 
Northerly from the Walker County Line to the junction of Head River Ranch Road and Gordon Forester Road shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Hales Gap Road (200) 
From Dugan Loop, C.R. 144 to Slygo Road, C.R. 145, a distance of 0.77 mile, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
Hartline Road 
Shall be set at thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
Head River Ranch Road (93) 
From the junction of Griff Johnson Road and Gordon Forester Road to Yankee Road shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Long Branch Road (91) 
From Griff Johnson Road thence westerly 1.24 miles to a dead end shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Michaels Road (5) 
From the Alabama state line to State Route 301, a distance of 1.35 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
New Home Road (202) 
From Brow Road, C.R. 200, to New Home Loop Road, C.R. 39, a distance of 3.40 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
Piney Road (106) 
From State Route 136 to Piney Road, C.R. 201, a distance of 1.05 miles, the speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
Piney Road (201) 
From Piney Road, C.R. 106 to Burkhalter Gap Road, C.R. 201, a distance of 1.47 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
Ralph Moore Road 
From Georgia Highway 189 to the dead end of said road shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Trinity Road (273) 
From Piney Road to the end of Trinity Road shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
Wells Road (24) 
From State Route 301 to Brow Road, C.R. 200, a distance of 2.69 miles, the speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
White Oak Gap Road (6) 
From State Route 136 to State Route 301 shall be forty (40) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. O-3-2-98, 5-7-1998; Ord. No. 0-27-01, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-2001; Ord. No. 08-02-07(a), § 1, 8-2-2007; Ord. No. 10-02-08, § 1, 10-2-2008; Ord. No. 12-04-08, § 1, 12-4-2008; Ord. No. 02-05-15, 2-5-2015; Ord. No. 06-02-16 , 6-2-2016) 
Sec. 54-3. - Motor vehicle registration. 
(a)  Definitions . 
(1)  As used in this section the term "resident" means a person who has a permanent home or abode in the county to which, whenever he or she is absent, he or she has the intention of returning. For purposes of this section, there is a rebuttable presumption that any person who, except for infrequent, brief absences, has been present in the county for thirty (30) days or more is a resident. 
(2)  As used in this section the term "motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle, tractor, motorcycle or trailer which is required to be registered and licensed under O.C.G.A. § 40-2-8 and O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any resident of the county who owns, rents or leases a motor vehicle to fail to register his or her motor vehicle in this state as required under O.C.G.A. § 40-2-8 and O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20 within thirty (30) days after becoming a resident of the county. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any resident of the county who purchases, rents or leases a new or used motor vehicle to fail to register his or her motor vehicle in this state as required under O.C.G.A. § 40-2-8 and O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20 within thirty (30) days after acquiring the motor vehicle. 
(c)  Enforcement . Prosecutions for violations of this section shall be made upon citation as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63, as amended. The Sheriff of Dade County, Georgia or his lawful deputies are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this section. 
(d)  Penalty . Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first violation and a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or up to thirty (30) days imprisonment for a second or subsequent violation. 
(e)  Exemption . The provisions of this section shall not apply to a "nonresident" or "visitor" as those terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-2-90. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, §§ I—V, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 54-4. - Regulation of motor vehicles in county parks. 
(a)  Use of county park roadways and parking lots. All motor vehicles having a gross vehicular weight in excess of thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds, including the load thereon, or having an overall length in excess of thirty (30) feet, or having in excess of three (3) axles, are prohibited from using any street or parking lot within a county park. This section shall not apply to vehicles designed for the primary purpose of carrying passengers. 
(b)  Operation and parking of vehicles at county parks . 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle upon or across any part of a county park except upon those areas specifically designed and marked for vehicular travel and parking. This section shall not apply to county park employees, volunteers and contractors whose duties require them to drive maintenance equipment or other such vehicles over county parks as authorized by the county's recreation director. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any road or parking lot within any county park at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. 
(c)  Penalties for violations. Any person found to be violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the county magistrate court, and shall be punished as provided in § 1-19 of the county code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 08-07-08(a), §§ 1—3, 8-7-2008) 
Sec. 54-5. - Blocking of railroad crossings prohibited. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association, joint venture, corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, institution, or any other legal entity, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section within the unincorporated areas of the county for any person to permit any car, train, engine, or other obstacle to stand upon, block, or in any way obstruct any street or grade crossing in the county for a time longer than thirty (30) minutes. This provision shall not apply to trains in motion or to those instances where a street or grade crossing is blocked as a result of a derailment, wreck, or mechanical failure which renders the car, train, engine, or other obstacle incapable of operation. 
(c)  Violation; penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by penalties and costs as set forth in § 1-19 of this Code. The passing of each 30-minute interval subsequent to the initial thirty (30) minutes that a car, train, engine, or other obstacle continues to block a street or grade crossing shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation of this section. In addition to other remedies, the county may institute an action for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or stop such violation. 
(Ord. No. 06-02-11, § 1—3, 6-2-2011; Ord. No. 03-05-15, § 2, 3, 3-5-2015) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 