CODE OF ORDINANCES MERIWETHER COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted May 28, 1991 
Effective May 28, 1991 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
MERIWETHER COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
George E. Washington 
Chairman, Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 
Norman J. Rowe 
Al Folden 
Grady Bradshaw 
L. Carl Garner 
Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 
Daniel W. Lee 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Debbie S. Flournoy 
Clerk, Board of County Commissioners 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances, resolutions and motions adopted by the board of commissioners through May 16, 1990. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance, resolution or motion included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Daniel W. Lee, County Attorney and Mr. Russell Melton, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 91-0528 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Meriwether County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 to 14 and Appendices A and B, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 16, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed; provided, however, that the following building codes adopted by reference in the ordinances of October 14, 1987, and January 26, 1988, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect: 
The Standard Building Code, 1985 Edition, including all sections of Appendix H, Mobile Homes Tie Down Standards and including all sections of Appendix A, Recommended Supplemental Administrative Provisions, except Section A101.4, Building Department; 
Georgia State Plumbing Code, 1984 Edition; 
Georgia State Energy Code, 1986 Edition; 
Georgia State Heating and Air Conditioning Code, 1985 Edition; 
(SBCCI Standard Mechanical Code, 1985 Edition, amended); 
(SBCCI Standard Housing Code, 1985 Edition, amended); 
Georgia State Gas Code, 1985 Edition; 
(SBCCI Standard Gas Code, 1985 Edition, amended); 
Georgia State Building Code, 1985 Edition; 
(SBCCI Standard Building Code, 1985 Edition, amended); 
National Electrical Code, 1987 Edition. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or a term of imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment as aforesaid. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 16, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective May 28, 1991. 
Passed and Adopted by the Board of Commissioners this 28th day of May, 1991. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County held on the 28th day of May, 1991. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization of governing authority to adopt ordinances for governing and policing unincorporated areas of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20.

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board of commissioners, board, commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority, governing body. Each such term shall mean the board of commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Chairman, other officers and officials. Whenever the word "chairman" is used it shall mean the chairman of the board of commissioners of Meriwether County. Whenever titles of various officers or officials are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such positions with Meriwether County. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of twenty-four (24) hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the clerk of the commissioners' office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Sheriff. The word "sheriff" shall mean the Sheriff of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week, of seven (7) days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County, as follows:" 
(c)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________, which said section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness; 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the county;
(4)	Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee;
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the county;
(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county; 
(7)	Any appropriation ordinance;
(8)	Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term;
(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
(10)	Any zoning ordinance;
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
(12)	Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county;
(13)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
(15)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county;
nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Penalties; continuing violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code, or in any other ordinance of the county, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or six months' imprisonment or both, provided the judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, except as otherwise provided by general law. 
(b)	Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, § 1, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 2012-04, 4-24-12)
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Airport regulations, Ch. 2.5; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 11; taxation, licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; zoning, App. A; future land use plan, App. B; subdivision regulations, App. C.
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 1, par. 1; county officers, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 1, par. 3; home rule for counties, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 1; supplementary powers, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - County commissioners' meetings. 
Board of commissioners' meetings shall be held on the second Wednesday at 9:00 a.m. and the fourth Tuesday at 6:00 p.m. each month. 
(Mo. of 1-12-83(1); Ord. No. 95-01, § 1, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-13-11; Ord. No. 2014-01, 3-25-14) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.; excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-2. - Appearance before board. 
Anyone wishing to be put on the agenda shall notify the board of commissioners' office by 12:00 noon of the Friday before the regularly scheduled meeting. They should also state their name and what it is in reference to and any other pertinent information. Anyone addressing the board during a meeting should state their name and the community in which they reside so the minutes can accurately reflect all necessary information. 
(Mo. of 5-9-84)
Sec. 2-3. - Rules of order. 
In the event of a question as to order or procedure in the course of business by the board of commissioners, Robert's Rules of Order shall be the authority consulted and observed. 
(Res. of 2-11-87)
Sec. 2-4. - Office of clerk-treasurer created. 
The offices of county treasurer and clerk of county commissioners will be combined and held by one (1) individual. 
(Mo. of 8-2-61)
Sec. 2-5. - Issuance of violation citations. 
The board of commissioners hereby authorizes the following persons to issue citations for violations of county ordinances: 
(1)	County sheriff and certified deputy sheriffs;
(2)	County health sanitarians;
(3)	County building and zoning official;
(4)	Warden;
(5)	Assistant warden/road superintendent.
(Res. of 4-10-85; Res. of 2-10-92)
Sec. 2-6. - Emergency medical service rates. 
Rates for emergency medical services, ambulance service, advanced emergency calls and basic EMS transfers shall be as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the clerk-treasurer's office. 
(Mo. of 1-12-83(3); Mo. of 5-18-88)
Sec. 2-7. - Smoking in county buildings. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all county buildings and no smoking signs shall be put throughout the courthouse and other county buildings. 
(Mo. of 3-11-81; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 11-8-93)
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2. 
Sec. 2-8. - Prohibiting use of county resources to promote candidates. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or, if such person is directly responsible for the supervision of a person or property, to allow the use of, any county resource, personnel or property, for the promotion of any political candidate or cause. 
Nothing in this section shall be implied or considered an attempt to curtail or restrict a person or employee from exercising his free will in voting for or supporting candidates or causes of his or her choice while off duty and without use of county resources. 
(Ord. No. 92-0608, § 3A, 6-8-92)
Secs. 2-9—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT REORGANIZATION POLICY AND PROCEDURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction, maintenance and operation of airports and landing fields by counties, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.

Sec. 2-36. - Governing board. 
(a)	There shall be a governing board appointed by the board of commissioners to oversee the operation of the Roosevelt Memorial Airport. 
(b)	This governing board shall be composed of five (5) members, with full rights of voice and vote. 
(c)	This governing board shall be composed of one (1) member from each of the five (5) commission districts. 
(d)	This governing board shall be subject to the authority of the board of commissioners in all matters of personnel, finance, usage, restrictions and operations of the Roosevelt Memorial Airport. 
(e)	Each member shall be appointed to the governing board of Roosevelt Memorial Airport for a term not to exceed two (2) years. 
(f)	Each member of the governing board may succeed himself in office for additional terms of service as approved and appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(g)	The members of this governing board shall serve staggered terms of office, with two (2) members coming up for appointment one (1) year, and the other three (3) coming up the next year. 
(h)	The term of appointment shall run from January 1st to December 31st, biennially, except for special interim appointments. 
(i)	It is understood that the members of the governing board serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners and are subject to recall upon a simple majority vote of the commissioners in any regular session of business. 
(Mo. of 11-13-85; Ord. of 9-9-96)
Sec. 2-37. - Duties and functions. 
(a)	The governing board of the Roosevelt Memorial Airport shall meet for the purpose of conducting business at least once every six (6) months. 
(b)	They shall elect each year a president and a secretary of the governing board from among their membership. 
(c)	The president shall call the meetings of the board as needed, and shall serve as chairman of these meetings. He shall also call a meeting at any time if requested by any three (3) of the members. 
(d)	The secretary shall notify all members of the date and time of such meetings, and shall keep minutes of the business conducted. He shall submit a copy of the minutes of these meetings to the county clerk within fifteen (15) days to be filed as a record. (Clerk's office can provide typing and xerox assistance to the secretary, if requested.) 
(e)	In the absence of the president or secretary, the membership present shall elect a president pro tem, or secretary pro tem to serve in that capacity until they return to duty. 
(f)	A quorum of the membership necessary for the conduct of business shall include:
(1)	The president and any two (2) voting members; or
(2)	The president pro-tem and any two (2) voting members.
(g)	The president, or president pro-tem, of the governing board shall not vote on any issue, except in the event of a tie vote. 
(h)	The governing board shall:
(1)	Develop and encourage use of the Roosevelt Memorial Airport by all citizens of the county. 
(2)	Make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning matters of personnel, fees, finance and maintenance, suggesting changes or improvements where needed. 
(3)	Keep accurate records of receipts and disbursements, and shall turn copies of such records over to the county clerk monthly. 
(4)	Offer public service advertisements annually in county papers to inform citizens of services offered, fees charged and other information pertinent to the use of Roosevelt Memorial Airport. 
(Mo. of 11-13-85)
Secs. 2-38—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— County manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.

Sec. 2-61. - General duties. 
The county administrator shall be the chief executive officer of the county and head of the administrative branch of the county government. He shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper administration of all affairs of the county, except as otherwise provided by law. It shall be his duty to: 
(1)	Appoint and remove all officers and employees of the county. Any personnel duties given the county administrator by this section may be delegated to a personnel manager designated as such by the board of commissioners. 
(2)	See that all rules and regulations adopted by the board of commissioners are enforced.
(3)	Exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county which the board of commissioners has exercised, or that may be created. 
(4)	Attend all meetings of the board of commissioners, with the right to take part in the discussion; provided, he shall have no vote before the board. 
(5)	Prepare and submit to the board of commissioners an annual budget.
(6)	Keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the county. 
(7)	Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the board of commissioners.
(Mo. of 8-10-83; Ord. No. 93-04, 11-30-93; Ord. No. 95-01, § 2, 2-13-95)
Sec. 2-62. - Purchasing agent. 
The county administrator shall be the chief purchasing agent for the county, by whom all purchases of supplies and all contracts therefor shall be made. He shall countersign with the chairman, or in the absence of the chairman from the county, vice-chairman, all vouchers for the payment of same under such rules and regulations as the board of commissioners may adopt, not inconsistent herewith. The board shall adopt rules for regulating purchases made by the county and the county administrator shall be governed thereby. In no event shall the county administrator be authorized to spend in excess of twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the purchase of any item for use by the county without the prior consent of a majority of the duly qualified members of the board of commissioners. 
(Mo. of 8-10-83(a))
Sec. 2-63. - Cosign payroll checks. 
The county administrator is vested with the authority to countersign with the chairman or, in his absence from the county, the vice-chairman, all payroll checks for the employees of the county. 
(Mo. of 8-10-83(b))
Sec. 2-64. - Supervision of roads, bridges; warden. 
The county administrator shall be directly responsible for the construction and maintenance of all roads and bridges under the jurisdiction of the county. He shall appoint a county warden whose primary duties shall be to supervise the construction and maintenance of all county roads and bridges and to supervise the operation of the county farm and the Meriwether County Correctional Institution. 
(Mo. of 8-10-83(b))
Sec. 2-65. - Reports. 
The board of commissioners shall have the right to require the county administrator to go before them at any time and make such reports as they may deem necessary. 
(Mo. of 8-10-83(a))
Sec. 2-66. - Bond. 
The county administrator shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the board of commissioners to be approved by it, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, the amount thereof to be determined by the board. 
(Mo. of 8-10-83(b))
Sec. 2-67. - Full-time position. 
The county administrator shall devote his full time to his office, and shall hold no other office or employment while so engaged. 
(Mo. of 8-10-83(c))
Secs. 2-68—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONNEL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Personnel matters are governed by the board of commissioners' personnel policy manual and all amendments thereto.
State Law reference— County commissioners authorized to provide civil service system for employees of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21.

Sec. 2-91. - Certification schools, obligation to work for county. 
All county employees that attend any type of certification school shall sign a form stating they will work for the county for one (1) year after certification or reimburse the county all expenses incurred. 
(Mo. of 8-23-88)
Sec. 2-92. - Physical examination. 
All new employees shall be given a physical at county expense by the county physician before beginning employment. 
(Mo. of 1-12-83(2))
Sec. 2-93. - Workers' compensation for elected officials, volunteer firemen. 
Workers' compensation coverage shall be provided to elected officials and volunteer firemen with no additional insurance premiums. 
(Mo. of 12-9-87)
Sec. 2-94. - Resign to run for public office. 
Any county employee who is a candidate for public office shall be required to take a leave of absence or resign. 
(Mo. of 5-22-84)
Sec. 2-95. - Veteran's hiring preference. 
Any veteran who has served on active duty as a member of the armed forces of the United States for a period of more than 180 days, not counting service under an initial period of active duty for training under the six-months' reserve or National Guard programs, any portion of which service occurred during a period of armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, and who was honorably discharged therefrom shall be entitled to employment preference in a position over other applicants after meeting substantially equal qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, 2-28-12)
Secs. 2-96—2-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASE OF MATERIALS AND SERVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2011-06, adopted Oct. 25, 2011, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 2-116—2-130, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Oct. 12, 1983, §§ 1-101—1-113.

Sec. 2-116. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the governing authority of the county to establish regulations and procedures to provide for an efficient and fiscally responsible system for the purchase of materials and services necessary for the effective operations of the county government and to ensure the administration of such system is in accordance with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-117. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all departments, divisions or other units of the county government receiving appropriations from the board of commissioners and to other agencies, as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-118. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
Contractual services includes any service covered by a contract, but shall not include professional services. 
Professional services refers to such services as legal, medical, accounting, engineering, surveying, architectural and others professions are licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Supplies means and includes all supplies, material, and equipment. 
Using department means any department, agency, commission, bureau or other unit in the county government using supplies or procuring contractual services as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-119. - Designation of county purchasing agent. 
The county administrator or his designee shall serve as the purchasing agent of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-120. - Powers and duties of county purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent shall have the following authority, responsibility and duties: 
(1)	To ensure the administration of the purchasing system is in accordance with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. 
(2)	To insure that all due diligence is applied to the purchase process.
(3)	To purchase or contract for all materials, supplies and services required by the using departments and divisions of the county government pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(4)	To purchase or procure for the county materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services from the "lowest and best bid" by a responsive and responsible bidder meeting specifications. 
(5)	To maintain up-to-date files of all vendors known to the county who are reputable and responsible vendors of materials, supplies, and services regularly used by the county, including descriptions of their goods or services, prices, and discounts as may be available. 
(6)	To sell or dispose of all obsolete or unusable personal property in accordance with the ordinance rules, regulations, or resolutions which may be adopted by the county. 
(7)	To coordinate cooperative purchasing practices with other governmental entities.
(8)	To establish, and amend when necessary, as authorized, all rules and regulations as may be necessary for the implementation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-121. - Authorized and unauthorized purchases. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all purchases for materials, supplies, and services for the county shall be on an official county purchase order as prescribed by the department head, purchasing director, county administrator or the chairman of the board. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any county officer or employee to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this article other than through the purchasing agent and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by the board of commissioners, and the county shall not be bound thereby. Any purchase made that is not in accordance with the procedures in this article automatically becomes the direct, personal obligation of the individual making such purchase. Purchase orders are specific as to vendor and cannot be reassigned. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-122. - Approved purchase amounts. 
(a)	A department head shall have authority to make purchases up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) within the purview of this article. 
(b)	Constitutional officers shall have authority to make purchases up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) within the purview of this article. 
(c)	The finance/purchasing director for the county shall have authority to make purchases up to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) within the purview of this article. 
(d)	The county administrator shall have authority to make purchases up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) within the purview of this article. 
(e)	All purchases above five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-123. - Procedure for purchases of materials, supplies, equipment or services. 
(a)	Any item, material, or service that has a value of $1,500.00 or less may be purchased from any approved vendor recommended by the using agency or in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved vendor selected by the purchasing agent. Sole source purchases shall be allowed when only one source is able to fill the requirements for the intended use. Sole source may be used for compatibility with equipment for repair purposes or to continue standardization. The county administrator, board of commissioners' chairman or vice-chair shall approve all initial sole source purchases. 
(b)	Any purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services estimated to cost between $1,000.00 and $5,000.00 shall be based upon verbal quotations from at least three reputable vendors if available. Equipment purchases from the Georgia Department of Administrative Services surplus or from state contracts are exempt from this provision. 
(c)	Any purchase for materials, supplies, equipment or services between $1,500.01 and $5,000.00 must have the approval of the county administrator. 
(d)	All purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services in excess of $5,000.00 must have purchase requisition approved by the chairman of the board or county commissioner in writing. 
(e)	Any purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services with an estimated cost between $5,000.01 and $24,999.99 shall be based upon written competitive quotations from at least three reputable vendors if available, without regard for formal advertising. Equipment purchases from the Georgia Department of Administrative Services surplus or from state contracts are exempt from this provision. 
(f)	All purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services estimated to cost over $25,000.00 shall be based on competitive bidding or proposal procedures. These procedures include formal advertising, contracts, specifications, sealed bids, public opening, bid deposits and performance bonds. Equipment surplus or from state contracts are exempt from this provision. Meriwether County reserves the right to reject bids, waive technicalities and make awards in the best interest of the county and in compliance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-124. - Emergency purchases. 
Emergency purchases shall be allowed when there is a threat to the health, safety or welfare of people or property or when faced with the loss of an essential governmental service. Competitive purchasing shall be resumed as soon as practical. The county administrator, board of commissioners' chairman or vice-chair must authorize the initiation of this procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-125. - Professional services. 
It is the policy of Meriwether County to award contracts for professional services on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications at a fair and reasonable price with the selection based on the best interest of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-126. - Local preference. 
Bids awarded to local vendors contribute to the local tax base and will, therefore, be given special consideration when compared against outside vendors. The county administrator is given the authority to give vendors from within the county, whose initial bid is within five percent of the low bid submitted by an out-of-county bidder, an opportunity to meet the lower bid priced. The local bidder must agree in writing within 48 hours to meet the lowest price. This policy does not apply to any purchases of materials, equipment or services in excess of $20,000.00. On those cases, the board of commissioners will make their decision based on the lowest and best bid by a responsive and responsible bidder submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-127. - Use of D.O.A.S. Contracts. 
The purchasing agent should use State of Georgia D.O.A.S. Contracts where feasible and if in the best interest of the county. The purchasing agent is allowed to use the Georgia Correctional Industries Administration as a vendor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-128. - Multi-year contracts. 
Meriwether County may enter into a multi-year contract or purchase agreement to lease, purchase or lease-purchase any goods, materials, real property, personal property, services, or supplies conditional on the following requirements: 
(1)	The contract must terminate and renew at the end of the calendar year.
(2)	The contract must specify the total obligation of Meriwether County.
(3)	The title of any supplies, material, equipment or other personal property must remain with the vendor until the obligation is liquidated or it must be specified in the contract that the title reverts back to the provider upon termination of the agreement or contract. 
(4)	The contract or agreement must specify that the county can terminate the contract if funds are not appropriated. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-129. - Construction contracts. 
(a)	Construction contracts, excluding roads, over $100,000.00 will be let in accordance with the Georgia Local Government Public Works Construction Law O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. Construction contracts between $2,500.01 and $99,999.99 will be secured by either competitive sealed bids or sealed proposals based upon the delivery method and in the best interest of the county. Construction contracts under $2,500.00 shall be considered as normal repair, maintenance or operating expense. The contract may be bid or offered with written competitive quotations without regard for advertising. 
(b)	Contract opportunities shall be posted conspicuously in the Meriwether County Courthouse and advertised twice in the four weeks preceding the bid/proposal opening. The first ad must run at least four weeks before the bid opening date. The second ad must follow at least two weeks later. 
(c)	Plans and specifications must be available on the first day of the advertisement and must be available to the public. 
(d)	Bid, payment and performance bonds shall be required on all projects over $50,000.00 and may be required on contracts over $20,000.00. at the discretion of the county commissioners. Bid bonds or proposal guarantees must be five percent of the bid price. 
(e)	All contractors must execute a written oath stating that they have not unlawfully restricted competitive bidding on the project. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-130. - Road construction contracts. 
(a)	Meriwether County shall award all contracts with private firms to build, rebuild or maintain a road that cost over $20,000.00 to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. (O.C.G.A. § 32-4-63(1)). The contract must be approved by a resolution of the board of commissioners and entered in the official minutes. 
(b)	Contracts with the State of Georgia, other counties or cities are exempt from this section. 
(c)	Meriwether County is exempt from the bidding law for purchases of supplies, material and equipment if the county performs the work. 
(d)	Emergency repairs as defined by the O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2(5) are exempt from the bidding provisions. 
(e)	All contract opportunities subject to the bidding law referred to in this section must be advertised in the legal organ of Meriwether County at least two times with the first ad appearing two weeks before the opening of the bid cycle. The second must appear one week after the first. 
(f)	Meriwether County and the board of commissioners reserve the right to reject any and all bids, re-advertise the project, perform the work in-house or abandon the project. 
(g)	Bonds are required on all road construction projects. All bidders must submit a proposal guaranty in an amount sufficient to insure that execution of the contract with a minimum amount of five percent of the bid amount. 
(h)	The contractor must provide Meriwether County with a payment bond and a performance bond in the amount of the bid on all road contracts over $5,000.00. The contractor must provide Meriwether County with proof of sufficient general liability in the county's sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-131. - Record keeping and retention. 
The county administrator shall create and maintain the following files for use in the purchasing and contracting process: 
(1)	Bidders list.
(2)	Purchase order file.
(3)	Requisition file by department.
(4)	Bid, proposal and quotation file both completed and solicitations.
All records are subject to the open record act of the State of Georgia and shall be retained in accordance with the retention schedule established by the Georgia Secretary of State Department of Archives and History. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-132. - Prohibition of interest. 
(a)	Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in which the county administrator, or any officer or employee of the county is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract the board of commissioners shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds such action to be in the best interest of the county. 
(b)	The county administrator and every officer and employee of the county are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person to which any purchase order or contract is, or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Secs. 2-133—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-150. - Surplus stock. 
All using agencies shall submit to the county administrator at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-151. - Disposition of real property. 
Disposition of real property shall be conducted as a public sale in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3 or as otherwise provided for by state law. The following exceptions apply to this public sale requirement: 
(1)	A redemption of real property acquired by a tax deed.
(2)	A grant of easement or license.
(3)	A grant or conveyance of right-of-way or other transportation purpose.
(4)	A conveyance to any other unit of government.
(5)	A conveyance of recreational area to the recreation authority.
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-152. - Disposition of personal property. 
The board of commissioners shall be the sole determinant of whether a particular item or group of items has no further value to the county. They may deem such personal property as surplus and order it sold by public auction, sealed bids, spot bids or by other means most advantageous to the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Secs. 2-153—2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BUDGET POLICIES 

Sec. 2-200. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for Meriwether County shall begin on October 1 and shall end on September 30. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-201. - General budget policy. 
Meriwether County shall strive to finance all current expenditures with current revenues thereby maintaining a budget. Meriwether County shall endeavor not to use short-term borrowing to finance current operational requirements, but shall not be prohibited by this policy from using short-term borrowing to meet operating budget requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-202. - Funds subject to budget process. 
All government funds, except capital project funds, are subject to the annual budget process. Capital projects will be subject to project length budgets. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-203. - GAAP. 
All budgets will be adopted on a basis accounting consistent with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Revenues will be recognized when they become measurable and available and expenditures are charged against the budget when they become measurable, a liability has been incurred, and the liability will be liquidated with current resources. Revenues will be recognized as available at the end of the year using the sixty-day rule. Expenditures will be recognized using the purchase method. If Meriwether County establishes a proprietary fund, that fund shall use the consumption and FIFO method of expenditure recognition for inventories. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-204. - Budget adoption. 
The budget shall be adopted by the approval of a budget resolution that specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories, the proposed expenditure totals for each department, each non-departmental expense, and each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget must be approved by resolution. The budget shall be adopted at the fund/department level, which is the legal level of budgetary control. The current year's budget may be adjusted to reflect changes in the local economy, changes in priorities or services needs, receipt of unbudgeted revenues and for unanticipated expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-205. - Balanced budget requirement. 
The budget must be balanced for all budgeted funds. Total anticipated revenues and other resources available unreserved fund balance must equal total estimated expenditures for each fund. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-206. - Lapse of budget appropriations. 
All operating budget appropriations will lapse at the end of the fiscal year. Encumbrances can be reappropriated in the next fiscal year by a budget amendment. Capital budget appropriations under the capital improvement program shall be appropriated with project-length balanced budget for major projects. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-207. - Provision for maintenance and operation of capital equipment. 
The operating budget will provide for adequate maintenance and operation of capital equipment and facilities and allocate funds to the capital budget for their orderly replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-208. - Establishment of fund balance reserve. 
Meriwether County will strive to establish a fund balance reserve for the general fund to pay expenditures caused by unforeseen emergencies, for revenue shortfalls and to eliminate short-term borrowing for cash flow purposes or because of the schedule of tax collections. The reserve will be maintained at an amount that represents no more than $2,000,000.00 or three months of operating expenditures whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-209. - Contingency line item. 
Meriwether County will strive to include a contingency amount in the general fund budget for unforeseen or emergency operating expenditures. The amount of the contingency will be no more than three percent of the operating budget. Meriwether County will endeavor to fund contingencies from the unreserved fund balance but may use general fund appropriations until sufficient fund balance has been accrued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-210. - Department level budget control. 
The budget shall be adopted at the legal level of budgetary control that is the fund/department level. Transfers of non-personal appropriations within a department shall require only the approval of the county administrator. Transfers between departments or funds, an increase of a personal services appropriation, or an increase in the level of authorized positions shall require the approval of the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners. Department heads and elected officials are directed to operate within budget limitations to prevent "emergency" situations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-211. - Budget amendments. 
The Meriwether County Board of Commissioners may authorize new projects or expenditures during the budget year by adopting a budget resolution that includes the project cost and revenue source. Each budget resolution must be balanced. The county commissioners shall adopt on a quarterly basis a budget amendment that incorporates all of the budget resolutions for the previous quarter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-212. - Budget officer. 
The county administrator is designated as the budget officer for Meriwether County. He shall prepare a budget calendar, a balanced budget proposal and a budget resolution to be presented to the county commission. He shall prepare a revenue plan itemizing all anticipated county revenues. The county administrator shall be responsible for the preparation, administration and fiscal control of the budget. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-213. - Departmental input. 
The county administrator shall utilize a decentralized budget process that gives department heads and constitutional officers the opportunity to provide input into the budget process. The department heads and constitutional officers must provide a current service level budget with a letter recommending any expanded service levels or additional personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-214. - Compliance with state law. 
The county administrator is charged with insuring that Meriwether County shall comply with all state laws applicable to budget hearings, public notices, public inspection, and budget adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-215. - Payment of bills. 
The county will pay bills weekly on Thursdays. Department heads and elected officials are directed to submit payment requests within this timeframe. The county administrator shall, however, have the authority to issue special checks up to a maximum of $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-216. - Performance measurement. 
Meriwether County will strive to integrate performance measurement and objectives and productivity indicators within the budget. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-217. - Budgetary control system. 
Meriwether County will maintain a budgetary control system to ensure adherence to the budget and will prepare timely financial reports comparing actual revenues expenditures and encumbrances with budgeted amounts. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-218. - Capital budget projects. 
Capital projects will be undertaken to preserve infrastructure and public facilities; promote economic development and enhance the quality of life; improve the delivery of services; preserve community assets; and improve economically depressed areas and those with low and moderate income households. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-219. - Capital improvement program. 
Meriwether County will seek to develop and maintain a five year capital improvement program (CIP) annually to direct the financing of and appropriations for all capital projects. Meriwether County defines a capital project for inclusion in the CIP as any asset or project in excess of $10,000.00 with an estimated useful life of three or more years. Meriwether County will coordinate the development of the capital improvement program with the development of the operating budget to insure that future operating costs are projected and included in the operating budget where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-220. - Vehicle replacement. 
Meriwether County will develop a program to replace authorized vehicles and equipment without significant impact to the capital budget. This program is to include a budgeted capital replacement allocation from the departmental section of the general fund to replace assigned vehicles. This section shall authorize the establishment of a local resource capital project fund for the acquisition of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-221. - Authorization to seek grants. 
Meriwether County will seek public and private grants, contracts, and other outside sources of revenue to fund projects included in the capital improvement program. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-222. - Budget length for capital projects. 
Budgets for capital projects shall not lapse at the end of a fiscal year. They shall be adopted in a project length budget and remain in effect until project completion. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-223. - Capital asset threshold. 
The threshold for recording capital assets in the general fixed asset account group (GFAAG) shall be a cost of $10,000.00 and an estimated useful life of three or more years. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Secs. 2-224—2-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INVESTMENTS 

Sec. 2-250. - Investment policy. 
Meriwether County shall strive to insure the safety and liquidity of its investments, to ensure the highest possible return on investments and to maximize the utilization of excess county funds. This investment policy applies to all funds under the control of Meriwether County and accounted for in or annual financial report and include: 
(1)	General fund.
(2)	Special revenue fund.
(3)	Jail fund.
(4)	Capital project fund.
(5)	Other funds as may be created.
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-251. - Investment criteria. 
(a)	Safety. Preservation of principal shall always be the foremost objective in any investment transaction involving county funds. Those individuals investing funds on the county's behalf must first ensure that capital losses are avoided by limiting credit and interest risk. Credit risk is the risk that market value portfolios will fall due to an increase in general interest rates. 
(b)	Liquidity. The second objective shall be the maintenance of sufficient liquidity within the investment portfolio. The county's investment portfolio shall be structured such that securities mature at the time when cash is needed to meet anticipated demands (static liquidity). Additionally, since all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should maintain some securities with active secondary or resale markets (dynamic liquidity). 
(c)	Return on investment. The third objective shall be the realization of competitive investment rates, relative to the risk being assumed. However, yield on the county's investment portfolio is of secondary importance compared to the safety and liquidity objectives described above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-252. - Delegation of authority. 
The Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County shall establish the overall investment policies for Meriwether County. The Meriwether County Administrator is designated as the investment director for the county and is authorized to make all appropriate investment decisions within the scope of those policies. The county administrator shall maintain a standard of prudence in accord with the "prudent person rule" that all investment decisions will be made with the judgment and care a person of intelligence and prudence would exercise in the administration of their own affairs. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-253. - Acceptable investments. 
All investments of Meriwether County shall adhere to O.C.G.A. § 36-83-4, and the county may invest and reinvest any money subject to its control and jurisdiction in: 
(1)	Obligations of this state or of other states;
(2)	Obligations issued by the United States government;
(3)	Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a United States government agency; 
(4)	Obligations of any corporation of the United States government;
(5)	Prime bankers' acceptances;
(6)	The local government investment pool established by O.C.G.A. § 36-83-8;
(7)	Repurchase agreements; and
(8)	Obligations of other political subdivisions of this state.
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-254. - Allocation of interest. 
All interest earned from investments unless otherwise indicated by action of the board of commissioners shall be retained within the fund generating the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-255. - Pledges of collateral required. 
Meriwether County shall require pledges of collateral for all cash deposits and investments from depository institutions as required by the O.C.G.A. § 36-83-5. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Secs. 2-256—2-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEBT MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-275. - Purpose. 
Meriwether County will utilize long-term debt only for capital improvement projects that are too extensive to be financed from current revenue sources. Meriwether County will not use long-term debt to finance current or on-going operations of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-276. - Debt limitations. 
Meriwether County is authorized by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia to issue general obligation bonds not in excess of 10 percent of the assessed values of all taxable property within the county and for a period of time not to exceed thirty years. However, Meriwether County will remain cognizant of the millage assessed for repayment of general government debt and will strive to maintain a stable millage in the debt service area for the benefit of its taxpayers. Where feasible, special assessment, revenue and other self-supporting bonds will be utilized instead of general obligation bonds. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-277. - Types of debt. 
Meriwether County is permitted to issue any form of debt that does not contradict the existing Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. These include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	General obligation bonds.
(2)	Revenue bonds for Meriwether County Proprietary Funds.
(3)	Intergovernmental contracts.
(4)	Lease purchases.
(5)	Certificates of participation.
(6)	Temporary loans.
(7)	Tax anticipation notes or any other revenue anticipation borrowing will be avoided if possible. In the event such borrowing occurs on an emergency basis, the debt will be retired in full by the end of the calendar year in which it is incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-278. - Debt features. 
(a)	Maturity of debt. When Meriwether County utilizes long-term financing, the county shall pay back the debt within a period of time that does not exceed the life of the project financed. The county will seek level or declining debt repayment schedules and will avoid the use of balloon principal payments at the end of the term of the borrowing. 
(b)	Redemption provisions. Where cost effective, the county will incorporate early call or prepayment features into the structured debt. 
(c)	Rates. Due to the higher volatility of variable rate debt, Meriwether County will examine each variable rate borrowing closely on a case-by-case basis before issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-279. - Interfund loans. 
Where cost effective, the county may choose to issue loans between funds within its reporting entity. The interest rate applied to such loans will be at the lowest available rate the county could obtain on the market or from governmental pooled resources. The county budget officer will complete a document outlining the amount, rate, repayment terms, and other such pertinent items after direction is issued by the county commission to complete the interfund loan transaction. Careful analysis will be performed on the lending fund's working capital to assure adequate cash flows will remain after the money is transferred to the borrowing fund. The lending fund will not incur financial hardship or an increase in rate structure as a result of the transaction. If the loan is considered non-current, the loan transaction should be listed as an advance and a reserve to fund balance created. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Secs. 2-280—2-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CAPITAL ASSETS 

Sec. 2-300. - Capital asset criteria. 
A capital asset is defined as a financial resource meeting all of the following criteria: 
(1)	It is tangible in nature.
(2)	It has a useful life of greater than three years.
(3)	It is not a repair part or supply item.
(4)	It has a value equal to, or greater than, the capitalization threshold of $10,000.00.
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-301. - Valuation of capital assets. 
All assets shall be valued at original or historic cost. If the historic cost is not available Meriwether County may use either standard costing of a like unit at the estimated date of acquisition or back trending to arrive at an estimated cost based on the use of current cost factored by the price index since acquisition. Contributed capital assets shall be valued at fair market value. Meriwether County is a Phase Three Government under GASBS 34 and will not be required to value or retroactively report existing infrastructure. All new infrastructure as defined by GASBS 34 will be reported subsequent to January 1, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-302. - Recording of capital assets. 
All capital assets that meet the capitalization threshold of $10,000.00 shall be recorded and maintained in the general fixed asset account group. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-303. - Depreciation method. 
Meriwether County shall use the straight-line method of depreciating capitalized assets. Meriwether County will depreciate infrastructure and not implement the modified approach for infrastructure. Useful life will be determined following best current practices. Fully depreciated assets that remain in use shall remain in the GFAAG. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-304. - General policy. 
(a)	Each department head is ultimately responsible for the proper recording, acquisition, transfer, and disposal of all assets within their department. County property may not be acquired, transferred, or disposed of without first providing proper documentation. 
(b)	Recording of capital assets. Unless otherwise approved by the county administrator, all capital assets must be recorded within 30 calendar days after receipt and acceptance of the asset. An inventory control tag must be applied to all capital assets. An inventory tag shall be applied to all inventory items with cost of over $500.00. 
(c)	Acquisition of capital assets. There are various methods by which assets can be acquired. The asset acquisition method determines the basis or valuing the asset. capital assets may be acquired in the following ways: 
(1)	New purchases.
(2)	Donations.
(3)	Transfers from other county departments.
(4)	County surplus.
(5)	Internal/external construction.
(6)	Lease purchases.
(7)	Trade-in.
(8)	Forfeiture or condemnation.
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-305. - Valuing capital assets. 
(a)	Purchased assets will be capitalized at acquisition cost, including expenses incurred in preparing the asset for use. 
(b)	Donated assets shall be recorded at fair market value as determined by the department head. Fair market value may be defined as, but is not limited to, an average of documented prices for equivalent items from three separate vendors. 
(c)	The county will recognize acquisition costs based on individual unit prices. assets should not be grouped. 
(d)	For equipment purchases, title is considered to pass at the date the equipment is received. Similarly, for donated assets, title is considered to pass when the asset is available for the agency's use and when the agency assumes responsibility for maintaining the asset. 
(e)	Constructed assets are transferred from the construction in progress account to the related building, improvements other than buildings, or equipment accounts when they become operational. Constructed buildings, for example, are assumed to be operational when an authorization to occupy the building is issued, regardless of whether or not final payments have been made on all the construction contracts. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-306. - Lease purchases. 
Assets may be lease-purchased through installment purchases or through lease financing arrangements. All lease purchases are subject to annual appropriation and must be renewed annually. Title cannot transfer to the county until obligation is settled. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-307. - Transfer of capital assets. 
An asset transfer between departments is recorded under the new department with original acquired date and funding amount. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-308. - Sale of capital assets. 
Sale of capital assets by the county must be to the highest, responsible bidder and must be conducted by sealed bid or by auction. The sale must be publicized in accordance with state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-309. - Disposal of capital assets. 
When an asset is disposed of, its value is removed from the financial balances reported and from inventory reports; however, the asset record, including disposal information, remains on the master file for three years, in the county administrator's office, after which time it is purged from the system according to general accepted accounting principles. This preserves an audit trail for disposed items, and facilitates departmental comparisons between actual or historical useful life information with useful life guidelines. 
Capital assets may be disposed of in any one of six ways: 
(1)	Sale or trade-in.
(2)	Abandonment/retirement.
(3)	Lost or stolen.
(4)	Transfer.
(5)	Cannibalization (taking parts and employing them for like uses within the department, such as is often the practice in computer or vehicle maintenance). 
(6)	Casualty loss.
Assets are "abandoned" or "retired" when there is no longer any use for them in the department, they are of no safe or appropriate use to any other county department, and they cannot be repaired, transferred, cannibalized, sold, or traded-in. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-310. - Report of stolen items. 
Stolen items must be reported to the Meriwether County Sheriff and a report filed. A copy of this report must accompany the disposal record. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-311. - Casualty losses. 
Casualty losses must be documented within 24 hours of loss and reported to the county administrator immediately for follow-up with the county's insurance carrier. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-312. - Cannibalized items. 
Cannibalized items are considered surplus and are disposed of by noting cannibalization on the disposal record. Departments will send documentation of items cannibalized to the county administrator's office, and all remaining costs and accumulated depreciation will be removed from appropriate asset accounts in the general capital asset fund. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-313. - General policy. 
All assets no longer in the possession of the department, due to one of these six qualifying conditions listed in section 2-309 and after submission of all appropriate documentation to the county administrator's office, will be removed from the master departmental asset file and considered disposed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-314. - Departmental review. 
Department management is responsible for reviewing disposal reports, evaluating causes and trends leading to disposals, and implementing procedures to more effectively manage and control disposals when the dispositions represent problems, inefficiencies, and/or the incurrence of unnecessary cost. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-315. - Annual physical inventory. 
An annual physical inventory of all capital assets will be performed by the county administrator's office. The inventory will be conducted with the least amount of interruption possible to the department's daily operation. A full report of the results of the inventory will be sent, within 30 days of completion, to all departments for verification and acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Secs. 2-316—2-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - GRANTS 

Sec. 2-325. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this policy is to provide direction in the application acceptance and administration of funds awarded through grants to the county from other local governments, the state or federal government, non-profit agencies, philanthropic organizations and the private sector. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-326. - Application and acceptance of grants. 
(a)	The county administrator is given authority to make application for and accept grants that: 
(1)	Are expected to be $50,000.00 or less on an annual basis with no required county match; or 
(2)	Are expected to be $25,000.00 or less on an annual basis with a required match of 20 percent or less; or, 
(3)	Are expected to be $10,000.00 or less on an annual basis with a required match of over 40 percent. 
(b)	The county commission must approve the application of and acceptance of any grants in excess of the limits established in this section. 
(c)	The county will assess the merits of a particular program as if it were funded with local tax dollars. Local tax dollars will not be used to make up for losses of intergovernmental aid without first reviewing the program and its merits as a budgetary increment. Therefore, no grant will be accepted that will incur management and reporting costs greater than the grant amount. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-327. - Grant administration. 
(a)	Each department, authority or board must notify the county administrator upon acceptance of any grant. Prior to the receipt or expenditure of grant revenues, the county administrator must be provided with the following information prior to receiving grant revenues or making purchases against the grant: 
(1)	Copy of grant application.
(2)	Notification of grant award.
(3)	Financial reporting and accounting requirements including separate account codes and/or bank accounts. 
(4)	Schedule of grant payments.
(b)	Each board shall establish two funds for grant disbursements. They shall be a major grant fund for all single grants in excess of $50,000.00 or two percent of county revenue and a multiple grant fund to accumulate by division all grants under $50,000.00. These funds shall be subject to audit by the independent auditor and all state grant funds must have annual reports completed and submitted to the state department of audits. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Secs. 2-328—2-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - INTERNAL CONTROLS 

Sec. 2-340. - Purpose. 
The Meriwether County Board of Commissioners, in order to protect the assets of the citizens of Meriwether County and to provide for reasonable assurances that the government of Meriwether County is operating in an efficient and effective matter do hereby establish the following internal control processes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-341. - Objectives. 
Meriwether County shall charge the county administrator to develop policies and procedures sufficient to achieve the following objectives with a degree of reasonable assurance: 
(1)	Meriwether County shall maintain a sufficient level of reliability in our financial reporting to assure that the citizens and financial partners have a true and accurate picture of the county's financial and economic condition. 
(2)	Meriwether County, in order to protect the taxpayers of Meriwether County from unreasonable taxation and to provide adequate services to the county, shall develop policies and procedures to assure an effective and efficient manner of governmental operations. 
(3)	Meriwether County shall conduct its affairs in compliance with all applicable county, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-342. - Internal control components. 
In order to achieve the objectives listed in section 2-341, Meriwether County shall develop a comprehensive internal control system consisting of five interrelated components including a control environment, risk assessment process, control activities, an information and communication process and a process to monitor the quality of internal control performance over time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-343. - Control environment. 
The Meriwether County Board of Commissioners and the county administrator as management shall establish a control environment to set an ethical tone for the governmental organization. This ethical environment will serve as the foundation for the internal control process, provide discipline and structure. Key elements of this environment should include the following: 
(1)	The management should convey to the department heads and employees a sense of conducting operations ethically as evidenced by a code of conduct or other verbal or written directives. 
(2)	Management shall respect and adhere to all legal compliance requirements of the county, state and federal governments. 
(3)	The roles and responsibilities of department heads shall be clearly defined.
(4)	Department heads shall have adequate knowledge and experience to discharge their duties.
(5)	Management shall insure that all employees have adequate knowledge and training to discharge their duties. Management shall maintain an open door, non-punitive, process to allow staff to communicate all instances of non-compliance to procedures or risk to assets. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-344. - Risk assessment. 
The Meriwether County Board of Commissioners and the county administrator shall conduct risk assessments based on a structured approach on a five-year cycle. The purpose of the risk assessment shall be to identify, analyze and manage risk associated with the internal control objectives set out in section 2-341. All members of the organization shall participate in the risk assessment activities. The county administrator is charged with procuring or developing a risk assessment tool to be utilized in this process. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-345. - Control activities. 
Control activities. The Meriwether County Board of Commissioners and the county administrator shall develop policies and procedures to insure that their directives are carried out. Key elements of control activities should include: 
(1)	Reviews of actual performance versus budget, forecast and prior period performance to determine variations in performance, financial and operational, of the departmental and functional components of government. 
(2)	Approvals must be in writing and given by the governing authority of their designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-346. - Check writing activities. 
The person preparing the check shall not be the person signing the check. The development of a system of controls to check the accuracy, completeness and authorization of transactions in the management information systems and should include: 
(1)	Data entry checks.
(2)	Exception reporting.
(3)	Access controls.
(4)	Review of input and output data.
(5)	Safeguarding of assets against unauthorized acquisitions, use or disposition. The county administrator is charged with developing a system to restrict access to county resources. 
(6)	Segregation of duties to include at a minimum the separation of the following duties:
a.	Personnel/payroll. 
1.	Hiring/termination. The individual responsible for hiring, terminating and approving promotions shall not be involved with preparing payroll or inputting data. 
2.	Payroll. Time cards and timesheets must be reviewed by administrators before the data is entered. Employees and management must sign the document. The chairman of the county commissioners shall review on a quarterly basis all of the personnel salaries and wage rates. 
b.	Expenditure activities. 
1.	Purchasing/payment—Approval for transactions that generate expenditures.
2.	All county checks shall require a minimum of two commissioner's signatures.
3.	The person signing the check shall not be the person reconciling the bank statements.
4.	Check account reconciliations must occur within 15 days of receipt of the appropriate bank records. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-347. - Information and communication. 
The board of commissioners and the county administrator shall endeavor to ensure that the county has a system in place to provide reasonable assurance that the identification, capture and exchange of information is provided in a form and time frame to allow people to carry out their responsibilities. The county shall at a minimum: 
(1)	Ensure adequate source documentation for all transactions;
(2)	Provide reports on a timely basis to decision makers for review and appropriate action;
(3)	Ensure that accurate information is available to those who need it;
(4)	Establish a schedule of reconciliations and reviews to ensure the accuracy of reports;
(5)	Establish internal and external communication channels;
(6)	Ensure that employee's duties and control responsibilities are effectively communicated; and 
(7)	Establish an open and non-punitive channel of communication that allows employees to report suspected improprieties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-348. - Monitoring. 
The Meriwether County Board of Commissioners and County Administrator shall develop a process to assess the quality of internal control performance over time. Management involvement and oversight of the operations shall provide the key to determining significant variances from expectations and inaccuracies in financial data. The county administrator at a minimum should review all budget, financial and economic reports to provide independent reconciliations and reasonable safeguards. The administrator is charged with investigating and reporting to the county commissioners on any irregularities or deficiencies. Corrective action and follow-up must be implemented. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ACCOUNTING, AUDITS, AND FINANCIAL REPORTING 

Sec. 2-350. - Basis of accounting. 
(a)	Meriwether County shall use the modified accrual basis of accounting for all governmental fund types at the fund level. The county shall use the accrual method for all proprietary or fiduciary funds at the fund level. 
(b)	At the entity-wide level, Meriwether County shall aggregate the governmental fund information and report using the accrual basis of accounting. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-351. - Annual audit. 
A qualified external auditor in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7 will perform an independent audit in compliance with generally accepted audit standards annually. This independent audit must be completed and mailed to the state auditor within 180 days of the end of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-352. - Treatment of county authorities. 
The Meriwether County Recreation Authority, the Meriwether County Water and Sewerage Authority, and the Meriwether County Development Authority shall be component units of the Meriwether County Government and reported as such on all government wide financial reports. The county will require audits of their records and the records of any subsequent component units in compliance with state law and generally accepted accounting procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-353. - Comprehensive annual financial report. 
Meriwether County will endeavor to prepare a comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR) in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-354. - Accounting practices. 
Meriwether County will maintain accounting practices and an accounting system that are sufficient to enable the preparation and presentation of financial statements that conform to generally accepted accounting principles. Meriwether County has adopted and will maintain the Uniform Chart of Accounts for Local Governments in Georgia as approved and amended by the department of community affairs. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-355. - Financial statements. 
Meriwether County will issue financial statements that conform to governmental generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-356. - Financial reports. 
Meriwether County will issue financial reports at the entity level utilizing major funds as defined in GASB 34. The auditors will also include original budget information in the comparison section of the financial reports. Meriwether County will report at the government-wide level at a minimum with a statement of net assets and a statement of activities that will disclose the total of primary governmental revenue allocation to the governmental activities. The basis of accounting at the government wide level shall be by the accrual method. To project a true and accurate reflection of the county's financial health, Meriwether County will insure that all long-term assets and liabilities are accounted for in the government-wide financial statements. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-357. - Management discussion and analysis. 
Meriwether County will endeavor to include a management discussion and analysis with the audit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-358. - Maintenance of system of financial reporting. 
Meriwether County will maintain an ongoing system of financial reporting to meet the needs of the board of commissioners, department heads, and the general public. Reporting systems will monitor the cost of providing services where possible. The reporting systems will promote budgetary control and comparative analysis. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
Sec. 2-359. - Independent auditor. 
Meriwether County will enter into multiyear agreements when obtaining the services of an independent auditor. Such multiyear agreements will be for periods of at least four years and consistent with applicable legal requirements. Every four years the county will issue a request for proposal to independent auditors to provide an audit for county operations. The current auditing firm will be eligible to propose on this audit. The audit procurement process should be structured so that the principal factor in the selection of an independent auditor is the auditor's ability to perform a quality audit. In no case shall price be the sole criterion for the selection of an auditor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 10-25-11)
ARTICLE XIV. - ANTI-FRAUD POLICY 

Sec. 2-360. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the governing authority of the county to establish this anti-fraud policy to enforce controls and to aid in the prevention and detection of fraud, theft, waste, or abuse against the county. This policy applies to any fraud, theft, waste, or abuse or suspected fraud, theft, waste or abuse involving an employee (including management), a consultant, vendor, contractor outside agency, or person doing business with the county or any other relationship with the county. Meriwether County does not tolerate any type of fraud, theft, waste or abuse. The county's policy is to promote consistent, legal, and ethical organizational behavior by: 
(1)	Designating an ethics officer (county administrator);
(2)	Assigning responsibility for reporting fraud, theft, waste or abuse;
(3)	Providing guidelines to conduct investigations of suspected fraudulent behavior; and
(4)	Requiring each employee to attend annual fraud awareness training.
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-361. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all departments, divisions or other units of the county government receiving appropriations from the board of commissioners and to other agencies, as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-362. - Consequences of failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with this policy subjects any employee (including management) to disciplinary action, including but not limited to immediate termination. Any consultant, vendor, contractor outside agency, or person doing business with the county or any other relationship with the county, including collusive relations between county employees and consultant vendor, contractor outside agency, or person doing business in any way with the county that fails to comply with this anti-fraud policy could result in cancellation of the business or other relationship between the entity and the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-363. - Criminal consequences. 
The county reserves the right to refer any matter for prosecution if the results of an administrative investigation indicate the possibility of criminal activity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-364. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
Abuse means the intentional, wrongful, or improper use of resources or misuse of rank, position, or authority that causes the loss or misuse of resources, such as tools, vehicles, computers, copy machines, etc. Examples of abuse include: 
(1)	Using county equipment or supplies to conduct personal business;
(2)	An employee using non-confidential taxpayer information to get new customers for his/her outside business. 
This definition of "abuse" is not intended to be construed as all inclusive. 
Fraud refers to an intentional deception designed to obtain a benefit or advantage or to cause some benefit that is due to be denied. Examples of fraud include: 
(1)	Forgery or alteration of a check, bank draft, or any other financial document;
(2)	Theft of a check or other diversion of a taxpayer's payment;
(3)	Making payroll checks out to "phantom" employees;
(4)	Falsifying time sheets or payroll records, including but not limited to reporting hours not worked or a supervisor not allowing the reporting of all hours worked by hourly paid employees; 
(5)	Listing of beneficiaries who do not qualify (or no longer qualify) as family members for healthcare benefits; 
(6)	Falsifying travel and entertainment expenses and/or utilizing county funds to pay for personal expenditures; 
(7)	Writing off of delinquent receivables that have been collected;
(8)	Misappropriation of funds, securities, supplies, or other assets;
(9)	Impropriety in the handling of reporting of money or financial transactions;
(10)	Profiteering as a result of insider knowledge of county operations;
(11)	Selling confidential taxpayer information or using such information in the conduct of an outside business activity; 
(12)	Disclosing to others the securities activities engaged in or contemplated by the county.
This list defining examples of fraud is intended to be illustrative only and is not intended to be all inclusive. 
Theft means the act of taking something from someone or the county unlawfully. 
Waste means the loss or misuse of county resources that results from deficient practices, system controls, or decisions. An example of waste is not taking advantage of available early bird conference registration discounts. This definition of "waste" is not intended to be construed as all inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-365. - Responsibility to report suspected fraud, theft, waste, or abuse. 
Each employee is required to report any suspected fraud, theft, waste or abuse or other dishonest conduct to the employee's management or to the ethics officer (county administrator). Suspected improprieties and/or misconduct concerning an employee's ethical conduct should be reported to management (department head or supervisor) or the ethics officer (county administrator). Management (department head or supervisor) is required to report suspected fraud, theft, waste, or abuse or other dishonest conduct, including reports from employees or other individuals, to the ethics officer (county administrator). 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-366. - Responsibility to report. 
The ethics officer (county administrator) shall have the exclusive authority to determine the merits of a report of suspected fraud. This determination shall be made with the assistance of an internal audit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-367. - Identity protected for employees reporting fraud. 
The identity of an employee or complainant who reports suspected fraud, theft, waste, or abuse will be protected to the full extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-368. - Guidelines for handling a report. 
Whether the initial report is made to management or the ethics officer (county administrator), the reporting individual should receive the following instructions and information: 
(1)	Do not contact the suspected individual in an effort to determine facts or demand restitution. 
(2)	Allow the ethics officer (county administrator) to conduct the investigation. Do not further investigate the allegation. 
(3)	Observe strict confidentiality. Do not discuss the case, facts, suspicions, or allegations with anyone unless specifically asked to do so by the ethics officer (county administrator) or the county attorney. 
(4)	Retaliation will not be tolerated. The county will not tolerate any form of retaliation against individuals providing information concerning fraud or suspected fraud. 
(5)	Every effort will be made to protect the rights and the reputations of everyone involved, including the individual(s) who in good faith alleges perceived misconduct as well as the alleged violators. 
(6)	The identity of an employee or other individual who reports in good faith a suspected act of fraud will be protected as provided by this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-369. - Duty of ethics officer to employees involved in a report. 
The ethics officer (county administrator) shall make every effort to protect the rights and the reputations of everyone involved in a report of suspected fraud, including the individual who in good faith alleges perceived misconduct, as well as the alleged violator(s). The ethics officer (county administrator) also shall make every effort to protect the identity of a person who in good faith reported the suspected fraud. However, disciplinary action may be taken as provided by this policy if a report is made in bad faith. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-370. - Preliminary investigation. 
On receiving a report of suspected fraud, theft, waste or abuse, the ethics officer (county administrator) shall document the contact and conduct a preliminary investigation to determine the credibility of the report. If the report is credible, the ethics officer (county administrator) shall follow the investigation guidelines provided in this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-371. - Procedure for report against the ethics officer. 
In the event of a suspected case reported involving the ethics officer (county administrator), the report and the authority to process the inquiry under the same guidelines as presented herein shall move to Meriwether County's legal counsel and chairman of the board of commissioners. Further diligence of the reported case under this scenario will progress forward using the same criteria as provided within the anti-fraud policy. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-372. - Documenting determination. 
On determining that a report is not credible or is not a report of fraud, the ethics officer (county administrator) shall document this determination. The ethics officer's (county administrator's) documentation shall include support for the determination. The ethics officer (county administrator) will refer questions as to whether an action constitutes fraud to the internal audit division. The ethics officer (county administrator) shall maintain appropriate documentation regarding incidents of fraud and other fraud reports. The ethics officer (county administrator) shall develop and maintain guidelines for access to and security of this documentation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-373. - Reporting confirmed fraud to state auditor. 
The ethics officer (county administrator) is responsible for the full investigation and documentation of suspected fraud. The ethics officer (county administrator) has primary responsibility for the investigation of reported wrongdoing and all suspected fraud and for coordinating investigative activities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-374. - Confidentiality of investigation. 
Each employee involved in an investigation of suspected fraud shall keep the content of the investigation strictly confidential to the full extent provided by law. Investigation results shall not be disclosed or discussed with anyone other than those who have a legitimate need to know. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-375. - Preparation of incident report. 
If an investigation substantiates fraudulent activities, the ethics officer (county administrator) will prepare an incident report, which will be made available to the board of commissioners and the county attorney. The ethics officer (county administrator) shall prepare the report as soon as possible after the fraud is confirmed and shall document the content of the investigation, the findings, and any disciplinary actions taken as a result of the findings. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-376. - Inquiries directed to ethics officer. 
Any inquiries from the suspected individual, his/her attorney/representative, or any other inquirer shall be directed to the ethics officer (county administrator). If necessary, the ethics officer (county administrator) will refer these inquiries to the appropriate person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-377. - Actions subjecting an employee to disciplinary action. 
An employee who knowingly commits the following is subject to disciplinary action, including but not limited to termination: 
(1)	Has engaged in any form of fraud, waste, theft, or abuse;
(2)	Suspects or discovers fraudulent activity and fails to report his/her suspicions as required by this policy; or 
(3)	Intentionally reports false or misleading information.
Any member of management who does not pass to the ethics officer (county administrator) each and every report of suspected fraud made by an employee or other person is subject to disciplinary action, including immediate termination. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-378. - Mandatory fraud awareness training. 
Each employee is required to attend at least one session of fraud awareness training during each fiscal year. After attending the training, the employee must sign a form indicating that they have attended the training and understood its content. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-379. - Reporting confirmed fraud to state auditor. 
In addition to reporting each suspected fraud to internal audit, the ethics officer (county administrator) is responsible for reporting confirmed fraud to the state auditor's office in the manner required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Sec. 2-380. - Administration, interpretation and application of this policy. 
The ethics officer (county administrator) is responsible for the administration, interpretation, and application of this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-9-11)
Chapter 2.5 - AIRPORT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 91-0610, §§ 1—17, adopted June 10, 1991, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified within Ch. 2.5 as Art. II, §§ 2.5-21—2.5-38, at the discretion of the editor.
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; airport reorganization policy and procedures, § 2-36 et seq.; litter control, § 12-26 et seq.; taxation, licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; zoning, App. A; future land use plan, App. B.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2.5-1—2.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 2.5-21. - Adopted. 
The board of commissioners of the county hereby adopts and approves the rules and regulations in this article for the operation and use of the Roosevelt Warm Springs Memorial Airport to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the county by regulating county property. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-22. - Definitions. 
Unless from the context a different meaning is apparent, as used in this article, the terms hereinafter used shall be defined as follows: 
Airport shall mean the property shown on the airport layout plan as described in Exhibit "A" attached to the grant agreement between the Federal Aviation Administration (United States of America) and Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Airport manager shall mean the free base operator, county manager, officer or representative of the commission or, if none exists, the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia, having immediate charge of the airport. 
FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Owner shall mean the board of commissioners, acting on behalf of and under authority from the citizens of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, firm, association or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 1, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-23. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)	The airport manager shall, at all times, have authority to take such reasonable action as may be necessary to enforce this article and to efficiently manage the airport and its operations. In any contingencies not specifically covered by this article, the airport manager shall be authorized to make such reasonable rules, orders and decisions as may be necessary and proper. 
(b)	The owner has the right to and does hereby regulate all commercial enterprises using the airport as a base of operation, whether such operation is aeronautical or nonaeronautical in nature. No commercial operation of any kind or type shall be conducted on the airport unless specifically authorized by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 2, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-24. - Regulations—General. 
(a)	The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user thereof to obey all the regulations herein provided and adopted by the owner. 
(b)	The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and the user shall release and hold harmless and indemnify the owner, its officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use, as well as claims of third persons using the airport. 
(c)	The privilege of using the airport shall be upon the further condition that any person desiring to use the same shall furnish a policy of indemnity against personal injury and property damage in a reasonable sum as the owner shall require from time to time. 
(d)	Any person violating any of the airport rules and regulations may be punished as provided by law or ordinance or, at the discretion of the owner, be deprived of the use of the airport facilities for such period of time as may be necessary to be effective, or both. 
(e)	No person shall solicit funds for any purpose, and no signs or advertisements may be posted at the airport without permission of the owner. 
(f)	Garbage, refuse and other waste material shall be placed in receptacles provided for such purpose, and no person shall destroy, remove or disturb in any way buildings, signs, equipment, markers or other property on the airport. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 3, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-25. - Same—Surface vehicles. 
(a)	Unless otherwise authorized by the airport manager, no highway or automotive vehicle shall be operated on the airport except on roadways, parking areas, or designated entrances and exits for automobiles that are specifically designated for such vehicles. Such vehicles shall be parked in the manner prescribed by the airport manager while on the airport and as indicated by posted signs. 
(b)	No surface vehicles shall be permitted on the runways, taxiways, aprons or ramps without the express permission of the airport manager, unless the operation of such vehicle is in accordance with prior agreement to accomplish a necessary airport purpose, service or inspection. 
(c)	No person shall operate any vehicle in a careless or negligent manner or in disregard for the safety of others or in excess of posted speed limits. All small aircraft have the right-of-way over all surface vehicles. 
(d)	All vehicles operating within the landing area shall be painted a bright yellow or international orange, or display an international orange and white checkered flag of not less than three (3) feet square, with one-foot squares. 
(e)	Any accident involving injury or property damage shall be reported to the airport manager or owner. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 4, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-26. - Same—Aircraft operation, maintenance. 
(a)	The FAA air traffic rules and regulations governing the operation of aircraft in effect as of June 10, 1991, as well as all additions thereto, are made a part of these airport rules and regulations as fully as if set forth herein. 
(b)	No aircraft shall be parked or stored at the airport except in the areas designated for such use. 
(c)	The performance of aircraft engine repair and maintenance is considered to be an aeronautical service regulated by the owner except where such services or repairs are performed by the aircraft owner or his employees. The airport owner reserves the right to designate reasonable areas where such aircraft owners may perform services on their own aircraft. If such areas are designated, the owner may prohibit the performance of such services in tie-down areas and prescribe rules for the use of such owner-type aircraft maintenance areas. 
(d)	At the direction of the airport manager, the operator, owner or pilot of an illegally parked aircraft on the airport shall move the aircraft to a legally designated parking area on the airport. If the operator refuses to comply with the directions, the owner, through the airport manager, may tow the aircraft to such place, at the operator's expense and without liability for damage that may result from such moving. 
(e)	The airport manager shall have the authority to detain any aircraft for nonpayment of any charges due. The use or participation in the use of the airport as described herein shall be deemed as an agreement by the user of such airport as a grant of this authority to the airport manager or owner. 
(f)	All takeoffs and landings shall be confined to the runways, and all movement of aircraft shall be confined to the hard surface areas. 
(g)	No person, except airmen, duly authorized personnel, passengers going to or from aircraft, or persons being personally conducted by airport attendants shall be permitted to enter the landing area proper, taxi space or aprons. However, this does not give any person so excepted the privilege of unrestricted use of the airport. These privileges are confined to the necessary use of these spaces in connection with flights, inspections and routine duties. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 5, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-27. - Same—Fueling. 
(a)	No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while the aircraft engine is running or while the aircraft is in a hangar or an enclosed area. 
(b)	During all fuel operations, the aircraft shall be grounded by an approved method.
(c)	Smoking or lighting of an open flame shall be prohibited within seventy-five (75) feet of any fueling operation. 
(d)	Fueling operations shall be conducted and fuel trucks shall be parked at least seventy-five (75) feet from any hanger or building. 
(e)	No fuel storage and dispensing equipment shall be installed and used at the airport without the prior written approval of the owner. All such equipment shall be of a modern design and shall be kept in a safe and nonleaking condition. The use of skid tanks and other such devices is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 6, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-28. - Same—Fire regulations. 
(a)	No person shall start an open fire in any place in the airport without permission of the airport manager. 
(b)	No person shall store material or equipment, use inflammable liquids or gases, or allow their premises to become in such condition as to violate, in any manner, the fire code in force in the area of the airport. The storage of paint thinners, fuels or other such volatile material in hangars is prohibited without express permission of the fire marshal or the owner. 
(c)	Tenants of all hangars, buildings, or occupiers of tie-down areas shall provide suitable fire extinguishers and equipment, and they shall be kept in good condition as recommended by the fire chief and inspected at least every twelve (12) months by trained personnel. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 7, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-29. - Minimum requirements for all fixed base operations. 
(a)	Generally. All fixed base operations at the airport shall be approved progressive business enterprises, with manned office facilities at the airport during designated business hours. No fixed base operator shall be allowed to operate on the airport without a fully executed lease agreement with the owner. 
All fixed base operators providing sales of aviation petroleum products shall also be required to meet the minimum standards and offer the services listed herein. Such operators may, at their option, engage in other aeronautical activities by qualifying to meet the associated minimum standards for the aeronautical services involved. No persons or fixed based operators, other than the operators qualifying under subsection (b), will permitted to sell aviation petroleum products. All other fixed base operators may engage in such other aeronautical services as they may qualify themselves for in accordance with these regulations and their lease agreements. No person shall sell or provide petroleum products at the airport without the express written permission of the airport owner. 
Fixed base operators must show financial solvency in business ability to the satisfaction of the owner. The minimum liability insurance for a fixed base operator shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage. The fixed base operators will be required to furnish to the owner a performance bond commensurate with the construction required under the minimum standards of service to be performed. All construction required herein shall be in accordance with design and construction standards established by the owner for the facility involved. 
(b)	Fuel and oil sales. Persons conducting aviation fuel and oil sales on the airport shall be required to provide: 
(1)	Hard-surface ramp space accessible by taxiway with electric pumps and tank storage having a capacity equal to the minimum tank truck load deliverable for 80/87 and 100/130 grade aviation fuel and, if public demand requires, also provide standard jet fuel. 
(2)	Properly trained line personnel on duty or, if on call, be readily accessible by telephone at all hours during the day or night. 
(3)	Proper equipment for repairing and inflating aircraft tires, servicing oleo struts, changing engine oil, washing aircraft and aircraft windows and windshields, and for recharging or energizing discharged aircraft batteries and starters. 
In conducting refueling operations, every operator shall install and use adequate grounding facilities at fueling locations to eliminate the hazards of static electricity and shall provide approved types of fire extinguishers or other equipment commensurate with the hazard involved in refueling and servicing aircraft. 
(c)	Flight training. All persons conducting flight training activities shall provide the following, but in no way is this article intended to lessen the requirements of the FAA in carrying out such flight training activities: 
(1)	At least one (1) dual-equipped single-engine land aircraft properly equipped and maintained for flight instruction and such additional types of aircraft as may be required to give flight instruction of the kind advertised. 
(2)	Properly certificated ground school instructor providing regularly scheduled ground school instruction sufficient to enable students to pass the FAA written examinations for private and commercial ratings. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 8, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-30. - Aircraft charter and taxi service; rental and sales. 
(a)	Charter and taxi service. Persons operating aircraft charter and taxi service shall have properly certificated, suitable aircraft with properly certificated and qualified operating crews available for service when not otherwise engaged in such service. Such crew and aircraft shall be available upon call within one (1) hour notice. 
(b)	Rental and sales. Persons conducting aircraft rental and sales activities shall provide airworthy aircraft suitably maintained and certificated, current up-to-date specifications and price lists for types and models of new aircraft sold and leased, proper checklists and operating manuals on all aircraft rented and adequate parts catalogs and service manuals on new aircraft sold. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 9, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-31. - Crop dusting and spraying. 
Persons seeking to conduct crop dusting or spraying of agricultural chemicals shall be required to satisfy the owner and operator that suitable arrangements have been provided for the safe storage and containment of obnoxious chemical materials; no poisonous or inflammable material shall be kept or stored in close proximity to other facility installations at the airport. The operator shall have available properly certificated aircraft suitably equipped for the agricultural operation undertaken. No crop dusting operation shall be conducted on a principal use apron or ramp of the airport. Adequate operational space shall be assigned by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 10, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-32. - Airport activities. 
Miscellaneous operations such as radio and instrument repairs, aerial advertising, aircraft tie down and other aeronautical activities not hereinbefore provided for may be conducted by any person upon application to and approval of the owner. Reasonable terms and conditions for the privilege of engaging in these various services will be established by the owner commensurate with the nature and scope of the activities involved. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 11, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-33. - Minimum standards for hangers and other buildings. 
Minimum standards for hangers and other buildings located or to be constructed on the airport property shall contain adequate square feet of floor space. For the purposes of this section, adequate square footage shall mean square footage necessary to safely carry out the service or other activity intended for use in the building. No building shall be constructed on airport property that shall contain less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of heated floor space. Buildings constructed on airport property shall be of a design that would easily accommodate an additional building being added to either side of that building. These buildings shall be fire-proofed and of metal or masonry construction, properly designed doors at both ends, stressed in accordance with the National Building Code or Standard Building Code, floor of properly constructed concrete of sufficient design, load strength to sustain all types of aircraft using the facility. Buildings for use as airplane storage (i.e. hangars) shall contain the total minimum square feet of one and one half (1½) times the total volume of the aircraft intended to be stored. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 12, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 91-43092, § 12, 4-30-92)
Sec. 2.5-34. - Equal access. 
All services shall be provided on a fair, equal, and not unjustly discriminatory basis to all users of the airport. The prices charged for each unit of service shall be fair, reasonable, and not unjustly discriminatory; provided, that the operator may be allowed to make reasonable and nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates, or other similar type price reductions to volume purchasers. The operator shall provide his services in accordance with the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Civil Rights Act of 1984 as amended (P.L. 88-352). Accordingly, no person shall be denied equal services on the grounds of race, color or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 13, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-35. - User fees and lease provisions. 
(a)	The prepayment for the use of the Roosevelt-Warm Springs Memorial Airport shall be based on an equal and fixed formula for all aeronautical activities. Each user of the airport shall pay a user fee based on the area of property used by the tenant. The tenant shall pay two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per acre per year for unimproved property in addition to the other stated fees contained in the lease attached to Ord. No. 91-43092, and made a part hereof. All users are required to execute that lease in order to make use of airport layout property. The tenant shall be responsible for gaining a survey of the area and quantity of land to be leased. The tenant must provide a certified copy of that survey to the county prior to the execution of the lease. The fee for maintaining an aircraft in the area designated for "tie-downs" shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month for single engine aircraft and fifty dollars ($50.00) per month for twin engine aircraft. 
(b)	An area of adequate square feet of office space, restrooms and lounge which, may be an adjunct to other buildings, must also be fire-proofed and of steel or masonry construction. "Adequate square feet" or other terms and requirements stated in this article shall be defined according to the National Building Code or the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 14, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 91-43092, § 14, 4-30-92)
Sec. 2.5-36. - Parachuting or skydiving activities. 
(a)	All entities or persons engaging in the activity of parachuting or skydiving, whether commercial or individual, shall adjust the flight patterns used in making jumps to a manner and procedure approved by the FAA. 
(b)	Reserved.
(c)	All commercial parachute jumping or skydiving activities shall furnish their official FAA manifest evidencing who has jumped and how many people have jumped within the last thirty (30) days. At such time the commercial operator or person carrying out the skydiving activity shall pay to the owner of the airport the calculated amount due (according to the user fee schedule maintained in the office of the clerk of the commissioners). The manifest and payment shall be due thirty (30) days after receipt by the airport owner. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 15, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 91-43092, § 15, 4-30-92)
Sec. 2.5-37. - Applications for commercial operations. 
Any applicant wishing to establish an aeronautical activity on the airport shall be furnished a copy of the minimum standards, as amended, and shall make application in writing to the owner, setting forth in detail the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant;
(2)	The proposed land use, facility and/or activity sought;
(3)	The names and the qualifications of the personnel to be involved in the conduct of such activity; 
(4)	The financial responsibility and technical ability of the applicant and operator to carry out the activity sought; 
(5)	The tools, equipment, services and inventory, if any, proposed to be furnished in connection with such activity; 
(6)	The requested or proposed date for commencement of the activity and the term of conducting the same; 
(7)	The estimated cost of any structure or facility to be furnished, the proposed specifications for same, and the means or method of financing such construction or acquisition of facilities. 
Upon the filing of such an application with the owner, it shall be immediately referred to the appropriate committee and considered at the next scheduled meeting. If no meeting is scheduled within thirty (30) days from the filing of such application, a meeting shall be called for considering same and notice thereof given to the applicant. 
Upon consideration of the application, the owner shall determine whether or not the application meets the standards and qualifications as herein established and whether or not such application should be granted in whole or in part. 
Upon approval of any such application in principle, the owner shall cause to be prepared a suitable lease or contract agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the fixed base operation shall be conducted. 
Any rejected application shall be returned to the applicant within ten (10) days of the rejection with a written explanation of the reasons for rejection. 
(Ord. No. 91-0610, § 16, 6-10-91)
Sec. 2.5-38. - Special airport uses. 
The owner obligates itself to operate the airport for the use and benefit of the public and to keep the airport open to the various types, kinds and classes of aeronautical use for which the airport facility is designed and intended to serve. 
The owner has established these rules to be met by all users so as to provide for the safe and efficient use of the airport and to otherwise protect the safety of persons and property both on the ground and in the air. 
It is understood that the landing area facilities constructed or to be constructed are primarily intended for the use of powered aircraft whose weights are not in excess of the published strengths of the paved surfaces concerned. Operations on these surfaces of aircraft slightly in excess of the published pavement strengths may be permitted on an infrequent basis with the permission of the owner. 
No operations involving nonpowered aircraft, including gliders, balloons, parachuting and other unusual and special classes of aeronautical activities, will be permitted on the airport without the prior written approval of the owner. 
Considering the owner's obligation to keep the airport open to the public for aeronautical purposes, the airport facilities will not be used for nonaviation events which would conflict with its aeronautical use. ;hn; (Ord. No. 91-0610, § 17, 6-10-91) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—An ordinance adopted Dec. 8, 2010, amended chapter 3 in its entirety as set out herein. Formerly, chapter 3, §§ 3-1—3-74, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation.Ord. No. 2011-01, adopted Apr. 13, 2011, corrected a clerical error in the above-mentioned ordinance adopted Dec. 8, 2010, inasmuch as it incorrectly set out the provisions for chapter 6, emergency management, rather than chapter 3, alcoholic beverages.
Cross reference— Rules for Lake Meriwether Park, § 8-30; dance halls, § 13-62; license application for billiard room, § 13-80.

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - General policies and purpose. 
(a)	Alcoholic beverages may be sold in Meriwether County only after the issuance of a license for such sale by the county and only in the manner permitted by said license. Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the county only by a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this chapter, and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	All licenses granted by the county for the sale of alcoholic beverages are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county ordinance and state law and subject to being revoked by the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County. 
(c)	Each licensee of the county shall display the license prominently at all times at the outlet for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each outlet of sale and a separate application must be made for each outlet. 
(d)	The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1)	Compliance with state law.
(2)	Guarding against monopoly and concentration of the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in one (1) group. 
(3)	Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons.
(4)	Promotion of appropriate land use planning and zoning in accordance with the county's comprehensive planning and land use policies and regulations. 
(5)	Protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions.
(6)	Protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage(s) means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Applicant means any one (1) or more persons applying for a license in the county or renewal thereof. 
Application means those forms required by the county to be completed by persons applying for an original license or a renewal license under this chapter. 
Beer and malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion of decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water, containing no more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. The term "beer" is used interchangeably with "malt beverage". 
Board of commissioners shall mean the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners. 
Brew pub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Building and planning director means the Meriwether County Building and Planning Director or his/her designee. 
Church means any place of permanent public religious worship and shall exist if a building permit has been obtained and construction of the church has commenced or substantial materials, or supplies for its construction, have been moved to the site. 
County means Meriwether County and when used in a geographical sense means the unincorporated areas of Meriwether County. 
County clerk means the County Clerk of Meriwether County or his/her designee. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquors means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila, and all other alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and with similar alcoholic content. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell malt beverages, wines, and distilled spirits and which derives at least fifty-five (55) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Family means any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to civil law. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Golf club means a corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the county prior to submitting an application for a license hereunder, having an eighteen-hole golf course of regulation size, a restaurant used exclusively for the purpose of preparing and serving meals with a seating capacity of at least sixty (60) patrons, a golf club membership, and has at least one hundred (100) paid-up members who have paid a membership fee for family or individual membership, and a full-time management staff for the social activities of the club, including the management of the premises where food and drink are sold. Food shall be served at least seven (7) days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacation, and periods of renovation. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two (2) individuals. 
Hotel means every building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed, sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, and having one (1) or more public dining rooms where meals are regularly served to such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels, shall be classified as hotels for the purpose of this chapter. 
Immediate family includes the spouses, parents, children, brothers and sisters, related by blood or marriage. 
Interest in license means an individual who is deemed to have an interest in a license if: 
(1)	He is the owner of the license;
(2)	He is the co-owner of the license;
(3)	He is a partner in any partnership that owns an interest in a license;
(4)	He is a stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in any corporation and/or is a stockholder in any corporation which has fewer than twenty-five (25) stockholders which owns an interest in a license; and 
(5)	He shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund having any interest in a license to sell at retail. 
License means the formal approval granted or issued by the county to a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages within Meriwether County. 
Licensee means the individual licensee and in the case of a partnership, corporation, private club, or nonprofit tax-exempt organization, includes the partnership, corporation, private clubs, or nonprofit tax-exempt organization and the named licensee. 
(1)	The licensee for all businesses shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
(2)	If the business is to be operated by an individual, the licensee shall be that individual.
(3)	If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the licensee shall be an individual who is a partner, or, if all partners are non-individuals, then the licensee shall be an individual who is an officer of any corporation which is a partner, or, an individual who is an officer, manager or agent of any unincorporated entity which is a partner. 
(4)	If the business is to be operated by a corporation, the licensee shall be an officer of the corporation. 
(5)	If the licensee is a resident of Meriwether County and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis, the licensee may also be the license representative of the business. If not, a license representative shall be named in accordance with this chapter. 
License representative: 
(1)	If the business is to be operated by an individual, the license representative shall be that individual. 
(2)	The license representative shall be a U.S. citizen.
(3)	If the business is to be operated by a partnership, close corporation, corporation, or other business entity, the license representative shall be a managing full-time employee who assumes an active role in the day-to-day operation of the business. 
(4)	The license representative shall be a resident of Meriwether County, Georgia, and shall be responsible for receiving all notices concerning said license pursuant to this chapter. 
Lounge/bar means a separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to, a restaurant or a room located in hotels as defined herein, and which serves no food. Lounges/bars shall not be permitted to sell or serve distilled spirits or spirituous liquors. Lounge/bars shall not allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume, and including, but not limited to, ale, porter, brown, stout, larger beer, malt liquor, small beer, and strong beer, not to include sake. 
Meal, regular meal means a meal which is prepared on the premises according to the order of the patron or customer given to a waiter or waitress at the table, booth, or counter area where the customer is seated and served by the waiter or waitress at said table, booth, or counter area. The term meal or regular meal does not include food served in a specialty shop; or prepackaged, individual meals. 
Outlet means the definite structure, whether a room, ship, store, building, restaurant, or club, in which activities permitted by this chapter are conducted. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises means not only the structure wherein an outlet for sale of alcoholic beverages is operated under a county license, but shall include all of the lot whereon said outlet is located, except where such outlet is located in a hotel or shopping center. Premises shall further mean and include any adjacent parking area used by customers of an outlet for sale of alcoholic beverages, except where such outlet is located in a hotel or shopping center. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Sheriff means the Sheriff of Meriwether County or his/her designee. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by fermentation, or natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term wine does not include cooking wine mixed with other ingredients to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Zoning means the zoning classifications as approved for the unincorporated areas of Meriwether County. 
Note— Additional definitions may be found in article VI (domestic and farm wineries). If conflicting, the article VI definitions shall apply to that article only. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Sec. 3-3. - License categories. 
(a)	The following categories of licenses and the cost of the same shall be issued pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)	Malt beverages. For sale by the package - $750.00.
(2)	Wine. For sale by the package - $750.00. (This does not include the various licenses issued in connection with the farm winery ordinance which is a separate category.) 
(3)	Malt beverages. Consumption on the premises - $750.00.
(4)	Wine by the drink - $750.00. (This does not include the various licenses issued in connection with the farm winery ordinance which is a separate category.) 
(5)	Distilled spirits. Consumption on the premises - $2,000.00. (This license includes for the same fee [$2,000.00] the licenses to sell malt beverages for consumption on the premises and wine for consumption on the premises. This does not cover any of the costs associated with a domestic or farm winery which is a separate category.) 
(6)	The license cost of any partner's licenses added to categories (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), and (a)(4) is $50.00. 
(7)	All applications for any of the above categories shall bear an application fee of $150.00. 
(8)	Any server seeking employment as such at an establishment serving distilled spirits by the drink shall pay an application fee of $25.00, which shall cover the necessary background check and the issuance of an identification badge. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2013-02, 10-22-13) 
Sec. 3-4. - License requirements and qualifications. 
(a)	Any person who desires to obtain a license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or by the package must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a corporation, the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as a part of the application process. If the applicant is a nonprofit tax-exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operating in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, such club or corporation may be licensed without reference to the financial interest qualifications of this section if no officer, director, trustee, manager, member, or stockholder therein can, in any event, derive any financial gain from the sale of alcoholic beverages by such club or corporation. The individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this section must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a private club, each member of its governing body must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. The specific qualifications are as follows: 
(1)	No license shall be issued to an applicant who is under twenty-one (21) years of age.
(2)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted to this country as a permanent resident. 
(3)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages may be issued to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
a.	An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of a felony, particularly, but not limited to, those offenses involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, tax law violations or violations relating to the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
b.	An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, tax law violations or violations relating to the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, if such conviction indicates to the board of commissioners that the applicant will not maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with the federal, state or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
c.	An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. For purposes of subsections a. through c. above, a "conviction" under this chapter shall include any plea of guilty or admission of guilt and subsequent sentence under the First Offender Act of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, or any similar sentencing provision for the first offenders of any other state or of the United States. A plea of nolo contendre for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or any county ordinance, except traffic violations, or the forfeiture of a bond (except traffic offenses) when charged with a crime is also considered a conviction under this chapter. 
d.	An applicant who has been held in civil or criminal contempt by any federal, state or local court if such citation indicates to the board of commissioners that the applicant will not maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
e.	An applicant for a license to sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises who has been denied or has had revoked for cause within five (5) years of the date of his/her application any license issued to him/her by Meriwether County and/or any other municipality, county and/or state to sell alcoholic beverages or an applicant for a package beer and wine license at an outlet in Meriwether County at which the license at that outlet has been revoked for cause within five (5) years of the date of the application. 
f.	An applicant as determined by the board of commissioners, by reason of such applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, records of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or local laws. 
g.	A location that is not in compliance with any federal, state or local regulation, including, but not limited to, a state certificate of occupancy or state fire marshal certificate of approval if the noncompliance has not been remedied by the applicant within a period of three (3) months from the date of the application. 
(4)	The applicant, whether it be an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a nonprofit tax-exempt civic, patriotic, or social club, or a private club, shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of the lease thereon for the period covered by the license. If the premises are leased, a copy of the lease will be furnished to the Meriwether County Building and Planning Director's Office with the application. 
(5)	The named licensees shall be active in the operation of the outlet and personally be present on the premises sufficiently to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the owner of the outlet is a corporation, the corporation and its principal officers shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If the owner of the outlet is a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If the owner of the outlet is a nonprofit tax-exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or a private club, the entity and its principal officers and/or governing body shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(6)	No license to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or in the original package shall be granted or issued unless the location within such area of the county is, at the time such application is made, located within one of the zoning designations permitting such use as prescribed by the zoning ordinances of the county. Private clubs shall be exempt from the above zoning classification requirements and need not contain such designations in order for a license to issue. 
(7)	No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to any outlet located within one hundred (100) yards of the property line of any church building or of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college building existing at the time of application. No license for the sale of wine or malt beverages by the package shall be issued where the outlet for such sales is located within one hundred (100) yards of the property line of any church building, school building, educational building, school grounds, or college building existing at the time of the application. The above provisions do not apply to renewal of a license or to applicants seeking a new license if the location was licensed by Meriwether County to sell alcoholic beverages at anytime during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application. For the purpose of this chapter, the schools or colleges referred to herein, shall include only such state, county, city, church, private, or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and expressly exclude buildings used by school officials solely for administrative purposes in which school children are not regularly taught. For purposes of this chapter, school and educational buildings shall also include daycare centers if the daycare centers receive state or federal funding for an educational program at the time of application. Distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground according to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(c). 
Unless waived by the building and planning director out of recognition of the absence of any school or church buildings in proximity to the outlet, all applications for a license shall have attached thereto a current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state showing a scaled drawing of the premises, the location or premises where the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet, and the distance in linear feet measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground from the subject applicant's structure to the property line of the tract which is located nearest the church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus building defined in this subsection. 
(8)	No license shall be issued to any person who fails to comply with all the rules and regulations regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages contained in this chapter. 
(9)	No license shall be issued to any person who owes any delinquent taxes, and/or assessments to Meriwether County. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-5. - The application process. 
(a)	Any person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink or by the package shall make written application to the building and planning director for the appropriate license on forms required by the county and filed with the Meriwether County Building and Planning Director's Office. All applications shall be fully completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a partnership, then each partner shall sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a corporation, the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises who is also the named licensee must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a nonprofit tax-exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, the individual being primarily responsible for the club or organization's compliance with this chapter must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a private club, then each member of its governing body must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
All applications shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)	Unless waived by the building and planning director out of recognition of the absence of any school or church building in proximity to the outlet, the application shall have attached a current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state, showing a scaled drawing of the premises, the location on the premises where the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet, and the distance in linear feet measured by the most direct route of travel, on the ground, from the proposed outlet to the property line of the tract upon which is located the nearest church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college grounds or college campus building as defined in this chapter. 
(2)	If the outlet is to be located on leased premises, then a copy of the lease must be attached. 
(3)	If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
(4)	If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
(5)	If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic or social club or corporation, which is organized and operating in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, a copy or the charter or articles of incorporation, as well as sufficient proof of the organization's tax exempt status shall accompany the application. 
(6)	If the applicant is a private club, a copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
(7)	As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints for all persons required to sign the application to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as specified under Georgia law. Each person required to sign the application for an original license and/or renewal license, must authorize the County of Meriwether or its designated representatives to secure from any state, county, municipality or federal court, any police department and/or law enforcement agency his, her or its criminal history and civil history and further authorize the county, its officers and employees to use such information in determining whether or not an alcoholic beverage license will be issued to the applicant. Further, the applicant must authorize the county, its officers and employees to use such information in a public hearing, if necessary, to determine whether or not the applicant's license should be denied, voided, cancelled and/or revoked. Each applicant waives any rights he, she or it may have under state or federal law, statute and/or court ruling to preclude the county from securing such criminal and/or civil history from any source and waives and right he, she or it may have to preclude the county from using such information publicly in determining whether the license will be issued to such applicant. 
(8)	The application shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check in the amount as set from time to time by the board of commissioners for an investigative fee. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded to the applicant. All other fees paid to the county, which were submitted as part of the application, including, but not limited to, the investigative fee, the sign fee, and any employee application permit fee(s) shall be retained by the county. 
(9)	All applications for licenses shall contain a full and complete statement of all material facts which tend to show whether the applicant or applicants, or any member or members of their immediate families, own a financial interest in any other alcoholic beverage outlets, or any interest in a wholesale alcoholic beverage entity, and/or distillery or brewery, and what interest they and each of them will have in the alcoholic beverage outlet being requested from this county. 
(10)	The building and planning director may require any additional information and records he reasonably deems necessary. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denying a license or revoking an issued license, and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(11)	Each applicant shall certify that applicant has read this chapter and if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of the licensee's employees to be familiar with this chapter. 
(12)	If the application is for sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, the applicant shall attach to such application a representative menu or bill of fare of prepared food or meals offered by the eating establishment to the public. 
(b)	Once an application, the accompanying documents described above, and the required investigative and license fees are filed with the Meriwether County Building and Planning Director's Office, the sheriff's office shall conduct a criminal investigation of the applicant and produce a written criminal investigation report concerning all information relating to the fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, prior alcohol violations, and other matters pertaining to law enforcement. In the event the failure to obtain fingerprinting information from state and federal authorities delays completion of the written report, the sheriff's office may later supplement any fingerprinting information. If the fingerprinting information later reveals that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, this may be grounds for denying the application or revoking a license, despite an otherwise satisfactory written report. Upon production of the criminal investigation report, the sheriff's office shall assemble the application forms and all accompanying documents relating to investigation and processing of the application and deliver such documents to the building and planning director for review. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant meets the requirements set by this chapter and the building and planning director believes that the applicant may meet all other qualifications of this chapter, then the building and planning director shall schedule the application for a hearing at the next regularly scheduled board of commissioners meeting and shall so inform the applicant of this fact before such meeting. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, or if the building and planning director finds that the applicant fails to meet all other qualifications outlined by this chapter, then the building and planning director shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his/her right to appeal; said appeal to be before the board of commissioners in accordance with section 3-13 of this chapter. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial by the building and planning director, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal hearing with the building and planning director within five (5) business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial by the building and planning director. 
(c)	Any application which the building and planning director determines to satisfy all the qualifications outlined in this chapter, including character requirements as contained in the criminal investigation report of the sheriff, shall be scheduled for review at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. At that meeting, the applicant and any person opposed to said application has the right to present to the board of commissioners any information that the board of commissioners determines is relevant to the licensing decision. In making its determination on whether to approve or deny the application, the board of commissioners shall look to the qualifications set forth in this chapter and consider the public interest and welfare. The board shall have the sole discretion to grant or deny the application based on the information presented. A decision by the board of commissioners shall be made within forty-five (45) days from the date of the board of commissioners meeting unless the decision is postponed for purposes of the board obtaining additional information deemed necessary for consideration of the application. Notice of the decision by the board of commissioners shall be mailed to the applicant. In the event the application is denied, such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal; said appeal to be in accordance with section 3-13 of this chapter. 
(d)	At the time the applicant makes application for a license, he shall pay to the building and planning director's office an amount as set from time to time by the board of commissioners as a nonrefundable sign fee for the posting on the premises where the activities permitted by such license are to be conducted, a notice of the pending application. The sign shall be posted and furnished by the county and will be painted or printed in black letters one and one-half (1½) inches in height, against an orange background, on a two-faced, back-to-back surface of not less than 14 × 30 inches in space, and shall be placed by the county with the base of the sign not more than three (3) feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises, facing the most frequently traveled road, street, or highway abutting same, and not more than ten (10) feet therefrom. The sign shall state clearly the nature and purpose of the application, and the name of the person, partnership, organization, corporation or private club making the application. 
(e)	In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for the same type of license for at least one (1) year from the final date of such denial. 
(f)	Upon the issuance of a license, the licensee must have and continually maintain in Meriwether County, a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served. This person must be an individual and must be a resident of Meriwether County, Georgia. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the building and planning director in such form as he or she may prescribe. 
(g)	Upon approval by the board of commissioners of the application for a license, the building and planning director shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the applicant is a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. If the applicant is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one (1) of the partners. If the applicant is a nonprofit tax-exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, the license shall be issued in the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter. If the applicant is a private club, the license shall be issued in the name of the private club and in the name of one (1) of the members of the private club's governing body who shall be the named licensee. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1, shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1, will be one-half (½) the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once the license is granted by the county. 
(h)	In the event the board of commissioners denies the application for a license, the applicant may appeal to the board of commissioners for reconsideration of the denial by filing a written request for an appeal hearing with the building and planning director within five (5) business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial. Any such appeal hearing concerning a denial shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in section 3-13. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-6. - Renewal of license. 
(a)	All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file a renewal application accompanied by the requisite license fee and investigative fee as set from time to time by the board of commissioners with the building and planning director's office upon forms prescribed by the county on or before October 1 of each year without penalty. Persons holding a license for more than any one (1) establishment and desiring to renew the license for such establishments shall pay only one (1) investigative fee charge. Applications for renewal filed after October 1 shall be subject to a late charge of ten (10) percent of the license fee. 
(b)	Each application for renewal will show the date of the original application and state there have been no changes in any of the information and data contained in and/or furnished with the original application and that the applicant or applicants for the renewal are familiar with applicable Georgia laws and regulations and with the rules and ordinances of the county. The renewal application must be signed and sworn to by all applicants in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. In the event it is discovered by the county that changes have occurred, which are in any way different from those facts shown in the original application and the documents furnished with the original application, the renewal shall be void. The applicant may be required to file a new application if changes have occurred in the information and data furnished with the original application. The applicant will furnish all information required by the renewal application and failure to furnish the information will be grounds for denying the application. A false statement made on the renewal application will void the application and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(c)	Each application for renewal of a license shall be approved or denied in accordance with the procedures prescribed in section 3-5 of this chapter, except that the public hearing for all applications of renewal will be conducted before the board of commissioners at the regularly-held December meeting of the calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-7. - Transfer of license. 
(a)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except upon the death of a licensee, at which time such license may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or lawful adult heir or heirs of such deceased person. If the legal representatives of such deceased licensee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter when the time arrives to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
(b)	Whenever a licensee doing business as a sole proprietorship loses its license as a result of the provision of this chapter, the licensee's successor in interest, upon filing an application for a new license, may continue to operate under the terms of the prior license until such time as the new application is approved or denied by the board of commissioners; provided, however, no such continued operation shall be authorized until such time as a new application for license is made and the required fees paid to the building and planning director's office. Payment of fees shall not be required of a corporation whose predecessor in interest remains the named licensee under the new lease. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-8. - Restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distribute, sell, or possess for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage when such person does not have a license from the county to sell or possess or manufacture for sale such beverage, provided that this subsection shall not be interpreted to preclude the otherwise illegal practice of private production of beer as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 or the private production of wine as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-3 for private use and consumption or to require the procuring of a license for a private party conducted at a private home, business, or other private establishment for which alcoholic beverages are provided at no charge. 
(b)	Except as otherwise authorized by law, no licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall sell or permit to be sold alcoholic beverages to any person under the legal drinking age as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(c)	No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall permit on the licensed premises the sale, barter, exchange, giving, providing or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
(d)	No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. The sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted on election days in outlets not located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place. 
(e)	No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall sell or permit to be sold any single beer, wine cooler, or similar alcoholic beverage that is customarily packaged for sale as part of a four-pack, six-pack, twelve-pack, or similar package as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
(f)	No licensee shall permit entry upon the premises of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, except as authorized under section 3-142. 
(g)	In any case where a reasonable and prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually twenty-one (21) years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or employee of the licensee, to see and to be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person or the person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and including, but without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or state department public safety identification card as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(h)	No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
(i)	No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises. This specifically prohibits the use of "to go" cups or any device permitting any person to remove the alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
(j)	No person employed or working in any capacity at any licensed outlet shall solicit or encourage patrons to purchase drinks to be consumed by or otherwise disposed of by any such person so employed or working as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
(k)	No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall add to the contents of a bottle or refill an empty bottle or in any other manner misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. No retail licensee shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(l)	It shall be unlawful for any delivery to be made to and/or sales be made outside of the outlet. It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages from "drive-in" or service windows. The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such outlet, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(m)	Reserved.
(n)	The licensee shall keep the premises clean, and in proper sanitary condition, and in full compliance with provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(o)	No licensee shall permit on the premises any gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pin ball machines, video machines, or similar machines which are in violation of the gambling provisions of the State of Georgia; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the lawful playing of bingo by establishments licensed to operate a bingo game under O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-50—16-12-62. 
(p)	When a change occurs in the relationship of a person, or in the status of any property or license, or any change in payment of rents, ownership of the lease, or buildings or land on which the outlet is located, any change in corporate ownership or management, any loss or damage to goods which result in a claim against an insurance policy and any change in the division of profits, any change in any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever, and any change in facts stated or claimed in any application or report herein required, a sworn statement of such change in all material facts relating hereto shall be filed with the sheriff's office and then forwarded to the building and planning director, and failure to do so within fourteen (14) days idler such change shall, unless such time limit is extended for good cause, be reason for cancellation of a license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. In the event that a licensee seeks to change the named licensee of an establishment, the application shall be amended by attaching a new personal statement, along with an investigative fee set from time to time by the board of commissioners. The new named licensee shall satisfy the qualification requirements as set forth in this chapter and be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(q)	Any violation of the provisions contained under this section may result in the suspension or revocation of the license held by the licensee and criminal penalties for the licensee or employee as provided for in Title 3 of the O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Sec. 3-9. - Regulations as to employees. 
(a)	Every licensee under this article shall maintain at all times on the premises for which the license has been issued, a list of all persons currently employed by such licensee at such premises, which list shall show the current full legal name, alias, date of birth, current address, current home telephone number, and Social Security Number of each employee. 
(b)	The licensee is responsible for the conduct or actions of his/her employees in his/her employment. An act or omission of a licensee, owner, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment that is willingly or knowingly performed, and that constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter, shall subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Criminal penalties may also apply to the licensee or owner when it is determined that the act or omission did occur, and the acts or omissions of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee or owner, were condoned by the licensee or owner, or where the licensee or owner has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring as prescribed by Title 3 of the O.C.G.A. It shall be the duty of the licensee hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter at the outlet and to instruct each and every employee engaged in the sale and/or handling of alcoholic beverages of the terms hereof. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-10. - Regulations on premises. 
(a)	A licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall display inside the place of business their current prices. 
(b)	The exterior of each building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are opened for business. 
(c)	The licensee shall post in a prominent location on the licensed premises, in a manner easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of Meriwether County and the State of Georgia in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage, intoxicated, or pregnant persons. Each sign shall be a size and configuration approved by the Georgia Department of Revenue and said sign shall be made available to said licensee by the building and planning director at a price to be established by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-11. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Any suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of a license by the board of commissioners shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the board of commissioners consistent with the procedures set forth in section 3-13, and upon the following occurrences: 
(1)	Any licensed outlet that is found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to license revocation or suspension and shall also be subject to criminal citation and prosecution as outlined in section 3-12. 
(2)	Every license issued by the county for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be immediately revoked in case of bankruptcy, receivership, levy of legal process, or failure to promptly account for and pay the excise tax levied on the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)	Except as provided for transfers under section 3-7 above, any change in ownership of any entity owning a licensed outlet shall cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(4)	All licensees must, within six (6) months after the approval of said license, open for business the outlet referred to in the application for license, and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the said license. Failure to open the outlet and begin the sales referred to within the six-month period shall cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke the license and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(5)	Any licensee who shall for a period or three (3) consecutive months cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized in the said license, shall, after said three-months' period, cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke the license, and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(6)	A license may be immediately suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)	Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the county license shall thereupon be immediately revoked. 
(8)	Reserved.
(9)	The board of commissioners shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any outlet which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to the board. 
(10)	The board of commissioners shall immediately revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(11)	It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee or licensed establishment to permit any person to engage in any activity on the premises for which the license is issued or within the place of business, which is in violation of the laws or regulations of any federal, state or county governing authority or regulatory agency. A violation of this subsection shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(12)	An act or omission of a licensee which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or regulation, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, taxes, gambling, violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, or constitutes a crime of moral turpitude, shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(13)	Any license shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year unless renewed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-12. - Enforcement of this chapter. 
(a)	Any violation of this chapter shall subject the licensee to the following progressive actions by the board of commissioners, except for those violations and occurrences set forth in section 3-11 above that provides for immediate suspension or revocation upon notice and hearing: 
(1)	The first violation shall result in a warning or a license suspension for a period of up to thirty (30) days. 
(2)	The second violation within a consecutive twenty-four-month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than thirty (30) days or more than ninety (90) days. 
(3)	The third violation within a consecutive twenty-four-month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than ninety (90) days or more than six (6) months. 
Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the board of commissioners from suspending a license for a period exceeding thirty (30) days or ninety (90) days, respectively, or from revoking the license if the board determines in its discretion that such action is necessary and in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of the county. 
In the case of a violation under this subsection by an employee, the suspension period may be mitigated by the board of commissioners upon presentation of evidence that the licensee established practices and procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(b)	In addition to the available actions to be taken by the board of commissioners, individuals who violate this chapter shall be subject to criminal citation and prosecution by the Meriwether County Code Enforcement Officer or Meriwether County Sheriff's Department. The criminal penalties may result in a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. 
(c)	Sworn officers of the sheriff's department and the building and planning director shall have the authority to inspect the outlet and premises licensed under this chapter during the hours when the outlet is open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county, state or federal officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(d)	In order to insure that the licensed premises are kept clean, and are in full compliance with all other ordinances and regulations of Meriwether County and the State of Georgia, the additional following representatives are authorized to inspect regularly the licensed premises: 
(1)	Representatives of the Meriwether County Health Department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all Meriwether County and State of Georgia Health Rules and Regulations and report any violations to the building and planning director. 
(2)	The Meriwether County Fire Department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all Meriwether County and State of Georgia Fire Regulations and report any violations to the building and planning director. 
(3)	The county has the right to have an inspector inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all technical codes of the county and report any violations to the building and planning director. 
(e)	Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee. The records shall be kept for a period of three (3) years from the date of purchase and sale and should at all times be open to audit and/or inspection by the building and planning director or any designated employee or any outside agent or agents for the county upon approval of such outside agent or agents by the building and planning department. In the event an audit is called for by the building and planning director, the building and planning director shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-13. - Hearing on denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(a)	Upon receipt of a timely appeal of a denial of a license, upon presentation of evidence to the building and planning director of a violation of this chapter, or upon a showing to the building and planning director of any of the other occurrences set forth in section 3-11 as grounds for suspension or revocation, the building and planning director shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners or their appointee and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The building and planning director shall also state in the written notice in reasonable detail basis for the denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the building and planning director and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)	The board of commissioners or their appointee shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the competent evidence presented at the hearing. At its discretion, the board of commissioners may appoint a special master to conduct said hearing and make findings of fact and conclusions of law and report such findings and conclusions to the board of commissioners and to the building and planning director. 
(c)	At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his/her case, to rebut the allegations made against him/her, and present whatever defense he/she has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(d)	At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the board of commissioners shall be forwarded to the building and planning director and it shall be the duty of the building and planning director to provide written notification to the adverse party of the actions of the board of commissioners, which actions shall comport with section 3-12 of this chapter. 
(e)	The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia, within thirty (30) days of the building and planning director providing written notification to the adverse party of the board's decision. 
(f)	For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by certified mail postage prepaid within three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Secs. 3-14—3-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE—ORIGINAL PACKAGE 

Sec. 3-51. - License fees. 
The license fee for a license to sell malt beverages and wine by the package shall be paid to the building and planning director in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners by certified or cashier's check at the time of the filing of the original application and the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners upon renewal thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-52. - Excise tax on the sale of beer and malt beverages. 
The county, in addition to excise taxes levied by the state, does hereby levy a local tax on the sale of beer and malt beverages of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces sold by wholesalers to retail package outlets in the county. Further, there is also levied by the county an excise tax on tap or draft beer of six dollars ($6.00) per each container sold by wholesalers to retail package outlets in the County of Meriwether and containing more than fifteen (15) gallons and a like rate for fractional parts where the draft beer is sold in or from barrel or bulk containers. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under section 3-223. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-53. - Excise tax on the sale of wine. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter on wines sold by a wholesaler to retail outlets in the county and a proportionate tax on the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under section 3-223. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-54. - Type of retail outlet. 
Beer and wine may be sold at retail, by the package, only in outlets maintaining seventy-five (75) percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other foods, groceries, and general merchandise. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-55. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package outlets shall engage in the sale of beer and/or wine only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. No package beer and/or wine may be sold on Christmas Day or Thanksgiving Day. The sale of beer and wine is allowed on election days provided the outlet is not located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2012-06, 8-28-12)
Sec. 3-56. - No consumption on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-57. - Listing of prices. 
Licenses shall indicate plainly by tag or labels on the bottles or containers, or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine offered for sale. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Secs. 3-58—3-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ON PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-131. - Locations where sale of distilled spirits is prohibited. 
(a)	No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises, except in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment sink, a stove or grill permanently installed and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health department) prepared to serve food every hour they are open, pursuant to the applicable building, fire and safety codes in effect for the county. In order to qualify to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises, eating establishments shall derive a minimum of fifty-five (55) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. An audit may be required at any time to insure compliance with these provisions. If such eating establishment provides a bar or counter service for the sale of distilled spirits for on premises consumption, the seating for such bar shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total seating capacity of the outlet. 
(b)	During the initial annual period in which a license is granted, by the twentieth day of each month after such license is granted, the licensee shall submit to the county a statement from a certified public accountant that the income requirements set forth in subsection (a) have been met. Thereafter, each distilled spirits for consumption on premises license holder shall submit annually at the time of the license renewal to the county the statement from a certified public accountant that the requirements of section have been met. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-03, adopted June 8, 2011, changed the title of § 3-131 from "Locations where prohibited" to "Locations where sale of distilled spirits is prohibited". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 3-132. - License fees. 
The licensee shall pay by certified or cashier's check a license fee for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to Meriwether County in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners to be paid at the time of application for said license and the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners for each annual renewal thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Sec. 3-133. - Excise tax. 
The county hereby imposes an excise tax upon every purchase of alcoholic beverages served for consumption on the premises of three (3) percent of the purchase price of said beverage. Said tax shall be paid by the licensee to the county, and remitted monthly by said licensee. The imposition of this tax shall be administered pursuant to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)	Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed herein from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licenses or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the building and planning director to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(2)	If requested by the purchaser, every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall at the time of collection for food and drinks served give to the purchaser a receipt on which the purchase price and tax imposed by this article on alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be itemized separately. In all cases where the collection of food and drinks is to be deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of, and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The building and planning director and the board of commissioners shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(3)	The taxes imposed by this section shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any alcoholic beverage by the drink in this county. The full amount of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable to the county monthly, on or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance department in such form as the building and planning director may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder; all returns shall show the gross receipt from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and the amount of the tax collected on such drinks. 
(4)	If the building and planning director has cause to believe that the return, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any licensee is not proper, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is available to him. Should the county determine that a deficiency exists in the amount of the tax due by the licensee for one (1) or more monthly periods, the amount of the deficiency shall be interest at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. The building and planning director or his designated representative shall give to the licensee written notice of this deficiency determination, and notice may be served by the county code enforcement officer or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the registered agent of the licensee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee or by receipt of mailing. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(5)	If any licensee fails to make a return, the building and planning director shall make an estimate of the amounts of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, the amount of the total sales within the county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is available to the building and planning director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in the preceding paragraph. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned until the date of payment. 
(6)	Any licensee who fails to pay the tax herein imposed, or fails to pay any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the county within the time required, shall pay a penalty or twenty (20) percent of the tax or amount of the tax or amount of the tax in addition to the tax or amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in the preceding section. 
(7)	At any time within three (3) years after any tax, or any tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax, or any amount of tax required to be collected, the county may bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the building and planning director, the excess amount paid the county may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the license, or may be refunded to the licensee if the licensee is no longer operating a licensed premises in the county. 
(8)	The building and planning director and the sheriff's department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax imposed by this section. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such forms as the building and planning director may require. The building and planning director or any person authorized in writing by the board of commissioners may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. In the administration of the provision of this section, the building and planning director may require the filing of the reports by any person or class or persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to the purchases which are subject to the tax. The report shall be filed with the building and planning director and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase, and such other information as the building and planning director may require. The licensee shall keep a copy of this chapter at the outlet at all times. All employees of the licensee will be informed of the contents of this section. 
(9)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the building and planning director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Sec. 3-134. - Hours of sale. 
Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. each weekday (meaning Monday through Friday), between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and midnight on Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and midnight on Sunday. All patrons must have exited the licensee's premises within thirty (30) minutes of the time which alcoholic beverages may no longer be sold, thus setting such exit time at 2:30 a.m. on each weekday, and 12:30 a.m. on the weekend. Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises on election days provided the outlet for such sale is not located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11; Ord. No. 2012-06, 8-28-12)
Sec. 3-135. - Consumption sales only. 
Licensees of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages by the package at that outlet and shall not permit a purchaser to remove from the premises any alcoholic beverage. This specifically prohibits the use of "to go" cups or any other device permitting any person to remove alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-136. - Licensee's price list. 
Licensees of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall display in prominent places, inside the outlet and/or on menus their current prices of alcoholic beverages. Provided, however, all licensees will keep a record of all sales of alcoholic beverages sold on which the excise tax is required to be paid under this chapter. No display of prices or brand names of alcoholic beverages to be served shall be displayed in such a manner as to be visible from the outside of the licensed outlet. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Sec. 3-137. - Patios and open areas. 
The consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations, as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress, and egress. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-138. - Regulation of happy hour promotions. 
No licensee shall advertise a happy hour or promotion of discounted drinks unless expressly authorized by this section. Eating establishments that derive a minimum of fifty-five (55) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food may advertise and hold a happy hour promotion, which may only take place on weekdays (Monday through Friday) between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-03, adopted June 8, 2011, changed the title of § 3-138 from "Happy hour promotions prohibited" to "Regulations of happy hour promotions". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 3-139. - Lighting. 
The exterior of each building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the outlet is opened for business. Also, the lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served, and all passageways shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that customers may be viewed by others inside the outlet. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-140. - Bring your own bottle "brown bagging" prohibited. 
No person may bring alcoholic beverages (brown bag) into any establishment, whether that establishment is licensed or is not licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, for the purpose of consuming alcohol on the premises during regular business hours of the establishment and/or while the establishment is open to the public. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-141. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-03, adopted June 8, 2011, repealed § 3-141 in its entirety, which pertained to organizations exempt from food service requirement and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 8, 2010. 
Sec. 3-142. - Age restrictions. 
Persons under the age of eighteen (18) years may be permitted to enter a food establishment serving food on the premises until 10:00 p.m. After 10:30 p.m., no one under the age of eighteen (18) years may remain on the premises of any food establishment serving food on the premises unless that minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11)
Sec. 3-143. - Nude dancing; findings; public purpose. 
(a)	Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia, and Fort Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by Meriwether County, Georgia, we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)	The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcohol beverages for consumption on such premises within the unincorporated area of Meriwether County: 
(1)	The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)	Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) above or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.	Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.	The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
c.	The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
(3)	The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above; provided, however, that nothing shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Secs. 3-144—3-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 3-181. - Definitions. 
(a)	"Private club" as used in this section means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)	Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)	Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members;
(3)	Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members and guests with: 
a.	Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment;
b.	A sufficient number of staff employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.	Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary of other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)	"A fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities, which are added to the bills under club regulations, shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-182. - License fees. 
A license fee authorizing a private club to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages shall be paid by certified or cashier's check to the county by the licensee in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners payable at the time of the application for the license or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-183. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-184. - Regulation. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations. The county, however, will grant no alcoholic beverage license to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
Secs. 3-185—3-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 3-221. - License required. 
Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages licensed by the State of Georgia or the agent of such wholesale dealer shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages to licensed retailers or dealers in the county upon application for such license to the building and planning director and the presentation of satisfactory evidence that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of this county and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-222. - License fees. 
A wholesaler of alcoholic beverages sold in the county whose principal place of business is in the county shall pay to the building and planning director annual license fees as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners for beer and/or wine. 
A wholesaler dealer who is licensed to do business in more than one (1) municipality or county of the State of Georgia and whose principal place of business is not in Meriwether County shall pay to the building and planning director a license fee in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners. Said license fees are payable at the time of application for a license or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-223. - Excise taxes. 
All wholesale dealers engaged in the wholesale distributions of alcoholic beverages to retail package outlets in this county shall pay to the building and planning director an excise tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter of wine sold to retail package licensees and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Further, all wholesale dealers will pay to the county an excise tax for malted beverages sold to retail package outlets in this county, equal to five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. Further, the wholesale dealers will pay to the county an excise tax on tap or draft beer in the sum of six dollars ($6.00) for each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons and a like rate for fractional parts where the draught beer is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container. Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report and payment within the time required shall result in a payment penalty of ten (10) percent of the excise tax amount due or two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is greater. Payment of this excise tax shall be made before the tenth day of each month for all sales made during the previous month. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-224. - Hours of sale. 
The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be from sunup to sundown only on days the outlets for sale of alcoholic beverages in the original package and by the drink are authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, excluding Sundays. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-225. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale license. 
(a)	No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. No alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to any outlet in the county except by a duly-licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(b)	Licensed wholesalers or their employees shall follow all traffic rules in effect for the county and shall not in any way conduct their business so as to interfere with the flow of traffic in the county. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Secs. 3-226—3-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOMESTIC AND FARM WINERIES 

Sec. 3-250. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Domestic winery means any winery, manufacturer, maker, producer, or bottler of wine located within Meriwether County, Georgia, and for which a license has been issued by Meriwether County. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that has received the appropriate permit and authorization from the Meriwether Building and Zoning Inspector, and the State of Georgia, and is located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery, or a domestic winery which (a) makes at least forty (40) percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in this state; and (b) is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the agricultural produce used in its annual production, as determined by the revenue commission. 
Georgia farm winery means a farm winery that is licensed by the commissioner to manufacture wine in the State of Georgia. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of the wine to the public, and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
Winery means a manufacturer of wine. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-251. - Winery license. 
(a)	No person shall engage in the business of manufacturing, distributing, or selling wine at wholesale or retail in Meriwether County, Georgia, without a license being issued by Meriwether County. 
(b)	All applicants for the issuance of a license to operate a domestic winery, including a farm winery in Meriwether County, Georgia, shall submit an application to the board of commissioners or its designee in such form as the board of commissioners or its designee shall require, and shall provide such information as the board of commissioners or its designee shall require and shall pay such fee or fees as the board of commissioners shall require before a license can be issued. 
(c)	Any applicant for the issuance of a license to operate a domestic winery, including a farm winery, in Meriwether County, Georgia, shall also be required to submit proof that a permit for a winery has been issued by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of Treasury. 
(d)	No applicant for the issuance of a license to operate a domestic winery, including a farm winery, in Meriwether County, Georgia, shall be allowed to operate a domestic winery, including a farm winery, until the appropriate license has been issued by Meriwether County, Georgia, and until such time as a license has also been granted by the Georgia Department of Revenue under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-20 et seq. 
(e)	A license to operate a domestic winery, including a farm winery, in Meriwether County, Georgia, shall authorize the applicant to conduct business and to operate in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-2, and in accordance with the rules and regulations issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Revenue provided, however, that a farm winery shall further comply with the provisions regarding the operation of a farm winery in Meriwether County, Georgia, also in accordance with and as required under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-252. - Sale by farm wineries. 
(a)	Farm winery may sell its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery licensee at retail in a tasting room on the premises of the winery for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises and to sell its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery licensee at retail for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises in tasting rooms at a location that is one (1) of the locations in the State of Georgia authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(b) and in accordance with the regulations of the commissioner described in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(c). 
(b)	The qualifications for a license to operate a farm winery tasting room shall be in two (2) parts: 
(1)	The same as set forth in the Meriwether County Alcohol Ordinance, except that a farm winery shall be authorized as a conditional use on any parcel of not less than ten (10) acres; and 
(2)	An applicant for a farm winery license shall be required to submit to the board of commissioners and display on its premises at the time it commences business, including the operation of a tasting room and at all times thereafter, proof that a farm winery license has been issued by the State of Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(c)	The license created in accordance with this section shall be limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 et seq., and the licensee shall be permitted to perform only acts allowed in accordance with such statutes. No license is hereby created authorizing any other use. In no event shall a farm winery license holder be entitled to receive a special event cash bar license. 
(d)	This section shall not be construed so as to authorize a farm winery to sell wine on Sunday on premises that are not located on the property where such farm wine is produced. A farm winery located on the premises where the farm wine is produced that is licensed to sell wine in a tasting room or other licensed farm winery facility for consumption on the premises or in closed packages for consumption off the premises shall be authorized in accordance with the terms hereof to sell its wine on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:59 p.m. in the tasting room or other licensed farm winery facility to the same extent as any other licenses issued in accordance with the terms hereof would otherwise permit. Monday through Saturday, the selling or tasting of wine at a farm winery shall occur from 10:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Sec. 3-253. - Licenses, fees, and taxes. 
(a)	The applicant for a domestic winery or farm winery license shall pay the annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)	Provided the applicant for a farm winery tasting room has also applied for a domestic winery or farm winery license pursuant to section 3-253 of this article, such applicant for a farm winery tasting room shall pay the annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each tasting room location. All other applicants for a farm winery tasting room shall pay the annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each tasting room location. 
(c)	An excise tax is hereby levied to be computed at the rate of twenty-five one-hundredths (.25) per liter on the first sale or use of the wine by the package that shall be paid to Meriwether County, Georgia. Such tax shall be paid to the designee of the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners by the licensee on wine sold in accordance with the terms hereof in Meriwether County, Georgia. Excise taxes received by Meriwether County, Georgia, after the twentieth day of the month shall be charged a ten (10) percent penalty. The twenty-five one-hundredths (.25) per liter shall be prorated so that all containers of wine shall be taxed on the basis of twenty-five one-hundredths (.25) per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any licensee in accordance with the terms hereof to sell or deliver wine in any manner without collecting said tax. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3); Ord. No. 2011-03, 6-8-11; Ord. No. 2013-02, 10-22-13) 
Sec. 3-254. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, clause, sentence, phrase, or part of this chapter for any reason be held, deemed, or construed to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof, and the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, each section, subsection, clause, sentence, phrase, and part thereof irrespective to the fact that one (1) or more sections, subsections, clauses, sentences, phrases, or parts thereof, be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(3))
Chapter 4 - UNIFIED ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of April 22, 2008 repealed ch. 4 and enacted a new ch. 4 as set out herein. The former ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-01, adopted Feb. 8, 2000; an ordinance adopted December 30, 1988, § 1; and an ordinance adopted April 11, 2007.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings given them in this section unless the context clearly requires a different interpretation. The use of the word "shall" means "mandatory", while the word "may" means "permissive". 
Abandonment means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal. 
Adequate food means palatable, uncontaminated, and nutritionally correct food sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation or significant risk to the animal's health from the lack of it. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent dehydration or significant risk to the animal's health from the lack of it. 
Adequate shelter means a structure having three (3) sides, a top, and a bottom, suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind, rain, and other elements with sufficient bedding inside the shelter during cold weather. 
Animal means any living vertebrate other than humans, rodents, and livestock. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the board of commissioners to administer and enforce this chapter. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the board of commissioners for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Board of commissioners means the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners. 
Guard dog means any dog maintained for the purpose of safety or security which dog is reasonably expected to attack other persons or animals either independently or on command. 
Humane care of animals means the provision of adequate food, adequate water, and adequate shelter to an animal consistent with its normal requirements. 
Inhumane treatment or care of animals means any act, omission, or neglect which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death to any animal. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health, administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian with a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian. 
Jurisdiction of this chapter means the unincorporated areas of Meriwether County except in those cases arising from joint government services under section 4-4 of this chapter in which cases jurisdiction shall extend to the combined area of governance of the local governments party to the contract for joint government services. 
Livestock means all animals so defined by O.C.G.A. § 4-3-2(1) as follows: all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals, and all ratites, including, but not limited to, ostriches, emus, and rheas. Also included are poultry, deer, giraffe, and other even-toed and hoofed animals. 
Meriwether County means the unincorporated portions of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Owner means any person, partnership, or corporation owning, possessing, keeping, or harboring one (1) or more animals; An animal shall be deemed harbored if fed or sheltered for seven (7) or more consecutive days. 
Public nuisance means if an animal: 
(1)	Is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner without the express consent of the person owning or occupying the other property; or 
(2)	Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways; or
(3)	Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; or
(4)	Is repeatedly at large; or
(5)	Trespasses on school grounds.
Records of appropriate authority includes records of: 
• Any county or municipal animal control agency; 
• County board of health; 
• Federal, state, or local court; or 
• Any animal control officer employed under this chapter. 
Restraint means: 
•  Having an animal on a leash or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands; 
•  Having an animal within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of Meriwether County; 
•  Having an animal in a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner if zoned A-1, RR, LDR, RD, R-1, MFR, MHP, NHC or PUD or as otherwise authorized by the board of commissioners. Invisible fence systems may be allowed if maintained in good working order and if they keep the animal contained. Any person using an invisible fence shall post a sign near the entrance to the property indicating an invisible fence is in use. 
•  Having an animal on a running line which has a connection between two (2) fixed points of not less than thirty (30) feet and a lead of not less than fifteen (15) feet, which lead must be attached to the animal by a chest harness that fastens on the back of the animal rather than on its neck. No other means of restraint may be used to attach an animal to a running line. 
Running at large means any animal off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-2. - Penalty for violation of this chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Meriwether County Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-3. - Citations. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation for that violation and ordered to appear in the Magistrate Court of Meriwether County. Such citation may be issued by an animal control officer and based upon his own personal knowledge, or upon a sworn written statement of another person who has witnessed the violation. In the latter case, the witness shall be subject to subpoena to testify for Meriwether County at the hearing of the case. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-4. - Joint government services. 
The board of commissioners and the representatives of any municipality in Meriwether County, or any combination of them, may contract and enter into formal agreements with each other for joint animal control services and codes for the shared use of personnel, facilities, and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-5. - Designation of animal control officer. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall designate an individual to carry out the duties of animal control officer as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	One (1) animal control agency may carry out the duties of animal control for more than one (1) local government pursuant to an agreement entered into under section 4-4 of this chapter. 
(c)	Animal control officers are authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to insure compliance with the terms of this chapter. Law enforcement officials of Meriwether County shall cooperate with animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	Animal control officers shall not be authorized to make arrests under this chapter unless they are also certified as law enforcement officers by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-6. - Authority to remove abused or neglected animals. 
Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove to a safe location any animal that appears abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal may be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-7. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass, or otherwise obstruct any animal control officer in the official performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-8. - Keeping of wild or nondomesticated animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep, or permit to be raised or kept, on any property located in Meriwether County any wild or nondomesticated animal unless specifically permitted by O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-9. - Livestock exempted from this chapter. 
The keeping, raising, and/or producing of livestock in any manner shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-10. - Restraint of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep under restraint any animal owned by or in the custody or control of such person. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-11. - Creation of public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a public nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-12. - Confinement of female animals in season. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or owner having custody or control of a female animal that is in season to fail to confine such female animal so as to prevent contact with a male animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-13. - Animal care. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody of an animal to fail to provide his or her animals with adequate food, adequate water, adequate shelter, and humane care, and to fail to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-14. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in cruelty to animals as proscribed by O.C.G.A. § 16-24-4 and to engage in dog fighting as proscribed by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-15. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-16. - Exposure to poisons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose a poisonous substance, mixed with food or not, so that the substance is liable to be eaten by any animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his or her own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-17. - Removal of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of an animal to fail to immediately remove an excrement deposited by his or her animal on public property, walks, or recreation areas. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-18. - Confinement and quarantine of biting animals. 
Any animal that is known to have bitten a person is required to be confined by the owner for the purpose of quarantine for not less than ten (10) days at the expense of the owner. The method of quarantine shall be determined by the Meriwether County Health Department in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-19. - Rabies inoculation for dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat kept in Meriwether County to fail to have the animal inoculated against rabies and to have a rabies tag attached to the animal's collar. The owner shall be liable for the inoculation of the animal. This provision is adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3 et seq. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-20. - Number of dogs and cats per residential lot. 
It shall be unlawful for there to be more than three (3) dogs and three (3) cats on any residential lot subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)	Pet owners in compliance with any prior ordinance limiting the number of dogs and cats shall be allowed to continue to keep said number of animals; 
(2)	A litter of puppies or kittens will be permitted to remain on the owner's property for a period of twelve (12) weeks after their birth; 
(3)	Residential lots of five (5) or more acres, lots zoned A-1 and RR are limited to five (5) dogs and five (5) cats; 
(4)	Foster home operators ("foster home" means any place routinely or in the practice of providing temporary care for animals, except equine. A foster home must be under a written contract with a licensed animal shelter. A foster home will be considered an agent for the animal shelter, and not an animal shelter itself), kennels, or other individuals who have been granted a waiver under section 4-21. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-21. - Waiver to animal limitations. 
(a)	Upon written application and upon review and approval based upon the criteria set forth below, the animal control board may grant a waiver of section 4-20. In order to grant a waiver, the board must find that: 
•  There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances existing that a waiver should be granted; and 
•  Granting the waiver will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to others; and 
•  The waiver will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the neighborhood; and 
•  The waiver does not violate the Meriwether County Zoning Ordinance; and 
•  The applicant can demonstrate a special use or need to house animals in greater number than allowed under section 4-20. Examples of such special use or need include, but are not limited to, participation in a licensed animal rescue organization, use of animals for therapeutic or other purposes, and emergency care of pets owned by other persons. 
(b)	The written application for waiver shall be accompanied by an application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The owner shall post a conspicuous sign large enough to be read from any public thoroughfare adjacent to the owner's property stating that a waiver of the animal limitation section of this chapter has been applied for and the date, time, and location of the hearing to be held on the application. The sign must be posted not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing on the application. 
(c)	Any decision denying a waiver may be reviewed by the board of commissioners in their discretion, and any granting of a waiver may be revoked upon a finding that the owner is in violation of the public nuisance provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-22. - Warning notice on premises using guard dogs. 
The owner, tenant, or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located shall conspicuously and prominently post a notice on the outside of the property, which notice shall contain block letters easily read at a distance of fifty (50) feet, which block letters shall read "Warning—Guard Dog". These letters shall be either red or black on a white background. If the dog is kept in a fence, the posted warning shall be placed on the fence at intervals of not more than fifty (50) feet apart and at the entrance and exit of the fence. In the case of apartments, condominiums, or businesses, the notice shall be posted at every entrance and exit to the apartment, condominium, or business. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-23. - Invisible fences. 
The property owner or occupier of any property protected by an invisible fence restraining an animal shall post a sign at the location of the fence. The sign shall read "Invisible Fence—Animal Inside" so that the sign may be read by all persons approaching the fenced area. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Secs. 4-24—4-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-76. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this chapter, whether or not the animal is on private or public property, may be impounded by the animal control officer in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-77. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
If the owner of an impounded animal is known or can reasonably be identified, the animal control officer shall notify that person by telephone or by mail within two (2) working days of the impoundment. The owner may claim and take custody of the animal within four (4) working days of the impoundment by the payment of an impoundment fee, boarding fee, and upon providing proof of rabies inoculation. If the impounded animal is not current on rabies inoculation, the animal may be released to the owner who shall have the animal inoculated within five (5) working days of the release and who shall provide a copy of the rabies certificate to the animal control officer. Failure to provide the certificate shall result in a new impoundment. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-78. - Impoundment fee. 
The board of commissioners shall set all fees for impoundment and may change them from time to time in their discretion. Impoundment fees are distinct from penalties for violations of this chapter. The initial impoundment fees are: 
(1)	First offence .....$25.00 
(2)	Second offense for the same animal .....50.00 
(3)	Third and subsequent offenses for the same animal .....100.00 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-79. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
If an impounded animal has remained unclaimed for a prescribed period of time or if it has been injured or is suffering and in great pain, and if such animal does not display an identification tag and no determination of the owner can be made from a reasonable investigation, the animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible or to donate any animal to a public or private nonprofit institution or agency. Disposal of an animal under this section does not relieve the owner from any other liabilities. If the owner is known or ascertainable, the animal control officer shall be authorized to hold the animal for a reasonable time until such owner can be reached. If the owner fails or refuses to reclaim the animal within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of impoundment, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal as provided for above. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Secs. 4-80—4-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 4-101. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
(a)	Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)	Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or 
(2)	Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
(3)	Inflicts a severe injury on another animal without provocation on public or private property. 
(b)	Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, unprovoked, bites a human being on private or public property. 
(c)	Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable both to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and top. If the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape. Such enclosure shall also provide adequate shelter for the dog. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-102. - Exemptions. 
Any dog being used by a law enforcement officer to assist in official duties shall be exempt from the provisions of this article even if it inflicts injury if the person injured: 
•  Was committing a willful trespass or tort; 
•  Was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog; 
•  Had tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog; 
•  Was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-103. - Violations of this article. 
Provisions regarding the violation of this article, and the penalties therefore, shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-104. - Animal control board. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d), the board of commissioners hereby establish an animal control board to conduct all hearings required under this chapter. The membership, terms, and procedures of the board shall be as the board of commissioners shall provide. All members of the animal control board shall be residents of Meriwether County. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-105. - Investigation; notice to owner. 
Investigations by animal control officers regarding the classifications of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs, notice to owners, and the classification process of such dogs shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23 and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-106. - Procedures for classification. 
Provisions pertaining to procedures for classification of a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, notice requirements and hearings shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-107. - Duties of owners of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs; registration fee. 
The provisions of this section shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. In accordance with that section, any person possessing or intending to possess a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must provide the animal control board with proof of liability insurance, issued by an insurer licensed to do business in Georgia, in an amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), which policy of insurance must provide coverage against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog during the term of the coverage. A separate policy must be maintained for each dog classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous. In the alternative, the owner may provide a surety bond in an amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-108. - Confinement. 
All provisions permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside a proper enclosure shall be applied by the animal control officer in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Sec. 4-109. - Confiscation of dogs. 
All confiscation of dogs shall be done in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
(Ord. of 4-22-08)
Secs. 4-110—4-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—A 1989 amendment to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25 provides for the statewide implementation of various standard building codes after October 1, 1991. The building codes adopted by the board of commissioners pursuant to ordinances adopted October 14, 1987, and January 26, 1988, remain in effect pending implementation of the 1989 amendment. Copies are available for inspection and review in the building and zoning officials' office.
Cross reference— Floodplain regulations, Ch. 7; signs, Ch. 10; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 11; water and sewerage, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.
State Law reference— Governing body may enact standards to determine safety of buildings, Ga. Const. art. 1, sec. 4, par. 1; authority of county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; state-wide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Appendices adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-22(b)(2) the board of commissioners specifically adopts appendix H (mobile home tie down standards) and appendix A (recommended supplemental administrative provisions) of the standard building code, except section A101.4 (building department). 
(Ord. of 10-14-77)
Sec. 5-2. - Minimum codes adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(b), the following state minimum codes are specifically adopted. The provisions of such codes are incorporated by reference in all respects as if restated verbatim herein: 
(1)	International Property Maintenance Code;
(2)	Appendix G, International Residential Code as Amended.
(Ord. of 11-11-09)
Sec. 5-3. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
(a)	The building and zoning official is hereby charged with enforcing the provisions of the building codes adopted by reference in the ordinances of October 14, 1987, and January 26, 1988, as well as the codes and appendices adopted in sections 5-1 and 5-2 of this Code. 
(b)	The building and zoning official shall continue to enforce the minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I) through (9)(B)(i)(VII) upon implementation on October 1, 1991, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 
(Ord. of 1-26-88, § 2)
Sec. 5-4. - Definition. 
Whenever used in the building codes referred to in this chapter, the word corporation counsel shall mean the county attorney. 
(Ord. of 1-26-88, § 3)
Sec. 5-5. - Fees; exceptions. 
(a)	The building permit fee for all structures constructed or located within the county shall be in an amount determined by the board of commissioners and listed in the schedule of fees and charges located in the clerk-treasurer's office and building and zoning department. 
(b)	For purposes of computing the building permit fee amount, the total area of all levels of the structure shall be used to determine the total area in square feet, excepting only that unfinished attics and crawl spaces shall not be included. 
(c)	Unenclosed structures such as a pole shed or carport with no electrical wiring or plumbing and having no enclosed storage area shall be charged only a minimum fee in an amount determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and listed in the schedule of fees and charges located in the clerk-treasurer's office and building and zoning department. 
(d)	The required permits shall be available to the public by payment of the necessary fee in the building and zoning department. 
(Res. of 10-14-87)
Sec. 5-6. - Building permit required for connection with electric service. 
(a)	It shall be a requirement for a person to obtain a building permit that such person first obtain a permit for sanitation from the county health department. 
(b)	Power companies providing service in the county shall not connect electric service without proof that a building permit has been issued by the building and zoning department. 
(Mo. of 1-14-81)
Sec. 5-7. - Penalty. 
Failure to secure the necessary permits for the purpose of building or adding to existing structures, and/or locating pre-manufactured storage buildings, modular homes, mobile homes, etc., shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11, plus the cost of the permit required. 
(Res. of 10-14-87)
Secs. 5-8—5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM 

Sec. 5-20. - Purpose. 
(a)	The purpose of building number identification, in conjunction with the implementation of the Meriwether County E911 system, is to aid emergency service responders. Building number identification shall be required throughout Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(b)	Building numbers, assigned and administered by the Meriwether County Building and Zoning Department, are assigned to each residential and business location in Meriwether County, and must be displayed according to the rules and regulations set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, 3-24-98)
Sec. 5-21. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)	Residential areas. 
(1)	Each driveway access must be identified by house numbers displayed on a driveway location sign in the following manner: 
a.	House numbering/driveway location signs must be a minimum of three and one-half (3½) inches high and seven and one-half (7½) inches long. 
b.	Signs must combine numbers which are at least three (3) inches high, and have a minimum, stroke width of one-half (½) inch against a contrasting background. The use of reflective numbers is strongly encouraged. 
c.	Signs must be mounted back to back on their supports so that they are clearly visible to vehicles approaching from either direction on the road. 
d.	All materials used in the construction of the house numbering/driveway location signs should be impervious to outdoor weather conditions and made of a break away type material. 
(2)	Placement of house numbering/driveway location signs in residential areas shall be done according to the following requirements: 
a.	Wherever possible, the signs shall be installed on the left side of each driveway access as determined by facing the driveway from the road. 
b.	Signs must be placed within six (6) feet of the edge of road surface and within five (5) feet of the driveway surface, so as to clearly identify the driveway access. 
c.	Signs must be installed at right angles to the road so they can be read from vehicles approaching from either direction on the road. 
d.	Signs must be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches and a maximum of forty (40) inches above the ground. Their visibility must be maintained in all weather conditions by the home owner. 
e.	Signs, as described in section 5-21, paragraph (a), may be displayed on mailbox supports below the box or on the sides of the box itself, on fence posts or gate posts, etc., only when the location of the supporting structure is on the same side of the road as the driveway, is located within six (6) feet of the driveway, clearly identifies the driveway access, permits the sign to meet the height requirements, is installed at right angles to the road and is clearly visible to vehicles approaching from either direction on the road. Groups of mailboxes may be identified with numbers to facilitate mail delivery, but they are not acceptable to provide house numbering/driveway identification unless they stand alone and meet the criteria listed above. 
(3)	Accessory dwelling units in residential areas.
a.	Where a single driveway serves a separate accessory residence/studio/office, as well as a main residence, the accessory unit or units must be identified by a driveway location sign as required above. Signs may be mounted on the same stake as the main residence identification sign, or they may be included on the same sign. 
b.	Each accessory unit must be identified by an additional sign meeting the above requirements. Such a sign shall be displayed at the place where the unit's access meets the driveway, or it may be affixed to the outer wall of the unit so it can be seen from the driveway, whichever placement will best clarify its location for emergency service responders. In questionable situations, the placement of the accessory building identification signs shall be approved by the building and zoning department. 
(4)	Requirements for residences using common driveways.
a.	Common driveway location signs must be a minimum of three and one-half (3½) inches high, and a length sufficient to accommodate the required numbers, but in no case shorter than seven and one-half (7½) inches long. Such signs will display the sequence of numbered properties accessed by that common driveway, and must meet the requirements for driveway location signs as described in this section. The use of reflective numbers is strongly encouraged. 
b.	Signs must be maintained in all weather, in legible condition, by the property owner and be made of a break away type material. 
c.	Signs identifying driveways branching from a common driveway need not be double-sided and need not be installed at right angles to the common driveway. Rather, they shall be installed so that they are easily visible and clearly identify the branching driveway for emergency responders approaching on the common driveway. 
(5)	Requirements for mobile home parks using common driveways.
a.	Common driveway location signs must be a minimum of three and one-half (3½) inches high, and a length sufficient to accommodate the required lot numbers, but in no case shorter than seven and one-half (7½) inches long. Each sign will display the sequence of numbered lots accessed by the common driveway and shall be prominently displayed at both front and rear entrances. They must meet the requirements for driveway location signs as described in this section. The use of reflective numbers is strongly encouraged. 
b.	Signs must be maintained in all weather, in legible condition, by the mobile home park owner and be made of a break away type material. 
c.	Signs identifying lots off of the common driveway need not be double-sided and need not be installed at right angles to the common driveway. Rather, they shall be installed so that they are easily visible and clearly identify the lot number for emergency responders approaching on the common driveway. 
(b)	Business areas. 
(1)	Building identification signs and driveway location signs in business areas shall be placed according to a building identification list maintained and monitored by the building and zoning department. 
a.	Building address identification signs must be attached to the building and must be prominently displayed at a height of from forty-eight (48) inches to seventy-two (72) inches from the ground. Where driveway location signs are required, they must meet the requirements of section 5-21, paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2). Secondary entrances must be identified in a like manner. 
b.	All apartment location numbers shall be three (3) inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half (½) inch, and shall be prominently displayed at both front and rear entrances. The use of reflective numbers is strongly encouraged. 
c.	Identification signs shall be maintained in all weather, in legible condition, by the property owner and be made of a break away type material. 
d.	Appeals for number relocation may be addressed to the building and zoning administrator, whose determination shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, 3-24-98)
Sec. 5-22. - Compliance and enforcement. 
(a)	The building and zoning administrator shall be the enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of all regulations of this article. 
(1)	Directives regarding standards and placement of dwelling numbers will be issued to each builder receiving a building permit in Meriwether County. No certificate of occupancy will be issued by the building and zoning department until dwelling numbers are installed as required by this article. 
(2)	Numbering discrepancies or problems noted by emergency agency personnel will be reported to the E911 director who will coordinate with the building and zoning department to effect corrections. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, 3-24-98)
Secs. 5-23—5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND RECREATIONAL WATER PARKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2000, set out provisions intended for use as Article II of this chapter. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Article III.

Sec. 5-31. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. 
Abrasion hazard means a sharp or rough surface that would scrape the skin by chance during normal use. 
Accessible means easily exposed for inspection and the replacement of materials and/or parts with the use of tools. 
Air induction system means a system whereby a volume of air (only) is induced into a hollow ducting in a spa floor, bench, or other location. The air induction system is activated by a separate air power blower. 
Air pump assist backwash means the compressing of a volume of air in the filter effluent chamber (by means of an air compressor or by the water pressure from the recirculating pump) which, when released, rapidly decompresses and forces water in the filter chamber through the elements in reverse, dislodging the filter aid and accumulated dirt, carrying it to waste. 
Alkalinity means the amount of bicarbonate, carbonate or hydroxide compounds present in water solution. See also "Total alkalinity." 
Backwash means the process of thoroughly cleansing the filter medium and/or elements and the contents of the filter vessel by the reverse flow of water through the filter. 
Barrier means a fence, safety cover, wall, building wall or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds or covers the swimming pool or spa and obstructs access to the swimming pool, spa or recreational water park. 
Bather means any person using a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park and adjoining deck area for the purpose of water sports, recreation therapy or related activities. 
Bather load means the number of persons in the pool/spa area at any given moment or during any stated period of time. 
Beginner's area means those water areas in pools which are three feet or less in water depth. 
Booster pump system means a system whereby one (1) or more hydrotherapy jets are activated by the use of a pump which is completely independent of the filtration and heating system of a spa. Also, a device used to provide hydraulic support for certain types of equipment such as cleaning systems, gas chlorinators and solar systems. 
Breakpoint chlorination means the addition of a sufficient amount of chlorine to water to destroy the combined chlorine present. (See Super-chlorination) 
Brominator means a device to apply or to deliver a bromine disinfectant to water at a controlled rate. 
Cartridge means a depth, pleated, or surface-type filter component with fixed dimensions that is designed to remove suspended particles from water flowing through the filter. 
Chemical feeder means a mechanical device for applying chemicals to pool or spa water. 
Chloramine means a compound formed when chlorine combines with nitrogen or ammonia that causes eye and skin irritation and has a strong, objectionable odor. 
Chlorinator means a device to apply or to deliver a chlorine disinfectant to water at a controlled rate. 
Chlorine generator means equipment that generates chlorine, hypochlorous acid, or hypochlorite on site for disinfection and oxidation of water contaminants. 
Circulation equipment means the mechanical components that are part of a circulation system in a pool or spa. Circulation equipment may be, but is not limited to categories of pumps, hair and lint strainers, filters, valves, gauges, meters, heaters, surface skimmers, inlet/outlet fittings, and chemical feeding devices. The components have separate functions, but when connected to each other by piping, perform as a coordinated system for purposes of maintaining pool or spa water in a clear, sanitary and desirable condition for using. 
Circulation system means an arrangement of mechanical equipment or components, connected by piping to a pool or spa in a closed circuit. The function of a circulation system is to direct water from the pool or spa, causing it to flow through the various system components for purposes of clarifying, heating, purifying and returning the water back to the original body of water. 
Clarifier means a chemical that coagulates and neutralizes suspended particles in water. There are two types: inorganic salts of aluminum or iron and water-soluble organic polyelectrolyte polymers. Also called coagulant or flocculent. 
Contact concentration means the concentration of a chemical in a flow of water. This concentration depends on the rate of addition, the flow rate of the water and the efficiency of the mixing. It is calculated using the equation (assumes complete mixing): Amount of Chemical (grams/hour)/Water Flow Rate (gpm) × 4.41 = Contact Concentration (mg/L). 
Coping means the cap on the pool or spa wall that provides a finishing edge around the pool or spa. Can be formed, cast in place or pre-cast, or pre-fabricated from metal or plastic materials. 
Cove means the radius between the pool or spa wall and the pool or spa floor. 
Covers means something that protects or shelters or a combination thereof, a swimming pool or spa. 
Cyanuric acid means a chemical that helps reduce the excess loss of chlorine in water due to the ultraviolet rays of the sun. It is also called stabilizer, isocyanuric acid, conditioner or triazinetrione. 
Decks means those areas immediately adjacent to or attached to a pool or spa that are specifically constructed or installed for use by users for sitting, standing or walking. 
Deep areas means water depths in excess of five (5) feet (1.42m). 
Department means the Department of Human Resources, State of Georgia. 
Diatomite means the filtering medium of a diatomaceous earth filter composed of microscopic fossil skeletons of the "diatom," a tiny freshwater marine plankton. 
Disinfectant means energy or chemicals to kill undesirable or pathogenic (disease-causing) organisms that have a measurable residual at a level adequate to make the desired kill. 
Diving board means a recreational mechanism for entering a swimming pool, consisting of a semirigid board that derives its elasticity through the use of a fulcrum mounted below the board. 
(1)	Jump board means a recreational mechanism that has a coil spring, leaf spring or comparable device located beneath the board which is activated by the force exerted in jumping on the board. 
(2)	Stationary diving platform is a diving platform used for diving and is constructed or located on site. It may be natural or artificial rocks, pedestals or other items. 
DPD (Diethyl-p-phenylene diamine) means a reagent and test method that specifically measures bromine or free available and total chlorine; producing a series of colors from pale pink to dark red. 
Effective filter area means total surface area through which the designed flow rate will be maintained during filtration. 
Effluent means the water that flows out of a filter, pump or other device. 
Feet of head means a basis for indicating the resistance in a hydraulic system, equivalent to the height of a column of water that would cause the same resistance. (One hundred (100) feet of head equals forty-three (43) pounds per square inch). 
Filter means a device that removes undissolved particles from water by recirculating the water through a porous substance (a filter medium or element). 
Filter element means a device within a filter tank designed to entrap solids and conduct water to a manifold, collection header, pipe, or similar conduit and return it to the pool or spa. A filter element usually consists of a septum and septum support, or a cartridge. 
Free available chlorine (FAC) means that portion of the total chlorine remaining in chlorinated water that has not combined with ammonia or nitrogen compounds and will react chemically with undesirable or pathogenic organisms. 
Handhold/handrail means a device that can be gripped by a user for the purpose of resting and/or steadying him/herself. It is not limited to but may be located inside or outside the pool or spa or as part of a set of steps or deck-installed equipment. 
Hardness means the amount of calcium and magnesium dissolved in water; measured by a test kit and expressed as parts per million (ppm) of equivalent calcium carbonate. 
Health authority means the Georgia Department of Human Resources Environmental Health Section or the County Board of Health Environmental Health Office; whoever has immediate jurisdiction. 
Hydrotherapy spa means a unit that may have a therapeutic use but which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each individual. It may include, but not be limited to, hydrotherapy jet circulation, hot water/cold water mineral baths, air induction bubbles or any combination thereof. Industry terminology for a spa includes, but is not limited to, "therapeutic pool," "hydrotherapy pool," "whirlpool, "hot spa," etc. 
Influent means the water entering a filter or other device. 
Multiple filter-control valve means a multiport valve having a number of control positions for various filter operations that combines in one (1) unit the function of two (2) or more single valves. 
Nonswimming area means any portion of a pool where water depth, offset ledges or similar irregularities would prevent normal swimming activities. 
Organic matter means perspiration, urine, saliva, suntan oil, cosmetics, lotions, dead skin and similar debris introduced to water by users and the environment. 
Orthotolidine (OTO) means an colorless reagent that reacts with chlorine or bromine to produce a series of yellow-to-orange colors which indicate the amount of chlorine or bromine in water. 
Overflow system means a system for the removal of pool/spa surface water through the use of overflows, surface skimmers and surface water collection systems of various design and manufacture. 
pH means a value expressing the relative acidity or basicity of a substance, such as water, as indicated by the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Pool means any artificial water holding structure with a closed-loop circulation of water through a water treatment system with a return to the structure. 
(1)	Private pool means any constructed pool, permanent or nonportable, that is intended for noncommercial use as a swimming pool by not more than one (1) owner family and their guests and that is over twenty-four (24) inches in depth, has a surface area exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet and/or a volume over three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250) gallons. 
(2)	Public swimming pool means any structure, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water used by the public for swimming, diving, wading, recreation, or therapy, together with buildings, appurtenances, and equipment used in connection with the body of water, regardless of whether a fee is charged for its use. The term includes municipal, school, hotel, or motel pools and any pool to which access is granted in exchange for payment of a daily fee. The term shall also include pools and spas operated by or serving camps, churches, day care centers, group home facilities of twelve or more clients, institutions, parks, state agencies, apartment complexes, subdivisions, condominiums, country clubs, mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks, associations, health clubs, special purpose pools, and recreational water park attractions. 
(3)	Therapeutic pool means a pool used in physical programs operated by medical facilities licensed by the department and operated by a licensed physical therapist. 
(4)	Permanently installed swimming pool means a pool that is constructed in the ground or in a building in such a manner that it cannot be readily disassembled for storage. 
(5)	Inground swimming pool means any pool where the sides rest in partial or full contact with the earth. 
Potable water means any water, such as an approved domestic water supply, which is bacteriologically safe and otherwise suitable for drinking. 
PPM means an abbreviation for parts per million. The unit of measurement used in chemical testing which indicates the parts by weight in relation to one million parts by weight of water. It is essentially identical to the term milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
Precipitate means a solid material which is forced out of a solution by some chemical reaction and which may settle out or remain as a haze in suspension (turbidity). 
PSI means an abbreviation for pounds per square inch. 
Rate of flow means the quantity of water flowing past a designated point within a specified time, such as the number of gallons flowing in one minute (gpm). 
Rated pressure means that pressure that is equal to or less than the designed pressure and appears on the data plate of the equipment. 
Recreational water parks means a facility or area together with associated buildings, appurtenances and equipment, that is designated for public bathing or swimming. 
Rehabilitation means the activity of restoring all or part of a pool or spa structure and its component parts back into good condition including the rebuilding and/or replacing of worn and broken parts or components. 
Removable means capable of being disassembled with the use of only simple tools such as a screwdriver, pliers or wrench. 
Return inlet means the aperture or fitting through which the water under positive pressure returns into a pool or spa. 
Return piping means that piping through which water is returned to the pool. 
Ring buoy means a ring-shaped floating buoy capable of supporting a user. 
Shallow areas means portions of a pool or spa with water depths five (5) feet or less. 
Shock treatment means the practice of adding significant amounts of an oxidizing chemical to water to destroy ammonia and nitrogenous and organic contaminants in water. 
Skimmer weir means the part of a skimmer which adjusts automatically to small changes in water level to assure a continuous flow of water to the skimmer. 
Slip resisting means a surface that has been treated or constructed so as to significantly reduce the chance of a user slipping. The surface should not be an abrasion hazard. 
Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) means a clear liquid form of an inorganic chlorine compound obtainable in concentrations of five (5) to sixteen (16) percent available chlorine. 
Spa means a hydrotherapy pool of irregular or geometric shell design. (See also Hydrotherapy spa.) 
Special purpose pool means any pool operated for recreational play and other special purposes, including, but not limited to, wave or surf-action pools, activity pools/interactive pools, wading pools and play areas. These include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)	Activity/interactive/wading pool: A pool which does not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in depth and contains any number of water features within the pool area. 
(2)	Continuous water course: A riding water course where ingress and egress is effectively limited to designated points of entry and exit. This is also known as a lazy river. 
(3)	Dual use pool: A pool that is normally used as a swimming pool, but has no more than one (1) water slide or other feature other than diving boards, that uses the main body of water as its landing or activity area. 
(4)	Falling-entry pools: This includes, but is not limited to slides, flumes, lilypad walks, log rolls, cable, rope, or boom drops and any other falling entry features. These types of pools allow for the bather to drop into the pool area from a height of one (1) to four (4) feet above the water surface and in various positions of entry. 
(5)	Wading pool: A shallow pool not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches that is void of any water activity features. 
(6)	Wave pool: This is a large body of water that has a mechanism for generating an oscillating wave-form at one end and ending at the other end with a zero-depth-entry. 
(7)	Zero-depth-entry pools: This may be any type of pool that in place of a wall at one end, may have a sloping edge or beach. 
(8)	Zero-depth-pool: A pad which contains various fountains and/or interactive water spray or waterfall features. The pad slopes to one (1) or more drains which empties into a reservoir which is recirculated and disinfected before its return to the water features. 
Suction outlet means the aperture or fitting through which the water under negative pressure is drawn from the pool or spa. 
Suction piping means that piping through which water is removed from the pool. 
Surface skimming system means perimeter-type overflows, surface skimmers and surface water collection systems of various design and manufacture which permit the continuous removal of floating debris and surface water to the filter. 
Test kit means a device used to monitor specific chemical or agent residual or demands in pool or spa water. 
Time clock means a mechanical device that automatically controls the periods that a pump, filter, chlorinator, heater, blower and other electrical devices are running. 
Total alkalinity means the ability or capacity of water to resist change in pH; also known as the buffering capacity of water. Measured with a test kit and expressed as ppm. 
Total available chlorine (TAC) means the sum of both the free available and combined chlorines. 
Turbidity means the cloudy condition of water due to the presence of extremely fine particulate materials in suspension that interfere with the passage of light. 
Turnover rate means the period of time (usually in hours) required to circulate a volume of water equal to the pool or spa capacity. 
Vacuum means the reduction of atmospheric pressure within a pipe, tank, pump or other vessel. Vacuum is measured in inches of mercury. One (1) inch of mercury is equivalent to one and thirteen hundredths (1.13) feet of head. The practical maximum vacuum is thirty (30) inches of mercury or thirty-three and nine-tenths (33.9) feet of head. 
Waterline. The waterline shall be defined in one of the following ways: 
(1)	Skimmer system: The waterline shall be at the midpoint of the operating range of the skimmers when there are no users in the pool or spa. 
(2)	Overflow system: The waterline shall be at the top of the overflow rim. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-32. - Scope. 
(a)	These rules prescribe minimum design, construction, and operation requirements that are intended to protect the health and safety of the public in swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks. 
(b)	These rules are intended to cover certain aspects of the design, equipment, operation, installation, new construction and rehabilitation of swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks. Where adequate standards do not exist and these rules do not provide sufficient guidance for consideration of innovations in design, construction, and operation of proposed pools, spas or recreational water parks the department will establish requirements necessary to protect the health and safety of the pool patrons. 
(c)	These rules shall not apply to private swimming pools and hot tubs/spas, therapeutic pools, therapeutic chambers drained, cleaned and refilled after each individual use nor to religious ritual baths used solely for religious purposes. 
(d)	All pools, existing and newly constructed, shall meet these rules except as allowed for in (e) below. 
(e)	Public swimming pools constructed or remodeled prior to December 31, 2000, that do not meet specific design and construction requirements of these rules, shall not be required to comply with design and construction requirements other than requirements related to the abatement of suction hazards. Public swimming pools constructed or remodeled prior to December 31, 2000, shall comply with all other rules for public swimming pools adopted by the ____________ County Board of Health by January 1, 2003. 
(f)	No single drain, single-suction outlet public swimming pool shall be allowed to operate unless a protective cover is properly installed. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-33. - Provisions. 
(a)	Permit. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public pool, spa or recreational water park, without having first obtained a valid operating permit from the health authority pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)	Permits are invalidated by change of ownership;
(3)	Each individually treated pool will operate under a separate permit;
(4)	Prior to the issuance of a permit to new or existing public pools, spas or recreational water park attractions, the applicant shall provide evidence of satisfactory compliance with the provisions of these rules and all other provisions of laws which apply to the location, construction and maintenance of the pool, spa or recreational water park and the safety of persons therein; 
(5)	The permit shall be prominently displayed at all times, as close to the main entrance as practicable, as determined by the health authority. 
(6)	The permit shall be the property of the health authority and shall be returned within seven (7) days to the local health authority when the pool, spa or recreational water park ceases to operate, has a change of ownership, or where the permit is revoked. 
(b)	Application for initial operating permit. 
(1)	The management of a public pool, spa or recreational water park shall submit to the health authority an application to operate a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park attraction at least fourteen (14) days prior to the starting of construction. 
(2)	The application shall be prepared in duplicate on forms provided by the department. The original shall be forwarded to the health authority and copy retained by the management. 
(c)	Plans. 
(1)	Submission of plans. Properly prepared plans and specifications must be submitted to the local health authority for review, approval and issuance of a construction permit when a public swimming pool, spa or recreational water park attraction is constructed or extensively remolded or renovated, or when an existing structure is converted to use as a public pool, spa or recreational water park attraction. 
(2)	Plans and specifications. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the health authority of the county in which the pool, spa or recreational water park is constructed at least fourteen (14) days prior to beginning construction. The plans shall indicate, at a minimum, the proposed layout, the mechanical plans, the construction materials, and the type and model of proposed equipment. 
(3)	A minimum of two (2) sets of drawings of the construction project shall be submitted, containing complete details so as to clearly document to the health authority the work to be undertaken. Additional sets of drawings may be required. Drawings shall be complete and shall comply with standard architectural/engineering practice. The maximum bathing load shall be stated on plans. 
(4)	Complete specifications of the project shall accompany the prints including manufacturer's cut sheets and/or specifications on all equipment, and hydraulics analysis. 
(5)	Any additional data required by the health authority for purpose of clarification, anticipated use, or to support any changes in design or scope of the project must be submitted prior to issuance of a permit to construct. 
(6)	One (1) signed and approved set of the construction plans shall remain at the construction sight at all times during construction. 
(7)	The swimming pool, spa or recreational water park shall be built in compliance with the plans as approved unless subsequent written approval of changes has been given by the health authority. 
(8)	The swimming pool, spa or recreational water park owner or agent shall notify the health authority at specific, predetermined stages of construction and at the time of completion of the pool to allow inspections. 
(9)	A construction permit is valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issue. After this time the health authority may require resubmission of plans and specifications and issuance of a new construction permit if project has not begun or has not been completed. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-34. - Structural design. 
(a)	The structural design and materials used shall be in accordance with generally accepted good structural engineering practices. 
(b)	Sand or earth shall not be permitted as an interior finish in a swimming pool or spa.
(c)	In climates subject to freezing temperatures, the pool or spa shell and appurtenances, piping, filter system, pump and motor and other components shall be designed and constructed so as to facilitate protection from damage due to freezing. 
(d)	The surfaces within the pool or spa intended to provide footing for users shall be designed to provide a slip-resistant surface that is ridged, and puncture and tear resistant. 
(e)	The roughness or irregularity of such surfaces shall not be constructed so as to cause injury or discomfort to the feet during normal use. 
(f)	The colors, patterns or finishes of the pool interior shall not obscure the existence or presence of objects or surfaces within the pool. 
(g)	Swimming pools and spas as well as all appurtenances shall be constructed of materials which are nontoxic to man and the environment; which are impervious and enduring; which can withstand the design stresses; and which will provide a watertight structure with a smooth and easily cleaned surface without cracks or joints, excluding structural joints, or to which a smooth, easily cleaned surface finish is applied or attached. Materials of manufacture for swimming pools and spas shall be capable of fulfilling the design, installation, and intended use requirements in these rules. The materials of manufacture, components and accessories used in public spas shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Plumbing. All plumbing shall be sized, installed, and maintained according to applicable state regulations and/or local plumbing codes. Written evidence shall be provided from a licensed plumbing contractor or the plumbing inspector, as required by the local health authority, of compliance with the plumbing code. 
(2)	Electrical systems. All electrical wiring, equipment, and installation including the grounding of pool components shall conform with the national, state and local electrical codes. Written evidence shall be provided from a licensed electrical contractor or electrical inspector, as required by the local health authority, of compliance with all electrical codes. 
(3)	Recirculation and treatment systems and other components. All recirculation and treatment system equipment and all other components such as filters, recessed automatic surface skimmers, ionizers, ozone generators, heaters, disinfection feeders, and chlorine generators must be tested and approved using the current NSF Standard Number 50, "Circulation System Components and Related Materials for Swimming Pool, Spas/Hot Tubs." If standards do not exist for a specific product, the manufacturer must work with NSF or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or other approved agency to develop such standards to the approval of the local health authority. Written evidence shall be provided from the designing engineer that all recirculation and treatment systems and all components used in the installation meet these standards. 
(4)	Material surfaces. All material surfaces that come in contact with the user shall be finished so that they do not constitute a cutting, pinching, puncturing or abrasion hazard under casual contact and intended use. All materials shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
(5)	Compatibility. Combinations of different materials shall be chemically and mechanically compatible for their intended use and environment. 
(h)	Roofs or canopies over pools or spas shall be constructed so that water run-off does not drain into the spa. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-35. - Dimensional design. 
(a)	No limits are specified for the shape of swimming pools, spas or recreational water parks attraction except that consideration shall be given to shape from the standpoint of safety and circulation of the water. 
(1)	There shall be no protrusions, extensions, means of entanglement or other obstructions in the swimming area which can cause the entrapment or injury of the user. 
(2)	There shall be construction tolerances allowed on all dimensional designs. Overall length, width and depth in the deep end of a swimming pool may vary plus or minus three (3) inches. All other overall dimensions in a swimming pool and in a spa may vary plus or minus two (2) inches, unless otherwise specified. The designed waterline shall have a maximum construction tolerance at the time of completion of the work of plus or minus one-fourth (¼) [inch] for pools and spas with adjustable weir surface skimming systems and of plus or minus one-eighth (1/8) inch for pools and spas with nonadjustable surface skimming systems. 
(3)	The size of pools shall be governed by the requirements of the activities for which the installation is intended. 
(b)	Walls. Walls shall not be greater than eleven (11) from plumb for a minimum depth of two (2) feet nine (9) inches from the waterline in deep areas or two (2) feet three (3) inches in the shallow areas. Below these depths the wall may be radiused to join the floor. 
(c)	Floor slopes. Floor slopes in pools shall, as a minimum, be in compliance with the following. 
(1)	All slopes shall be uniform.
(2)	The slope of the floor from the shallow end wall towards the deep end shall not exceed one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet to the point of the first slope change. 
(3)	The point of the first slope change shall be defined as the point at which the floor slope exceeds one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet and shall not occur at a depth greater than five (5) feet. 
(4)	The slope of the floor from the point of the first slope change to the deep end shall not exceed one (1) foot in three (3) feet. Such slopes are not intended to provide any less water depth than those specified if the pool is intended for diving. 
(5)	Transitional radius from wall to floor where floor slopes join the wall shall comply with the following: 
a.	The radius shall have its center no less than two (2) feet nine (9) inches below the waterline in deep areas or two (2) feet six (6) inches in the shallow area. 
b.	The radius shall be tangent at the point where the radius either meets the wall or the floor. 
c.	The radius shall be at least equal to or greater than the depth of the pool minus the vertical wall depth measured from the waterline (or tolerance allowed in two (2) minus three (3) inches to allow draining to the main drain. (R minimum = Pool depth Vertical wall depth 3") 
(d)	Water depths. Water depths at the shallow end of the swimming area shall be a maximum of three (3) feet six (6) inches except for racing pools which must have a minimum depth of three (3) feet six (6) inches. 
(1)	The beginners' area of a pool shall be visually set apart from, but may be adjoined to, the shallow area and shall not adjoin the deep area. 
(2)	The transition point or point of slope change of the pool from the beginners' area to the shallow area and from the shallow area to the deep area and at the points of separation of diving, slide and amusement areas shall be visually set apart with a rope and float line, depth markers and a four-inch minimum width row of floor tile, painted line or similar means of a color contrasting with the bottom. In diving pools with a constant slope, the shallow area shall be visually set apart from the deep area with a rope and float line, depth markers and a four-inch minimum width row of floor tile, painted line or similar means of a color contrasting with the bottom. The health authority may waive the need for a rope and float line in swim-out areas or similar construction where deemed necessary. 
(e)	Diving areas in pools shall conform to the minimum water depths, areas, slopes and other dimensions shown in subsection (f). If a wall exists, then it shall conform with the 3:1 slope in the Point D dimension and the L1-2-3-4 dimensions. 
(1)	When diving equipment is installed, it shall conform to the specifications set forth in subsection 5-36(g) and shall be located in the diving area of the pool so as to provide the minimum dimensions as shown in subsection (f). 
(2)	The tip of the diving equipment shall be located at Point A, which is the reference point of all other dimensions. 
(3)	There shall be a completely unobstructed clear vertical distance of thirteen (13) feet above any diving board measured from the center of the front end of the board. This area shall extend horizontally at least eight (8) feet behind, eight (8) feet to each side and sixteen (16) feet ahead of Point A. 
(4)	Public pools with diving facilities in excess of three (3) meters in height or pools designed for platform diving shall comply with the dimensional design requirements of FINA, U.S. Diving, National Federation of State High School Associations (NFSHSA), or similar authority. 
(f)	Minimum dimensions for diving portion of pools.
(1)	Diagram showing points where dimensions are measured. Note that the shallow portion of the pool is not shown. 

(2)	Minimum dimensions for points given in diagram (1).

 
L2 L3 and L4 combined represent the minimum distance from the tip of the board to pool well opposite diving equipment. 
For board heights exceeding 3 meters see Article 4.5.2 
*Note: Placement of boards shall observe the following minimum dimensions. With multiple board instructions minimum pool widths must be increased accordingly. 

 
(g)	Offset ledges. When provided, offset ledges shall fall within eleven (11) degrees from plumb starting at the junction of the pool wall and waterline and shall have a slip-resistant surface. The outer two-inch edge shall be painted a contrasting color. The maximum width shall be eight (8) inches. The typical allowable dimensions are based on the depths shown below: 

(h)	Underwater seat benches. Underwater seat benches in pools, when provided, shall have a maximum horizontal seat bench depth of twenty (20) inches below the waterline, be visually set apart by having the outer two (2) inches of each seat painted in a contrasting color, have a slip-resisting surface, and shall be located fully outside of the required minimum diving water envelope if the pool is intended for use with diving equipment. Underwater seat benches shall be permitted in the deep end of the pool only if they are either completely recessed, shaped to be compatible with the shape of the pool wall, or in a corner of the pool. 
(i)	Maximum user load and pool size. Maximum user load at all public pools except spas, shall be in accordance with table (1) below. Tables (2) a. and b. are to be used only to establish the minimum pool size allowable: 
(1)	The user load shall be the maximum number of people allowed in the swimming pool at one time. Use of the table in calculating the bathing load shall be cumulative. 

 
(2)	Maximum bathing load per number of living or dwelling units shall be used only to establish the minimum pool size allowable. The use of these tables in calculating the bather load shall be cumulative. These tables do not apply to spas. 
a.	Swimming pools with transient bathers.

 
b.	Swimming pools with non-transient bathers.

 
(3)	The maximum user load in a spa at one time shall not exceed one (1) person per nine (9) square feet of surface area. 
(j)	Wading pool water depth. Wading pools shall be separate and physically set apart from beginning or shallow water areas of swimming pools by at least six (6) feet of deck. Where a wading pool is adjacent to any deep water area, a minimum four-foot-high barrier shall be installed separating the two pools. 
(1)	Wading pools shall have a maximum water depth of twenty-four (24) inches. The water depth at the perimeter shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. Water depths may be reduced from the above maximums and brought to zero at the most shallow point. 
(2)	Walls in wading pools shall be vertical or within eleven (11) of vertical except for the lower six (6) inches which shall be radiused to the floor. Walls shall not extend more than six (6) inches above the waterline at any point. 
(3)	Floors of wading pools shall be uniform, sloped to drain with a maximum slope of one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet. 
(k)	Spa water depth. The maximum water depth in a spa shall be four (4) feet measured from the waterline. Exceptions may be made for spas designed for a special purpose. 
(1)	Multi-level seating in a spa may be provided, but the maximum water depth of any seat or sitting bench shall be twenty-eight (28) inches measured from the waterline. 
(2)	The spa shall be provided with a suitable handhold around its perimeter in areas where water depths exceed three (3) feet six (6) inches. Handholds shall be provided no further apart than four (4) feet and may consist of any one or a combination of the following options. 
a.	Coping, ledges, radiused flanges or decks along the immediate top edge of the spa shall provide a suitable slip-resisting handhold located not more than twelve (12) inches above the waterline; or 
b.	Ladders, steps or seat ledges; or
c.	A secured rope or railing at or not more than twelve (12) inches above the waterline.
(3)	The slope of the floor in a spa shall not exceed one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet vertical to horizontal. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-36. - Decks and deck equipment. 
(a)	These requirements shall be for decks and deck equipment used by users and shall apply at the time of construction. 
(1)	Deck(s) shall be designed and installed in accordance with the engineering practices required in the area of installation. This includes the design and quality of subbase when required, concrete mix design, reinforcing, joints, etc. If a concrete deck is selected, in the absence of specific local engineering practices, the work shall be performed in accordance with the recommended practices of the latest edition of American Concrete Institute (ACI) Standard 302.1R-80, "Guide for Concrete Floor and Slab Construction." 
(2)	Decks, ramps, coping and similar step surfaces shall be slip-resisting and easily cleanable. 
(3)	Special features in or on deck(s) such as markers, brand insignias or similar shall conform to this chapter. 
(4)	Risers for steps for the deck shall be uniform and have a minimum height of three and three-fourths (3¾) inches and a maximum height of seven and one-half (7½") inches. The minimum tread depth shall be ten (10) inches. 
(5)	Excavation areas shall be adequately compacted when they support the deck(s).
(6)	The deck, including coping, shall have a minimum four (4) feet width of continuous, unobstructed walking area maintained at all times. 
(7)	A minimum four-foot deck width shall be provided on the sides and rear of any diving equipment. A deck clearance of twenty-four (24) inches shall be provided around any other deck equipment that is thirty-six (36) inches or less in height above the deck. A deck clearance of thirty-six (36) inches shall be provided around all other deck equipment. 
(8)	A four-foot minimum, continuous unobstructed deck, which may include the coping, shall be provided around at least fifty (50) percent or more of a spa. 
(9)	The minimum slope of the deck(s) shall be one-eighth (1/8) inch per one (1) foot.
(10)	The maximum voids between adjoining concrete slabs, and/or between concrete slabs and expansion joint material, shall be three-sixteenths (3/16) inch of horizontal clearance with a maximum difference in vertical elevation of one-fourth (¼) inch. 
(11)	Construction joints where pool coping meets deck(s) shall be watertight and shall not allow water to pass to the ground beneath. 
(12)	The areas where the deck(s) join the pool and spa coping shall be designed and installed so as to protect the coping and its mortar bed from damage as a result of reasonable movement of adjoining deck(s). 
(13)	Joints in deck(s) shall be provided to minimize the potential for cracks due to a change in elevations, separation of surfaces or movement of the slab. 
(14)	The areas where the deck(s) join(s) concrete work shall be protected by expansion joints to protect the pool adequately from the pressures of relative movements. 
(15)	Deck(s) shall be edged, have a radius, or be otherwise relieved to eliminate sharp corners. 
(16)	Deck(s) shall be sloped to effectively drain either to perimeter areas or to deck drains. Drainage shall remove pool and spa splash water, deck cleaning water and rain water without leaving standing water. 
(17)	Site drainage shall be provided so as to direct all perimeter deck drainage as well as general site and roof drainage away from the pool. When required, yard drains shall be installed to prevent the accumulation or pudding of site water in the general area of the deck(s) and related improvements. 
(18)	If used, an open pit or leaching design for backwash sump purposes shall be located so that it falls completely below adjacent deck(s) and fully outside a line projected forty-five (45) degrees downward and away from such deck(s), or shall be designed to accommodate local soil conditions and the volume of backwash (see diagram below). 

(19)	Circulation system piping, other than that integrally included in the manufacture of the pool or spa, shall be subject to an induced static hydraulic pressure test (sealed system) at fifty (50) pounds per square inch (psi) for at least thirty (30) minutes or longer as determined by the local health authority. This test shall be performed before the deck is poured and the pressure shall be maintained through the deck pour. 
(20)	Valves installed in or under any deck(s) shall provide a minimum ten (10) inches diameter access cover and valve pit to facilitate servicing. 
(21)	A hose bibb and a vacuum breaker shall be provided for washing down the entire deck area. 
(22)	The deck area will be kept clean of all trash and debris.
(b)	Entry/exit. All pools except spas, shall have at least two (2) means of entry/exit located so as to serve both ends of the pool. These shall consist of ladders, stairs or recessed treads, or a walking entry and may be used in combination. All treads shall have slip-resisting surfaces. 
(1)	Where water depths are twenty-four (24) inches or less at the pool wall, such areas shall be considered as providing their own natural mode for entry/exit. 
(2)	For pools or water areas over thirty (30) feet in width, both sides of the deep portions of the pool shall have entries/exits provided. 
(3)	A means of entry/exit for the shallow end shall be located between the shallow end wall and the cross section at Point C, while a means of entry/exit for the deep end shall be between the deep end wall and the cross section at Point B as shown in subsection 5-35(f). 
(4)	A means of entry/exit shall be provided at a minimum of every seventy-five (75) linear feet of pool wall or fraction thereof. 
(5)	Stairs, ladders and recessed treads shall be located so as not to interfere with racing lanes if applicable. 
(c)	Pool stairs. The design and construction of protruding and recessed pool stairs shall conform to the following: 
(1)	Step treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth of ten (10) inches and a minimum unobstructed surface area of two hundred forty (240) square inches. 
(2)	Risers at the centerline of the treads shall have a maximum uniform height of ten (10) inches, with the bottom riser height allowed to vary from two (2) inches to not more than ten (10) inches. 
(3)	Each set of stairs shall be provided with at least one (1) handrail to serve all treads and risers. Handrails shall conform to the following: 
a.	Handrails, if removable, shall be installed in such a way that they cannot be removed without the use of tools. 
b.	The leading edge of handrails facilitating stairs and pool entry/exit shall be no more than eighteen (18) inches plus or minus three (3) inches, horizontally from the vertical plane of the bottom riser (where applicable). 
c.	The outside diameter of handrails shall be between one (1) inch and one and nine-tenths (1.9) inches. 
(4)	Underwater seats, benches or swimouts may be provided as part of the stairs or recessed treads. 
(d)	Pool ladders. The design and construction of pool ladder(s) shall conform to the following.
(1)	Pool ladders shall be made entirely of corrosion-resisting materials.
(2)	Ladders shall provide two (2) handholds or two (2) handrails.
(3)	Below the water level, there shall be a clearance of not more than six (6) inches nor less than three (3) inches between any ladder tread edge, measured from the pool wall side of the tread and the pool wall. 
(4)	The clear distance between ladder handrails shall be a minimum of seventeen (17) inches and a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches. 
(5)	There shall be a uniform height between ladder treads, with a seven-inch minimum distance and a twelve-inch maximum distance. 
(6)	Ladder treads shall have a minimum horizontal depth of one and one-half (1½) inches.
(e)	Recessed treads. The design and construction of recessed treads in the pool wall shall conform to the following. 
(1)	Recessed treads at the centerline shall have a uniform vertical spacing of twelve (12) inches maximum and seven (7) inches minimum. 
(2)	The vertical distance between the pool coping edge, deck or step surface and the uppermost recessed tread shall be a maximum of twelve (12) inches. 
(3)	Recessed treads shall have a minimum depth of five (5) inches and a minimum width of twelve (12) inches. 
(4)	Recessed treads shall drain into the pool to prevent the accumulation of dirt.
(5)	Each set of recessed treads shall be provided with a set of handrails/grabrails/handholds to serve all treads and risers. 
(f)	Spa entry/exit. Spas shall have a means of entry/exit at a minimum of every fifty (50) [feet] or portion thereof, where water depths are greater than twenty-four (24) inches. 
(1)	Subsections 5-36(d) and (e) shall apply to ladders and recessed treads in spas. 
(2)	Spas shall be equipped with at least one (1) handrail (or ladder equivalent) for each fifty (50) feet of perimeter or portion thereof, to designate the point of entry and exit. 
a.	Handrails shall be installed in such a way that they cannot be removed without the use of tools. 
b.	The leading edge of a handrail in the spa shall be no more than eighteen (18) inches plus or minus three (3) inches horizontally from the vertical plane of the bottom riser (where applicable). 
c.	The outside diameter of handrails shall be between one (1) inch and one and nine-tenths (1.9) inches. 
(3)	The design and construction of spa steps and seat benches, where used, shall conform to the following: 
a.	Step treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth of ten (10) inches for a minimum continuous width of twelve (12) inches. Step treads shall have slip-resisting surfaces. 
b.	Riser heights shall not be greater than twelve (12) inches. Where the bottom tread serves as a bench or seat, the bottom riser may be a maximum of fourteen (14) inches above the spa floor. 
c.	The first and last risers need not be uniform but shall comply with riser height requirements as noted above. The first (top) riser is measured from the finished deck. 
d.	Intermediate risers, those between the first and last risers, shall be uniform in height. 
e.	Each set of steps shall be provided with at least one (1) handrail to serve all treads and risers. 
f.	The outer two-inch edge of each step shall be painted a contrasting color.
(g)	Supports for diving equipment. Supports, platforms, stairs, and ladders for diving equipment shall be designed to carry the anticipated loads. Stairs and ladders shall be of corrosion-resisting material, easily cleanable and with slip resisting tread. 
(1)	All diving stands higher than twenty-one (21) inches measured from the deck to the top butt end of the board shall be provided with stairs and/or a ladder. Step treads shall be self-draining. 
(2)	Platforms and diving equipment of one (1) meter or higher shall be protected with guard rails which shall be at least thirty (30) inches above the diving board and extend to the edge of the pool wall. All platforms or diving equipment higher than one (1) meter shall have guard rails which are at least thirty-six (36) inches above the diving board and extend to the edge of the pool wall. 
(h)	Diving equipment. Diving equipment shall be designed for swimming pool use and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacture's recommendations. 
(1)	Diving equipment manufacturers shall provide installation instructions and specifications with each unit. 
(2)	A label shall be permanently affixed to the diving equipment or jump board and shall include: 
a.	Manufacturer's name and address,
b.	Board equipment length,
c.	Identification as to diving or jump board,
d.	Fulcrum setting specifications (if applicable).
(3)	Diving equipment shall have slip-resisting tread surfaces.
(4)	Diving equipment shall be permanently anchored to the pool deck. The edge of the board at the tip end shall be level with the water surface. The tip end of the board over the pool water surface may be higher than the butt end of the board. 
(5)	Maximum board height over the water shall have plus three (+3) inches tolerance.
(6)	The maximum construction tolerance of the tip of the board from Point A as shown in subsection 5-35(f) shall be plus or minus three (3) inches. The diving equipment shall be in compliance with subsection 5-35(e). 
(i)	The requirements of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) Standard for Swimming Pool Slides as published in the Code of Federal Regulations, 16 CFR Part 1207, shall be used for standards relating to swimming pool slides. Installation and use instructions shall be provided with each unit by the manufacturer. 
(j)	Play structures and other equipment shall be governed by other appropriate authorities such as building codes, U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), and amusement ride regulations. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-37. - Circulation systems. 
(a)	A circulation system consisting of pumps, piping, return inlets and suction outlets, filters and other necessary equipment shall be provided for complete circulation of water through all parts of the pool. 
(1)	The equipment for a swimming pool shall be of adequate size to turn over the entire pool water capacity at least once every six (6) hours unless otherwise specified in (3) below. The equipment for a spa shall be of adequate size to turn over the entire spa water capacity at a minimum of once every thirty (30) minutes. This system shall be designed to give the proper turnover rate based on the manufacturer's recommended maximum pressure flow of the filter in clean media condition of the filter. 
(2)	In pools other than those listed in (3) below, built prior to December 31, 2000, the turnover rate must be at least once every eight (8) hours. Upon rehabilitation of a pool which includes piping and/or circulation equipment changes, or by January 1, 2003, whichever is sooner, a six-hour turnover rate will be met if possible as determined by the health authority. 
(3)	Turnover rates for pools by type:

 
(4)	Timing devices will be allowed for the purpose of turning off the circulation system during times when a pool is not being used. Timing devices must be set to provide at least one complete turnover immediately prior to the pool reopening. 
(5)	Water clarity shall be maintained. (Clarity is a function of proper filtration and maintenance of proper chemical operational parameters.) When standing at the pool's edge at the deep end, the main drain covers or a standard black and white disc shall be clearly visible. When standing at a spa's edge, the deepest portion of the spa floor shall be visible in a still condition. 
(6)	Circulation system components which require replacement or servicing shall be accessible for inspection, repair, or replacement and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(7)	Where equipment sizing falls within the scope of NSF International testing, materials and equipment used in the circulation system shall comply with the appropriate requirements of NSF International Standard 50. 
(8)	Pool and spa equipment shall be properly supported to prevent damage from misalignment, settlement, etc. The equipment shall be mounted so as to minimize the potential for the accumulation of debris and moisture, following manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)	Water velocity. The water velocity in the pool or spa piping shall be a minimum of five (5) feet per second, but shall not exceed ten (10) feet per second for discharge piping (except for copper pipe where the velocity should not exceed eight (8) feet per second), and a minimum of four (4) feet per second, but not exceed six (6) feet per second for suction piping, unless summary calculations are provided to show that the greater flow is possible with the pump, and piping provided. Pool and spa piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the maximum head of the pump. 
(1)	The pump shall be sized to deliver the required flow rate against the total system head involved. 
(2)	A wading pool shall have a separate circulation system of adequate size to turn over the entire pool water capacity at least once every two (2) hours. 
(c)	Piping and fittings. The circulation system piping and fittings shall be nontoxic, shall be considered to be process piping and shall be of material able to withstand operating pressures and operating conditions. 
(1)	Pool and spa piping subject to damage by freezing shall have a uniform slope in one direction equipped with valves for adequate drainage. Pool and spa piping shall be supported at sufficient intervals to prevent entrapment of air, water or dirt. Provision shall be made for expansion or contraction of pipes. 
(2)	Equipment shall be designed and fabricated to drain the pool or spa water from the equipment, together with exposed face piping, by removal of drain plugs and manipulating valves, or by other methods. Refer to manufacturer's recommendations for specific information on draining the system. 
(d)	System condition. Gauges shall be provided as follows:
(1)	A pressure or vacuum gauge or other means of indicating system condition shall be provided in the circulation system in an easily readable location. 
(2)	A flow meter measuring the rate of flow through the filter system with an appropriate range readable in gallons per minute (GPM) and accurate within ten (10) percent actual flow shall be provided. The flow indicator shall be capable of measuring from one-half to at least one and one-half times the design flow rate. The gauge shall be located after the filtering equipment and in such location on the return line, so as to measure the total amount of water returning to the pool according to the manufacturer's installation specifications. 
(e)	Water clarity and chemistry. The circulation system shall be capable of maintaining water clarity and water chemistry requirements and shall operate twenty-four (24) hours per day, except when an automatic timing device is installed that will allow at least one (1) complete turnover, immediately prior to beginning the next period of operation. 
(f)	Instructions. Operation and maintenance instructions shall be provided for the circulation system. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-38. - Filters. 
(a)	Design. Filters shall be designed so that after cleaning per manufacturer's instructions, the system can provide the water clarity noted in subsection 5-37(a)(3). 
(1)	Filter sizing shall be per NSF International Standard 50 with the specific maximum flow rates per surface area based on media used. 
(2)	Filters shall be designed so that filtration surfaces can be inspected and serviced.
(b)	Internal pressure. On pressure-type filters, a means shall be provided to permit the release of internal pressure. 
(1)	Any filter incorporating an automatic internal air release as its principal means of air release shall have lids which provide a slow and safe release of pressure as a part of its design. 
(2)	Any separation tank used in conjunction with any filter tank shall have a manual means of air release or a lid which provides a slow and safe release of pressure as it is opened as a part of its design. 
(c)	Instructions. Pressure filters and separation tanks shall have operation and maintenance instructions permanently installed on the filter or separation tank and shall include a precautionary warning statement not to start up the system after maintenance without first opening the air release and proper reassembly of the filter and separation tank. The statement shall be visible and noticeable within the area of the air release. 
(d)	Piping. Piping furnished with the filter shall be of suitable material capable of withstanding one and one-half (1½) times the working pressure. The suction piping shall not collapse when there is a complete shutoff of flow on the suction side of the pump. 
(e)	A sight glass shall be installed on the waste discharge line of pressure filters so that the progress of filter washing can be observed. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-39. - Pumps and motors. 
(a)	Sizing. A pump and motor shall be provided for circulation of the pool and spa water. Performance of all pumps shall meet or exceed the conditions of flow required for filtering and cleaning (if applicable) the filters against the total dynamic head developed by the complete system. Where applicable, pumps shall comply with the NSF International Standard 50, or Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 1081. 
(b)	Strainer or screen. With all pressure filter systems, a cleanable strainer or screen shall be provided upstream of the circulation pump(s) to remove solids, debris, hair, lint, etc. 
(c)	Pump(s) and motor(s) shall be accessible for inspection and service.
(d)	Safe operation. The design and construction of the pump(s) and component parts shall provide safe operation. 
(e)	Pump seal. Where a mechanical pump seal is provided, components of the seal shall be corrosion-resisting and capable of operating under conditions normally encountered in pool operation. 
(f)	Capability. Motor(s) shall be capable of operating the pump under full load with a voltage variation of plus or minus ten (10) percent from the nameplate rating. If the maximum service factor of the motor is exceeded (at full voltage), the manufacturer shall indicate this on the pump curve. 
(g)	Overload protection. All motors shall have thermal or current overload protection, either built in or in the line starter, to provide locked rotor and running protection. 
(h)	When the pump is below the waterline, valves shall be installed on permanently connected suction and discharge lines, located in an accessible place outside the walls of the pool, where they shall be readily and easily accessible for maintenance and removal of the pump. 
(i)	Pressure or vacuum gauges shall be installed on all public pools and spas.
(1)	The vacuum gauge shall be installed after the filter and before the pump, as close to the pump return inlet as possible while still maintaining an accurate reading. 
(2)	The pressure gauge shall be installed downstream from the pump on the face piping ahead of the filter or on top of the filter in the area of greatest filter pressure. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-40. - Return inlets and suction outlets. 
(a)	Location. Return inlet(s) and suction outlet(s) shall be provided and arranged to produce a uniform circulation of water and maintain a uniform disinfectant residual throughout the pool or spa. Where skimmers are used, the return inlet(s) shall be located so as to help bring floating particles within range of the skimmers. 
(1)	A swimming pool shall have a minimum of two (2) return inlets regardless of pool size. The number of return inlets shall be based on two (2) inlets per six hundred (600) square feet of pool surface area or one inlet every fifteen feet of perimeter or fraction thereof, whichever is greater. Return inlet(s) from the circulation system shall be designed so as not to constitute a hazard to the user. 
(2)	All pools shall be provided with at least two main drain suction outlets in the lowest point of the pool floor. The spacing of the main drains shall be at least five (5) feet, but not greater than twenty (20) feet on centers nor more than fifteen (15) feet from each side wall. 
(3)	All spas shall have a minimum of two (2) suction outlets provided for each pump in the suction outlet system, separated by a minimum of three (3) feet or located on two (2) different planes; i.e. one (1) on the bottom and one (1) on the vertical wall or one (1) each on two (2) separate vertical walls. These suction outlets shall be plumbed such that water is drawn through them simultaneously through a common line to the pump. 
(b)	Suction outlets shall be provided with a cover that has been tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory and comply with ANSI/ASME A112.19.8M-1987, Suction Fittings For Use in Swimming Pools, Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and Whirlpool Bathtub Appliances. 
(c)	Net openings in each floor outlet covering or grating shall be at least four (4) times the area of the discharge pipe and provide sufficient area so that the maximum velocity of the water passing the grate will not exceed one and one-half (1½) feet per second. 
(1)	The width of openings in grating shall be not less than one eighth (1/8) inch and not more than one half (½) inch.
(2)	The pool or spa shall not be operated if the outlet grate is missing, broken or secured in such a way that it can be removed without the use of tools. 
(d)	Entrapment avoidance. If the suction outlet system, such as a filtration system, booster system, automatic cleaning system, solar system, etc., has a single suction outlet, or multiple suction outlets which can be isolated, each suction outlet shall protect against user entrapment by as many of the following as necessary. 
(1)	An antientrapment device installed immediately upstream of the pump,
(2)	An antivortex cover,
(3)	A twelve-inch by twelve-inch grate or larger.
(4)	Other means.
(e)	Where provided, the vacuum cleaner fitting(s) shall be located in an accessible position(s) at least six (6) inches and no greater than eighteen (18) inches below the minimum operating water level or as an attachment to the skimmer(s). 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-41. - Surface skimmer systems. 
(a)	A surface skimming system shall be provided on all swimming pools and spas and shall be designed and constructed to skim the pool or spa surface when the water level is maintained within the operational parameters of the system's rim or weir device. Surface skimming devices shall comply with NSF International Standard 50. 
(b)	Skimming devices shall be designed and installed so as not to constitute a hazard to the user. 
(c)	Automatic surface skimmers. Where automatic surface skimmers are used as the sole overflow system in pools, at least two (2) surface skimmers shall be provided for the first five hundred (500) square feet or fraction thereof of the water surface area and one (1) skimmer shall be provided for each additional five hundred (500) square feet of surface area. In spas, one (1) skimmer shall be provided for each one hundred (100) square feet of surface area. Nominal recessed areas such as stairs, swimouts, spas, etc., shall not be considered in the calculation. When skimmers are used, they shall be located to maintain effective skimming action over the entire surface of the pool or spa. 
(d)	Perimeter surface skimmer (gutter). Where a perimeter type surface skimming system is used as the sole surface skimming system, this system shall extend completely around the perimeter of the pool except at steps or recessed ladders. The lip of the gutter shall be level and shall be designed to serve as a handhold for bathers. The perimeter surface skimming system shall be connected to the circulation system with a system surge capacity of not less than one (1) gallon for each square foot of pool surface or two and one half (2½) gallons for each square foot of spa surface. 
(e)	The hydraulic capacity of the overflow system shall be capable of handling one hundred (100) percent of the circulation flow. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-42. - Lighting and electrical requirements. 
(a)	Artificial lighting shall be provided for all indoor and outdoor pools and spas. Lighting shall be adequate to illuminate the entire swimming pool enclosure without glare. All installations shall comply with local building code requirements. Ground-fault interrupters must be provided. Lighting in dressing rooms, sanitary facilities, equipment rooms and concessions shall comply with local code requirements. 
(1)	For outdoor pools used for night swimming and all indoor pools and spas, a minimum of thirty (30) foot candles shall be maintained at the surface of pool and deck areas where underwater lighting is utilized. A minimum of fifty (50) foot candles shall be maintained at the surface of pool and deck areas where underwater lighting is not utilized. More light may be required as deemed necessary by the health authority and/or by other codes which apply. 
(2)	Where underwater lighting is used, the following rules shall apply:
a.	For public pools under eight hundred (800) square feet of pool surface area, a minimum of five hundred (500) watts of underwater lighting is required. 
b.	For all public pools eight hundred (800) square feet or larger of surface area, at a minimum, one and one half (1.5) watts per square feet of surface area is required. The lighting shall be evenly spaced around the pool to prevent glare. 
c.	In all diving pools and all pools over one thousand (1000) square feet with diving areas to twelve (12) feet in depth, two (2) watts per square feet of surface area is required. In all pools with diving wells deeper than twelve (12) feet, it is required to provide at least three (3) watts per square feet of surface area, within the diving well. 
(3)	For outdoor pools, when not being used for night swimming or recreation; a minimum of ten (10) foot candles shall be maintained at the surface of pool and deck areas. Motion detector type lights are acceptable. 
(b)	No switches, starters, panel boards or similar electrical equipment shall be located in areas readily accessible to bathers while in the pool or on the designated deck area. 
(c)	No overhead wiring shall pass within twenty (20) feet (horizontal distance) of the pool enclosure. No electrical outlets shall be located within ten (10) feet of the pool edge. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-43. - Heaters. 
(a)	Sizing. A heater will be properly sized according to the volume of water, square footage of surface area and manufacturer's recommendations. 
(b)	Water temperature. The owner/operator shall routinely check the in-pool or in-spa water to ensure that the temperature does not exceed one hundred and four (104) degrees Fahrenheit. If adjustments are necessary, those adjustments shall be performed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions or by a qualified technician. A thermometer shall be available to measure the temperature of the water. It may be attached or floating or available to the operator at all times. 
(c)	Installation. The heater(s) shall be installed in accordance with all federal, state and local codes as well as the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(1)	Support. The heater shall be installed on a surface with sufficient structural strength to support the heater when it is full of water and operating. The heater shall be level and not able to move after plumbing, gas and/or electrical connections are completed. 
(2)	Ventilation. Fossil fuel heaters shall have adequate ventilation in order to assure proper operation. 
(3)	Make up air. Make up air shall be sufficient for proper operation. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-44. - Air blower and air induction systems. 
(a)	Entry devices. This section pertains to all devices and systems which induce or allow air to enter the spa either by means of a power pump or passive design. 
(b)	Air intake source. Air intake sources shall not induce water external to the spa unit, dirt or contaminants, into the spa. 
(c)	Make up air. When installing an air blower within an enclosure or indoors, adequate ventilation is a necessity. The air induction system shall be installed in accordance with any applicable codes and the manufacturer's recommendations for air openings to the enclosure. 
(d)	Accessibility. The air blower shall be accessible for inspection and service. 
(e)	Air passages. Integral air passages shall be pressure tested at the time of manufacture to provide structural integrity to a value of one and one-half (1½) times the intended working pressure. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-45. - Water supply. 
(a)	The water supply for all pools, spas, showers, lavatories, drinking fountains and any other uses in conjunction with the pool shall be adequate in quantity and shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 and the "Rules for Safe Drinking Water" promulgated by the Department of Natural Resources. The water supply serving the pool which may come from a variety of sources, shall meet the requirements of Rule .17 before the user uses the pool. 
(b)	No direct mechanical connection shall be made between the potable water supply and the swimming pool, chlorinating equipment or the system of piping for the pool, unless it is protected against backflow and back-siphonage in a manner approved by the Health Authority or through an air gap meeting the latest American National Standards Institute Standard A112.1.2 or other equivalent means approved by the Health Authority. 
(c)	An over-the-rim spout, if used, shall be located under a diving board, adjacent to a ladder or otherwise properly shielded so as not to create a hazard. Its open end shall have no sharp edges and shall not protrude more than two (2) inches beyond the edge of the pool. 
(d)	Backwash water may be discharged into a sanitary sewer through an approved air gap or into an approved subsurface disposal system or by other means approved by the Health Authority. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-46. - Disinfectant equipment and chemical feeders. 
(a)	Disinfectant equipment and chemical feeders, hereafter referred to jointly as "equipment," shall comply with the requirements of NSF International Standard 50. The disinfection equipment shall be capable of precisely introducing a sufficient quantity of an approved disinfecting agent to maintain the appropriate recommended guidelines as outlined in section 5-47 of this chapter. 
(1)	Every pool and spa shall be required to have at least one (1) unit of disinfectant agent equipment in compliance with subsection 46(a)(2). Additional units may be required to maintain chemical and physical parameters of the pool water. 
(2)	The pool or spa water shall be continuously disinfected by a disinfecting agent that imparts an easily measured residual. The disinfecting agent used shall be subject to field testing procedures that are simple and accurate. Gaseous chlorine, chlorine compounds, bromine compounds or other bactericidal agents shall be acceptable when meeting the disinfectant level parameters outlined in section 5-47 of this chapter. Other bactericidal agents not outlined in section 5-47 may be used if the Health Authority can be shown test results that show the agent to be an adequate bactericide for swimming pool and/or spa use. A test kit for these other agents must be supplied to the Health Authority by the manufacturer or the pool owner. Bactericidal agents shall be registered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(3)	Any apparatus, device, or equipment that discharges water into the pool or that uses water from the pool as part of the operations of that device, shall either use only water that has been filtered and disinfected immediately prior to being discharged into the pool or shall have a separate disinfection system for the device. This includes, but not limited to slides, fountains, water wheels, "mushrooms", squirt guns, etc. Any water being discharged into the pool water shall have at least the same level of disinfection that is required for the type of pool that the device is in, as listed in section 5-47. 
(b)	Chemical feeders. The installation and use of chemical feeders shall conform to the following: 
(1)	Chemical feeders must be installed downstream from the filter and heater.
(2)	If the chemical feeder is equipped with its own pump, it shall be installed so it introduces the gas or solution downstream from the heater and, if possible, at a position lower than the heater outlet fitting. 
(3)	Chemical feed pumps shall be wired so they cannot operate unless the filter pump is running. If the chlorinator has an independent timer, the filter and chemical feed pump timers shall be interlocked. 
(c)	Elemental (gaseous) chlorine. Chlorine in the gas form may be used.
(1)	Users of gas chlorine must be trained as to the proper procedures for handling chlorine and as to appropriate emergency procedures. 
(2)	Gas chlorination equipment shall be located so that equipment failure or malfunction will have minimum effect on evacuation of pool patrons in an emergency. 
(3)	Gas chlorine feeders (chlorinators) shall be activated by a booster pump using recirculated water supplies via the recirculation system., The booster pump shall be interlocked to the filter pump to prevent feeding of chlorine when the recirculation pump is not running. 
(4)	The chlorinator, cylinders of chlorine and associated equipment shall be housed in a reasonably gas-tight and corrosion-resisting housing having a floor area adequate for the purpose. Cylinders shall always be stored in an upright position and properly secured so they can not tip over if bumped. 
(5)	All enclosures shall be located at or above ground level. The enclosure shall be provided with a motor-driven exhaust fan capable of producing at least one air change per minute. This fan must be located at the lower part of the enclosure and there must be louvers of good design near the top of the enclosure for admitting fresh air. A warning sign, stating "Chlorine Gas" shall be posted on doors. Doors to the chlorine room shall open away from the pool and be equipped with a viewing window located so that the chlorinator and the inside of the enclosure can be clearly seen prior to entering. 
(6)	Electrical switches for the control of artificial lighting and ventilation systems shall be on the outside of the enclosure adjacent to the door. 
(7)	Facilities shall include a scale suitable for weighing the cylinders.
(8)	Connections from the cylinders to the system depend on the type of chlorinator to be used and shall comply with the chlorinator manufacturer's recommendation. 
(9)	An automatic chlorine leak detector and alarm shall be installed in the chlorinator room. 
(10)	Respirators approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) shall be provided for protection against chlorine. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations require training and maintenance programs for respirators. 
(11)	Containers may be stored indoors or outdoors. Full and empty cylinders shall be segregated and appropriately tagged. Storage conditions shall: (a) minimize external corrosion, (b) be clean and free of trash, (c) not be near an elevator or ventilation system, (d) be away from elevated temperatures or heat sources. 
(12)	A specific person shall be made responsible for chlorination operations and shall be trained in the performance of routine operations including emergency procedures, leak control procedures, and maintain current documentation of their training in proper respirator use. 
(13)	Chlorine cylinders must be handled with care. Valve protection caps and valve outlet caps shall be in place at all times except when the cylinder is connected for use. Cylinders must not be dropped and shall be protected from falling objects. Cylinders shall be used on a first-in, first-out basis. New, approved washers shall be used each time a cylinder is connected. 
(14)	A safety wall chart shall be posted in or near the chlorine enclosure and a second chart in the pool office near the telephone. The telephone number of the chlorine supplier shall be shown on this chart. 
(15)	Pool personnel shall be informed about leak control procedures.
(16)	As soon as a container is empty, the valve shall be closed and the lines disconnected. The outlet cap shall be applied promptly and the valve protection hood attached. The open end of the disconnected line shall be plugged or capped promptly to keep atmospheric moisture out of the system. 
(d)	Training. Personnel responsible for the operation of the disinfection agent equipment shall be properly trained in the operation of that equipment, the procedure for performing and interpreting the necessary chemical field tests and the appropriate emergency procedures. 
(e)	Test kits. Every pool shall be supplied with an accurate and reliable testing kit capable of measuring any agent that is introduced into the water of the pool, for the determination of pH, free available chlorine (FAC), total available chlorine (TAC) if chlorine is used, bromine or other chemical disinfectant residuals, cyanuric acid (if used), total alkalinity, calcium hardness, copper and silver (if a copper or copper/silver ionization unit has been installed). The local health authority shall, upon request, be supplied a field testing kit for any agents introduced into the water supply. If a field testing kit is not available, the agent cannot be introduced until standards for testing have been established by, and written approval has been obtained from, the health authority. The Orthotolidine test (OTO) shall be unacceptable since it cannot distinguish FAC and TAC. 
(f)	Daily record. A daily record will be kept of all chemical testing and temperatures recorded for all spas and self inspections performed. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-47. - Chemical operational parameters. 
The chemical operational parameters in swimming pool or spa water shall not exceed the maximum level or be lower than the minimum level given in the following parameters. Where no minimum or maximum is given, additional information is within this chapter to assist the pool operator. 

 
Sec. 5-48. - Specific safety features. 
(a)	Handholds. A public pool shall be provided with a suitable handhold around its perimeter in areas where depths exceed three (3) feet six (6)inches. Handholds shall be provided no further apart than four (4) feet and shall consist of any one (1) or a combination of the items listed below: 
(1)	Coping, ledge or deck along the immediate top edge of the pool which provides a slip-resisting surface of at least four (4) inches minimum horizontal width and located at or not more than twelve (12) inches above the waterline; or 
(2)	Ladders, stairs or seat ledges; or
(3)	A railing placed at or not more than twelve (12) inches above the waterline.
(b)	Rope and float line. A rope and float line shall be provided within one (1) foot of and on the shallow side of the break in grade between the shallow and deep portions of the swimming pool, with its position marked with visible floats at not greater than seven-foot intervals. 
(1)	The rope and float line shall be securely fastened to wall anchors of corrosion-resisting materials and of the type which shall be recessed or have no projection that will constitute a hazard when the line is removed. 
(2)	The line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by users. 
(c)	Depth markers for swimming pools. Depth of water in feet shall be plainly and conspicuously marked at or above the waterline on the vertical pool wall and on the top of the coping or edge of the deck or walk next to the pool. The word or abbreviation for "feet" must be specified. 
(1)	Depth markers on the vertical pool wall shall be positioned to be read from the water side. 
(2)	Depth markers on the deck shall be within eighteen (18) inches of the water edge and positioned to be read while standing on the deck facing the water. 
(3)	Depth markers shall be slip-resisting.
(4)	Depth markers shall be installed at the maximum and minimum water depths and at all points of slope change. 
(5)	Depth markers shall be installed at intermediate increments of water depth not to exceed two (2) feet, nor spaced at distances greater than twenty-five-foot intervals. 
(6)	Depth markers shall be arranged uniformly on both sides and both ends of the pool.
(7)	Depth markers on irregularly shaped pools shall designate depths at all major deviations in shape as well as conform to the foregoing articles. 
(8)	Depth markers shall have a four-inch minimum height. Numbers shall be of contrasting color to the background on which they are applied, and the color shall be of a permanent nature. 
(d)	Depth markers for spas. Public spas shall have permanent depth markers with numbers a minimum of four (4) inches high plainly and conspicuously visible from all obvious points of entry and in conformance with (1) through (4) below and be in accordance with ANSI/UL 969 "Marking and Labeling Apparatus". 
(1)	There shall be a minimum of two (2) depth markers per spa, regardless of spa size or shape. 
(2)	Depth markers shall be spaced at no more than twenty-five-feet intervals and shall be uniformly located around the perimeter of the spa. 
(3)	Spas shall have the maximum water depth clearly marked on the deck wall.
(4)	Depth markers shall be positioned on the deck within eighteen (18) inches of the water line. 
(5)	Depth markers shall be positioned to be read while standing on the deck facing the water. 
(6)	Depth markers in or on the deck surfaces shall be slip-resisting.
(e)	Clock. All public facilities shall have a clock which is visible to spa users.
(f)	Water temperature. The maximum temperature in a spa shall not exceed one hundred and four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Celsius). 
(1)	The spa operator shall be provided with an accurate thermometer (;pm;1;deg;F tolerance) and shall periodically check to ensure that the maximum temperature does not exceed one hundred and four (104) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)	A means to determine the spa temperature with a ;pm;1;deg;F tolerance shall be provided to the user. 
(g)	Lifeguards. All owners, managers, or lifeguards, if provided, in charge of, or working at, public swimming pools, spas or recreational water parks shall be responsible for the supervision and safety of the pool, spa or recreational water park. 
(1)	If lifeguards and safety assistants are provided, they shall be qualified as lifeguards by holding current, nationally recognized certifications in Lifeguarding, Adult/child/infant CPR and First Aid. 
(2)	If lifeguards are provided, their lifeguard certification, CPR and first aid certificates or photocopies thereof shall be maintained at the facility and be available to the local health authority for inspection. 
(h)	Lifesaving equipment. All public swimming pools shall have lifesaving equipment conspicuously and conveniently on hand at all times. Lifesaving equipment for special purpose pools may be exempted from this requirement or the requirements will be provided as deemed necessary by Health Authority. The following will be provided: 
(1)	A light, strong pole not less than twelve (12) feet long, including a body hook shall be provided. 
(2)	A minimum one-fourth-inch diameter throwing rope as long as one and one-half (1½) times the maximum width of the pool or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less, to which has been firmly attached a ring buoy with an outside diameter of approximately fifteen (15) inches or a similar flotation device which is U.S. Coast Guard approved, shall be provided. 
(3)	A telephone which is hard wired and affixed, with posted names and phone numbers of the nearest available police, fire, ambulance service and/or rescue unit, and/or 911, if available. 
(i)	Barriers. All outdoor swimming pools and spas shall be provided with a barrier.
(1)	The top of the barrier shall be at least forty-eight (48) inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be four (4) inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be four (4) inches. 
(2)	Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch diameter sphere.
(3)	Solid barriers which do not have openings such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
(4)	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty-five (45) inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed one and one-fourth (1¼) inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and one-fourth (1¼) inches in width. 
(5)	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is forty-five (45) inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four (4) inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed ne and one-fourth (1¼) inches in width. 
(6)	Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a one and one-fourth (1¼) inch square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to no more than one and one-fourth (1¼) inches. 
(7)	Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than one and one-fourth (1¼) inches. 
(8)	Access gates shall comply with the requirements of subsections (1) through (7) also and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than fifty-four (54) inches from the bottom of the gate, (a) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate and (b) the gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half (½) inch within eighteen (18) inches of the release mechanism. 
(9)	There shall not be direct access from any dwelling into the pool enclosure.
(10)	Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of access is a ladder or steps then (a) the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access or (b) the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of this section. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere. 
(11)	Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. 
(12)	A spa with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F1346, "Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs" shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Swimming pools with safety covers shall not be exempt from the provisions of this document. 
(j)	Warning/safety signs for swimming pools. Signs shall be provided as follows:
(1)	The words "No Diving" shall be permanently visible at the edge of the deck for water five (5) feet or less. Placement should conform to that outlined for depth markers in subsections (1) through (8). 
(2)	Where no lifeguard is on duty, a sign shall be placed in clear view at or near the entrance to the pool and shall state in clearly legible letters at least four inches high "WARNING NO LIFE GUARD ON DUTY". 
(3)	The same sign in (2) or an additional sign will state the following rules in clearly legible letters at least two (2) inches high: 
a.	Unattended solo bathing is prohibited.
b.	Children shall not use pool without an adult in attendance.
c.	No glass articles allowed in or around pool.
d.	No food, drink or wrappers shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of the swimming pool or spa. 
e.	No running or rough play allowed.
f.	No spitting, spouting of water or blowing nose in pool.
g.	No "cut-offs" or "exposed" diapers allowed.
h.	Only one (1) bather at a time allowed on diving board.
i.	Diving area must be clear of other patrons before diving is permitted.
j.	No swimming allowed during heavy rain or when thunder and lightening can be seen or heard. 
(k)	Warning/safety signs for spas. Signs shall be provided as follows:
(1)	Signage which states safety, emergency and operational aspects of the spa, shall be prominently located. As a guide, for the language and layout of the safety signs reference ANSI Z 535 series of standards for Safety Signs and Colors and ANSI/UL 1563 1987 "Standards for Electric Hot Tubs, and Associated Equipment". 
(2)	Warning/safety signs for spas shall be in clear view of the spa and prominently displayed. Signs shall state the spa's address, the location of the nearest telephone with references that emergency telephone numbers are posted at the location. These emergency telephone numbers should include the name and phone number of the nearest available police, fire, ambulance service and/or "911", if available. Signs shall include, but not be limited to the following messages. 
a.	Risk of Fetus Damage — Hot water exposure limitations vary from person to person. Pregnant women and small children should not use spa prior to medical consultation. 
b.	Risk of Drowning — Other persons suffering from heart disease, diabetes, high or low blood pressure and other health problems should not enter the spa without prior medical consultation and permission from their doctor. 
c.	Risk of Drowning — Do not use the spa while under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drugs that cause sleepiness, drowsiness or raise/lower blood pressure. 
d.	Risk of Drowning — Use caution when bathing alone. Overexposure to hot water may cause nausea, dizziness and fainting. Lower water temperatures are recommended for extended use (exceeding 10-15 minutes) and for young children. 
e.	Risk of Drowning — Do not allow the use of or operate spa if the suction fitting is missing, broken or loose. 
f.	Risk of Child Drowning — Unsupervised use by children is prohibited.
g.	Risk of Injury — Before entering, check spa temperature before each use. The spa temperature should not exceed 104;deg;F. 
h.	Risk of Injury — Enter and exit slowly.
i.	Risk of Injury — Keep all breakable objects out of the spa area.
j.	Risk of Shock — Never place electrical appliances (telephone, radio, tv., etc.) within five feet (5') of the spa. 
k.	Risk of Shock — The spa shall not be operated during severe weather conditions, i.e. electrical storms, tornadoes, etc. 
(l)	In all swimming pools built prior to December 31, 2000 which have floor slopes greater than that allowed in this chapter of which have other construction variance to this chapter, the health authority may require a warning sign stating the possible hazard, to be posted in public view. 
(m)	Obstructions and entrapment avoidance. There shall be no obstructions that can cause the user to be entrapped or injured. Types of entrapment can include but not be limited to such things as wedge or pinch-type openings and rigid, nongiving cantilevered protrusions. 
(n)	No less than one (1) drinking fountain shall be provided and available to users at the pool site. 
(o)	A minimum of one (1) rinse shower shall be provided on the pool deck of all public pools and spas with bather loads of fifty (50) or less. An additional rinse shower shall be provided for each additional one hundred (100) bathers. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-49. - Dressing facilities. 
Adequate dressing facilities, for pools, spas and recreational water parks should be provided unless these facilities are provided in connection with the general development for other purposes and are of adequate capacity and number and in close proximity to the pool. Handicapped accessible dressing and sanitary facilities shall be designed and provided in accordance with state or local requirements and can be included as part of the total number of water closets, shower heads, lavatories, etc. required herein. 
(1)	Dressing facilities, when provided, shall be provided with separations for each sex with no interconnection. The rooms shall be well-lighted, drained, ventilated and of good construction with impervious materials. They shall be developed and planned so that good sanitation can be maintained throughout the building at all times. 
(2)	Partitions between portions of the dressing room area, screen partitions, shower, toilet and dressing room booths shall be of durable material not subject to damage by water and shall be designed so that a waterway is provided between partitions and floor to permit thorough cleaning of the walls and floor areas with hoses and brooms. 
(3)	When dressing facilities are provided a minimum of two (2) shower heads shall be provided for the first one-hundred (100) bathers of each sex. One (1) additional shower head for each sex shall be added for each additional fifty (50) male or female users. These showers, when provided, may be used in place of the deck showers. However, the use of deck showers will not be substituted for the above dressing facility showers. 
(4)	Floors of the dressing facility shall be free of joints or openings and shall be continuous throughout the areas. Floors shall have a slip-resisting surface that shall be relatively smooth to insure complete and ease in cleaning. Floor drains shall be provided and floors shall be sloped not less than one-fourth (¼) inch per foot toward the drains to insure positive drainage. 
(5)	An adequate number of three-fourths-inch hose bibbs shall be provided for flushing down the dressing facility interior. 
(6)	Lavatories. Lavatories and toilets shall be provided for all public pools and spas. The minimum criteria for lavatories and toilets for public pools shall be based upon the maximum bathing load as established. 
a.	All public pools shall provide one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) urinal for the first fifty (50) male users. One (1) additional water closet, lavatory and urinal shall be provided for each additional one hundred fifty (150) male users or major fraction thereof. 
b.	All public pools shall provide two (2) water closets and two (2) lavatories for the first fifty (50) female users. One (1) additional water closet and lavatory shall be provided for each additional one hundred (100) female users or major fraction thereof. 
c.	All spas shall provide at least one (1) water closet and lavatory for each sex.
d.	Soap dispensers for providing either liquid or powdered soap shall be provided at each lavatory. The dispenser shall be of all metal or plastic type with no glass permitted in these units. 
e.	At least one (1) paper towel dispenser or hand blow dryer shall be provided for every three lavatories. 
f.	An unbreakable mirror shall be provided over each lavatory.
g.	Toilet paper holders shall be provided at each water closet combination.
h.	Soap, paper towels and toilet tissue shall be provided in all dispensers.
i.	Fixtures shall be installed in accordance with local plumbing codes and shall be properly protected against back-siphonage. 
j.	Fixtures shall be designed so that they may be readily and frequently cleaned and disinfected. Frequent cleaning and disinfecting shall not cause damage. 
k.	At least one (1) trash receptacle will be available in toilet areas.
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-50. - Recreational water parks and special purpose pools. 
(a)	Deviation from requirements. A recreational water park attraction may deviate from the requirements of this code if and to the extent: 
(1)	An exception from this code is necessary to accommodate the special use of the facility; and 
(2)	The design and construction of the attraction are within the limits of sound engineering practice and present no health or safety hazard. 
(b)	Zero-depth pools. 
(1)	The water supply for a zero-depth pool must, at all times, meet the requirements relating to water quality set forth in section 5-47 of this chapter. 
(2)	The zero-depth pool must be equipped, at its lowest point, with an unvalved drain of sufficient capacity and design to prevent the accumulation of water in the pool. 
(3)	For zero-depth-entry pools, the floor slope shall be at a fifteen to one (15:1) or gentler slope. 
(4)	Zero-depth pools must be located at the shallow end of deeper water swimming pools and must be separated from them by at least six (6) feet of deck or by a separate barrier or fence meeting the requirements of this code. 
(c)	Wading pools. 
(1)	Wading pools must be located at the shallow end of the main pool and must be separated from it by a separate barrier or fence meeting the requirements of this Code. 
(2)	Underwater lights are prohibited in wading pools.
(d)	Water slides. 
(1)	A water slide must consist of one (1) or more flumes, falling-entry pools or slide runouts, a pump reservoir, and facilities for the disinfection and chemical treatment of the water. 
(2)	The structural design of a water slide and the materials used in its construction must conform with generally accepted structural engineering practices and must provide a sound, durable structure that will safely sustain all the dead loads, live loads, liquid hydrostatic and earth pressures encountered. 
(3)	Any components or accessories of a water slide that come into contact with bathers must be assembled, arranged and finished so that their external surfaces and edges do not present an injury hazard to the skin of users under casual contact. 
(4)	The owner of a water slide and the registered engineer who designs the slide are responsible for the safe design and construction of the entire facility. 
(5)	Flumes.
a.	Each flume of a water slide must be water-tight. Its surfaces must be inert, nontoxic, smooth and easily cleaned. 
b.	If a tube-type flume is used, it must be designed or ventilated to prevent a hazardous concentration of toxic disinfectant fumes under all circumstances of operation. 
c.	All curves and turns in a flume must be:
1.	Designed so that the impact of users with the walls of the flume does not present a hazard; and 
2.	Banked so that the forces on the bathers keep them safely inside the flume under all foreseeable circumstances of operation. Bathers must not become airborne. 
d.	In curved sections of a flume, the design of the wall of the flume must cause the outward thrust of the body of the bather to be dissipated towards the centerline of the flume. 
e.	All slopes in a flume must be designed so that the speed of the bathers does not reach a point at which a safe equilibrium of dynamic forces cannot be maintained on any curve or turn in the flame. 
f.	In sections of a flume where bathers can stop, provision must be made by design or modification to prevent bathers from falling out of the flume. 
g.	The construction, dimensions and methods of mechanical attachment of a flume must provide a smooth and continuous surface through the entire length of the flume. Any misalignment of joints in a sectional flume must not exceed one-eighth (1/8) inch. 
h.	The walls of any flume must be designed so that the continuous and combined action of hydrostatic, dynamic and static loads, as well as normal environmental deterioration do not damage the flume bed to the extent of creating a structural failure that presents a hazard of injury to users or that requires frequent patch repairs that may weaken the structural integrity of the flume. 
(6)	Flume exit:
a.	The exit of any flume must be designed to ensure that bathers enter the falling-entry pool or slide runout at a safe speed and angle of entry. 
b.	If a slide has two (2) or more flumes and there is a point of intersection between the centerlines of any two flumes, the distance between that point and the point of exit for each intersecting flume must not be less than twenty (20) feet, or thirty (30) feet if any user exits a flume at high speed. 
(7)	Exit into falling entry pool. If users exit the flume of a water slide into a falling-entry pool: 
a.	The flume must be horizontal and perpendicular to the wall of the pool at the point of exit. 
b.	The flume must be designed with an exit system that provides for safe entry, into the falling-entry pool or slide runout with an exit grade for the last ten (10) feet, that does not exceed ten (10) percent. Present practices for safe entry include a water backup, a deceleration distance, and body attitude control. Other methods are acceptable as long as safe exit velocities and proper body altitudes are assured under normal use, and 
c.	The flume exit must be flush with the vertical wall of the pool at the point of exit and not more than two (2) inches above, nor less than six (6) inches below, the normal operating level of the pool. 
d.	The distance between:
1.	The side wall of the pool and that portion of the flume exit nearest the wall must be not less than five (5) feet at the point of exit; 
2.	The centerline of the flume and the centerline of any adjacent flume must not be less than six (6) feet at the point of exit; 
3.	The point of exit and the side of the pool opposite the bathers as they exit, excluding any steps, must not be less than twenty (20) feet, if the flume ends above or below the normal operating water level of the pool. 
(8)	Falling-entry pools:
a.	If a splash pool is used at a water slide, it must be located at the base of the slide.
b.	Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the water depth in a falling-entry pool at the end of the flume must be a minimum of three and one-half (3½) feet from the normal operating water level to the floor. This depth must be maintained for distance of not less than twenty (20) feet from the point of exit from the flume or other falling-entry feature, or not less than 30 feet if the point of exit is even with the normal operating water level. The health authority may waive these requirements if a special exit system is used that ensures a safe exit from the flume and safe entry to the falling-entry pool. 
c.	Beyond the area of level floor required above, in the area of the pool opposite the point of exit from the flume or other falling-entry feature, the floor of the falling-entry pool may have a constant slope upward of not more than one (1) foot in seven (7) feet. 
d.	If steps are provided instead of exit ladders or stepholes with handrails, a handrail must be provided at the steps opposite the point of exit from each flume or falling-entry feature. 
(9)	Decks. A deck must be provided along the exit side of the falling-entry pool and along one or more of the other sides of the pool. The pump and reservoir must be accessible by a deck not less than three (3) feet wide. 
(10)	Means of access.
a.	A concrete walkway, steps, stairway or ramp must be provided between the falling-entry pool and the top of the flume. 
b.	The walkway or other means of access must:
1.	Not retain standing water;
2.	Conform to the structural requirements of the local building code;
3.	Not be less than four (4) feet wide;
4.	Be provided with handrails;
5.	Have a slip-resistant surface;
6.	Be separated from the flume by a physical barrier that is located far enough from the flume to prevent it from being contacted by users of the flume. 
(11)	Slide runouts.
a.	Slide runouts, if used, must have an exit opening or step, unless one (1) or both of the walls of the runout are not more than twelve (12) inches in height. 
b.	Slide runouts must be designed with adequate length and water depth and sloped so as to bring the user to a safe stop. 
(12)	Pump reservoirs.
a.	Pump reservoirs used in water slides must have sufficient volume to contain not less than two (2) minutes of combined flow from all water treatment and flume pumps or must contain enough water to ensure that the falling-entry pool will maintain a constant water depth. 
b.	The interior of pump reservoirs must be water-tight with a hard trowel or equivalent, slip-resistant finish. 
c.	Pump reservoirs must be accessible only to authorized persons. Intakes to the slide pump must be designed to allow cleaning without danger of trapping the operator. 
(13)	Control of water.
a.	A surge-free automatic water makeup system with a manual override must be provided and constructed so that the normal operating water level of the falling-entry pool is maintained at all times. An approved backflow prevention device must be provided. 
b.	The velocity of water at the weir or inlet grate must not exceed one and one-half (1½) feet per second. 
c.	The slide or other falling-entry feature may not be used if the main drain of the falling-entry pool is not clearly visible from the deck with the flume water turned off. 
(14)	Posting notice of prohibited conduct. The operator of a water slide or other falling-entry feature shall post one or more warning signs at the entrance to the facility. Each sign must state that the following types of conduct are prohibited within the facility: 
a.	Running, standing, kneeling, rotating, tumbling or stopping in any flume or tunnel.
b.	Horseplay.
c.	Diving or flipping while exiting from a flume.
d.	Use of the slide while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
e.	Use of the flume by more than one (1) person at a time.
f.	Failure to obey the instructions of the pool attendant or lifeguard.
g.	Failure to keep hands inside the flume while using the slide.
h.	Failure to leave the falling-entry pool promptly after exiting from the slide.
i.	The possession of any glass, bottle or food in or near any pool.
j.	Entry into an area of grass or other vegetation.
k.	The possession of any toy or can.
l.	The use of any clothing on the slide other than the usual swimwear.
m.	Wearing any bracelet, watch or other jewelry.
n.	Failure to shower before using the slide.
(15)	Precautions for safety.
a.	At all times while a water slide is open for use, an attendant must be on duty at each falling-entry pool or runout. The attendant shall serve as the safety director of the slide. In that capacity, the attendant shall control crowds, keep bathers moving through the pool or runout in an orderly fashion, and control any unsafe behavior in the lower flumes, in the pool or runout, or on the decks at the base of the slide. 
b.	At all times while the slide is open for use, an attendant must be on duty at each entrance to a flume. The attendant shall control bathers near the entrance, regulate the departure of each bather down the slide and control any unsafe behavior in the upper flumes. 
c.	Radio communication, or other means of communication acceptable to the health authority, must be provided between the flume entry attendant and the splash pool or slide runout attendant. 
d.	Each water slide must have a means to allow the flume entry attendant to monitor the slide exit. 
(e)	Activity pools. Amusement devices used in activity pools must be designed and maintained so that their surfaces are smooth, nontoxic and easily cleanable. The devices must not pose a safety or health hazard to users and must not interfere with circulation or disinfection of the water. 
(f)	Wave pools. 
(1)	The generation of waves more than three (3) feet in height in a wave pool, regardless of the depth of the pool, must not continue for more than fifteen (15) minutes at a time. 
(2)	The wave pool must not be used if the main drain is not clearly visible from the deck with the wave generating equipment turned off. 
(3)	Bathers must gain access to the wave pool at the shallow or beach end. The sides of the pool must be protected from unauthorized entry into the pool by the use of a fence or other comparable barrier. 
(4)	Wave pools must be provided with handholds at the static water level. These handholds must be self-draining and must be installed so that their outer edge is flush with the pool wall. The design of the handholds must ensure that body extremities will not become entangled during wave action. 
(5)	Life jackets must be provided free for use by bathers who request them.
(6)	Each permanent station for pool attendants and lifeguards must be provided with a clearly labeled and readily accessible emergency shut-off switch for the control of the wave action. 
(7)	An audible warning system must be provided to alert bathers of the beginning of wave generation. 
(8)	Stepholes and handrails must be provided at one (1) or more locations along the wall of the wave pool. The stepholes and handrails must extend down the wall so they will be accessible during wave generation at the lowest water level. The distance between the handrail and the wall must not exceed six (6) inches. 
(g)	Child amusement lagoons. Amusement devices used in child amusement lagoons must be designed and maintained so that their surfaces are smooth, nontoxic and easily cleanable. The devices must not pose a safety or health hazard to bathers and must not interfere with circulation or disinfection of the water. 
(h)	Watercourse rides. 
(1)	Handrails, steps, stairs, and booster inlets for watercourse rides must not protrude into the watercourse. 
(2)	The watercourse must not be narrower than twelve (12) feet and not deeper than three and one half (3½) feet. 
(3)	An approved method of exit must be provided at least every two hundred (200) feet along the watercourse. 
(4)	A deck must be provided along at least one (1) side of the watercourse.
(5)	The design velocity of the water in a watercourse ride must not exceed two (2) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-51. - Food service. 
(a)	Food service facilities shall comply with provisions of Article 13 of O.C.G.A. Chapter 26-2 and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder. 
(b)	Eating, drinking and smoking shall not be permitted within the waters of the pool, spa or recreational water park but are permitted on the deck area at a distance of least ten (10) feet horizontally away from the water's edge. 
(c)	Food and beverage(s) shall only be served in nonbreakable containers.
(d)	Covered trash containers shall be provided where food and/or beverage(s) are available and allowed to be consumed. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-52. - Operation and management. 
All swimming pools and spas covered by this chapter shall be maintained under the supervision and direction of a properly trained operator who shall be responsible for the sanitation, safety and proper maintenance of the pool and all physical and mechanical equipment and records. 
(1)	Training for the operator can be obtained by completion of the National Swimming Pool Foundation's Certified Pool/Spa Operator's Course or state or local training course, if available or similar course as approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Division of Public Health, Environmental Health Section. 
(2)	Upon completion of any swimming pool or spa, the manager and his operators shall be given complete written and oral instructions by the builder as well as operational guidance of the pool, all equipment and the maintenance of the swimming pool water. 
(3)	The bathing load limit shall be observed by the management. The maximum number of users to be allowed in a pool at one time shall be based on subsection 5-35(i) in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Sec. 5-53. - Compliance procedures. 
(a)	A swimming pool, spa or recreational water park shall not operate until such time as the appropriate application has been submitted to the health authority, on the prescribed forms provided and the valid operating permit has been issued by the health authority. 
(b)	Suspension or revocation. The health authority shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 31-5, Article 1. If an application is denied or a permit is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action was taken. The purpose of these procedures is to state the minimum actions to be taken to fulfill the obligation of the health authority in assuring compliance with the regulations when the continued operation of a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park presents a substantial and imminent health hazard to the public or when a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park is in flagrant or continuing violation of this chapter. Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and operation must cease immediately. The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the permit holder of the right to a preliminary hearing on request within eight (8) working hours. If requested, the preliminary hearing will be held by an experienced supervisory level employee of the health authority not directly involved in the suspension. The rules of evidence will not apply, but both the health authority and the permit holder may present witnesses, records and argument. The hearing official will be authorized immediately to rescind or modify the suspension or to continue the suspension with or without conditions. If the suspension is not rescinded, the permit holder will have the right on request to an evidentiary hearing. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, the owner may request an inspection to reinstate permit. 
(1)	Items that are considered substantial and imminent health hazards include the following:
a.	During operation, disinfectant levels are less than the minimum given in section 5-47. If the level of the disinfectant used is not given in section 5-47, the disinfectant must be approved and kept at levels determined necessary by the health authority. 
b.	During operation, the pH is less than the minimum or more than the maximum levels allowed in section 5-47. 
c.	The pump, automatic disinfectant equipment or other equipment necessary for continuous filtration and disinfection of the swimming pool, spa or recreational water parks attraction is not working. 
d.	The water turbidity is such that the main drain cover or a standard black and white disc laying on the bottom of the deepest portion of the pool cannot be seen. 
e.	Other hazards as determined by the health authority.
(2)	All other violations of items on the inspection report will be corrected as deemed appropriate by the health authority. 
(3)	In lieu of suspension or revocation of a permit, a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park attraction may be allowed to voluntarily close until such time as the violations are corrected. 
(c)	Notice of hearing. For the purpose of this chapter, a notice of hearing is properly served when delivered in person or by registered or certified mail to the owner or authorized agent of the swimming pool, spa or recreational water park. 
(d)	A swimming pool, spa or recreational water park shall not be placed in operation initially until appropriate inspections show compliance with the requirements of this chapter with no items violated on the inspection report. 
(e)	The health authority shall inspect the swimming pool, spa, or recreational water park for compliance. Swimming pools, spas, or recreational water parks which open on or after April 1 and which close on or before October 31 shall be inspected at least once during the period of operation. All other swimming pools, spas, or recreational water parks shall be inspected at least twice each year. Additional inspections may be made as determined necessary by the health authority. The pool or spa operator shall receive a copy of the inspection and place it in a location protected from the weather in public view as designated by the health authority. 
(f)	Representatives of the health authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any swimming pool or spa facility or property of any recreational water park at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Chapter. Should access be denied, an inspection warrant may be obtained as authorized in Article 2 of O.C.G.A. Chapter 31-5. 
(g)	Enforcement. The administration and enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be as prescribed in O.C.G.A. 31-5. 
(h)	Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated under O.C.G.A. 31-45 by the health authority shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § 1, 11-28-00)
Chapter 5.5 - CRIMINAL MISCONDUCT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 99-02, adopted July 27, 1999, set out provisions for criminal misconduct. To maintain the alphanumeric sequencing of this Code, these provisions have been included as §§ 5.5-26 and 5.5-27 at the editor's discretion. See the Code Comparative Table.
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; parks and recreation, ch. 8.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5.5-1—5.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CRIMINAL MISCONDUCT 

Sec. 5.5-26. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the boundaries of the county to engage in any conduct described as follows: 
(1)	To act in a violent or tumultuous manner towards another whereby such person is placed in fear of the safety of his life, limb or health; or 
(2)	To act in a violent or tumultuous manner towards another whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; or 
(3)	To cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another person or to disturb the peace and tranquility; or 
(4)	To direct "fighting words" toward another person or in another person's presence, that is to say, use opprobrious or abuse words which by the very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person, such person's presence, tend to provoke violent resentment or by their very nature tend to incite an immediate beach of the peace; or 
(5)	To enter upon the grounds of any school and cause or participate in a disruption or disturbance which is intended and is calculated to disturb and interfere with the orderly educational process; or 
(6)	To physically or verbally harass, threaten or intimidate another person in a manner which is reasonably calculated or intended to cause a breach of the peace whether or not a breach of the peace actually occurs. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, 7-27-99)
Sec. 5.5-27. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear, within the boundaries of the county in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own unless by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which intoxicated conditions exhibited or may be manifest by boisterousness, or by an indecent condition or act, or by extreme stupor or a deep sleep, or by impairment of ambulation, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. For the purposes of this section, public place shall mean any place where the conduct so exhibited or manifested may reasonably be expected to be viewed by persons other than members of the actor's family or household. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, 7-27-99)
Sec. 5.5-28. - Noise control. 
(a)	Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Meriwether County through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(b)	Sound measurement standards for law enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this section 5.5-28, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
(c)	Prohibited conduct. 
(1)	Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
a.	Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet of more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
b.	Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
c.	Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
d.	Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. and b. above. 
(2)	Restrictions of 100 feet for 8:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 9:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
a.	Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet of more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
b.	Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
c.	Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
d.	Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. and b. above. 
(3)	Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following:
a.	Noises or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing or governmental entities in the normal course of their business; 
b.	Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound is controlled by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; 
c.	Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions; 
d.	Noises or sounds made by domestic animals;
e.	Noises or sounds made by livestock;
f.	Noises or sounds emanating from any official elementary or secondary school event (public, private, or parochial school) on property for which a school is an authorized use established in appendix A zoning ordinance as amended 2006; 
g.	Noises or sounds made between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. emanating from any authorized use in the agricultural district (A-1) established in appendix A zoning ordinance as amended 2006; 
h.	Noises or sounds made by irrigation equipment or spraying equipment;
i.	Noises or sounds made during a state of emergency declared pursuant to section 6-4 of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia. 
j.	Noises or sounds made between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. by use of tractors, motorized vehicles, or motorized landscape maintenance devices (including, but not limited to, leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws); 
k.	Construction noise of any type (including, but not limited to, erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment) made between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9 p.m.; or 
l.	Noises or sounds caused by authorized uses in the industrial district (I), commercial industrial district (CID), and planned industrial district (PID) established in appendix A zoning ordinance as amended 2006. 
(d)	Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by Section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(e)	Severability clause. A determination of the invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or part of this section shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 3-27-12)
Sec. 5.5-29. - Failure to pay inspection or permit fees required by board of health regulations. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or any other entity to fail to pay for an inspection and/or permit fee required by the regulations of the Board of Health of Meriwether County at the time the permit is issued or fee is due. 
(b)	Any violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both, and any violator may be subject to additional penalties as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, 1-14-15) 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19).

Sec. 6-1. - Definition. 
As used in this article the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces, state and federal agencies are primarily responsible. It shall mean to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disaster of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare and social services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Res. of 2-12-86, § 1)
Sec. 6-2. - County agency; director, duties. 
There is hereby established the county emergency management agency. The board of commissioners shall nominate, for appointment by the governor, a director of emergency management (emergency management coordinator) for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	To represent the board of commissioners on matters pertaining to civil preparedness.
(2)	To assist county officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)	To develop in conjunction with county and city departments and agencies the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions set forth in section 6-1. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for approval and thence to the director of the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)	To maintain the emergency management office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the county civil preparedness and disaster program including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)	To render reports such as financial and daily activity as required by the board of commissioners in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)	To designate with the authority of the board of commissioners, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)	To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of a declared emergency under the supervision of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 2-12-86, § 2)
Sec. 6-3. - County organization. 
The county emergency management organization shall be established around existing county and city departments and agencies, and the emergency functions listed in section 6-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plan and SOP for their assigned emergency function. Such plans and SOPs will be submitted through the emergency management director to the board of commissioners and governing officials for approval. 
(Res. of 2-12-86, § 3)
Sec. 6-4. - Emergency powers/police powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the board of commissioners, or in his absence, a legally appointed successor, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)	To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)	To seize, take for temporary use or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)	To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county; to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)	To perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Res. of 2-12-86, § 4)
Sec. 6-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the cities, towns and the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Res. of 2-12-86, § 5)
Sec. 6-6. - Penalties. 
Any violation of any provision of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Res. of 2-12-86, § 6)
Sec. 6-7. - Registration of building and repair services during a state of emergency. 
(a)	Building contractor registration required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this section. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Building contractor. As used in this section the word or term 'building contractor' shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this section if: 
(1)	He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated area of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making or improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)	He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three (3) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(c)	Registration; certification. All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the county building department. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(d)	Registration fees. Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this section at fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(e)	Transferability. Each certification issued under this section is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(f)	Display of registration certification. Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(g)	Revocation; suspension. Each certification granted under this section is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this section or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, §§ 1—8, 5-22-01)
Sec. 6-8. - Suspension of portions of the Code and other formalities during a state of emergency. 
(a)	Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(1)	Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two (2) members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(2)	Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(3)	Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
a.	The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
b.	Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
c.	Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations.
(4)	Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(5)	Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and plans are approved by the county health department and county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six (6) months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, §§ 1, 2, 5-22-01)
Sec. 6-9. - Imposition of curfews during times of emergency or disaster. 
(a)	Institution of curfew. 
(1)	Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(2)	All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)	The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this section from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to section 6-7, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)	Prohibition. It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Meriwether County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, §§ 1—3, 5-22-01)
Sec. 6-10. - Overcharging for goods, materials, services and housing during a state of emergency prohibited. 
(a)	Overcharging prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, §§ 1, 2, 5-22-01)
Chapter 7 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2012-05, adopted June 13, 2012, amended Ch. 7 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 7, §§ 7-1—7-13, 7-41—7-44, 7-66—7-69, pertained to floodplain regulations and derived from the Code of 1991.
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 11; water and sewerage, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 7-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of Meriwether County are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health;
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
(7)	To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in article II, section 7-7 of this chapter. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means any portion of a building that has its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 16, 1990. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 16, 1990. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after July 16, 1990, [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced after July 16, 1990, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after July 16, 1990. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Zoning administrator See section 16.1 of Appendix A Zoning Ordinance as Amended 2006, Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7-6. - Land to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Meriwether County. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated July 3, 2012, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in zoning administrator's office. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Meriwether County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Meriwether County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Secs. 7-14—7-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 7-41. - Designation of enforcement officer. 
The zoning administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-42. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the zoning administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of article IV, subsection 7-52(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the zoning administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The zoning administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-43. - Duties and responsibilities of the zoning administrator. 
Duties of the zoning administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with article II, section 7-7, then the zoning administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article IV of this chapter. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with article III, subsection 7-42(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with article III, subsection 7-42(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the zoning administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with article III, subsection 7-42(1)(c) and article IV, subsection 7-52(2) or subsection 7-54(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the zoning administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-44—7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 7-51. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully-enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-52. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of article IV, subsection 7-51(4), "Elevated Buildings". 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in article III, subsection 7-43(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 7-51(6) above). 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days.
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of article IV, subsections 7-52(3)a., c. above. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in article II, section 7-7 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection 7-52(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-53. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 7-7, then the zoning administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article IV. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections 7-53(2), (3)) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of article IV, subsection 7-51(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The zoning administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-54. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with article IV, section 7-52. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-55. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of article IV, subsection 7-51(4), "elevated buildings". 
The zoning administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 7-42(1)c. and 7-42(2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-56. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-57. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Secs. 7-57—7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 7-61. - Board of appeals. 
The board of appeals established in section 16.3 of appendix A zoning ordinance as amended shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-62. - Types of appeals. 
The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-63. - Appeal to superior court. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Meriwether County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-64. - Variance for historic structure. 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-65. - Other variances. 
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-66. - Where variance is prohibited. 
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-67. - Factors to consider for variance. 
In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-68. - Conditions for variances: 
(a)	A variance shall be issued only when there is:
(1)	A finding of good and sufficient cause;
(2)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)	The zoning administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Sec. 7-69. - Attachment of conditions to variance. 
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
ARTICLE VI. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 7-70. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, clause, sentence, phrase, or part of this chapter for any reason be held, deemed, or construed to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof, and the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, each section, subsection, clause, sentence, phrase, and part thereof irrespective to the fact that one (1) or more sections, subsections, clauses, sentences, phrases, or parts thereof, be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 6-13-12)
Chapter 8 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(5); authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; state commission on physical fitness created, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - PUBLIC SPACES AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 8-1. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Spaces and Facilities Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote and regulate the use of public spaces and facilities within the unincorporated portion of Meriwether County and any other public space or facility owned by Meriwether County, which is not subject to a lease for a term longer than one (1) year, consistent with the dedicated uses and maintenance of such public properties, the preservation of public safety, lawful commerce, and rights of access and traverse in preservation of natural and historic environments, and the protection of the well-being, peace, privacy, and good order necessary to the free enjoyment by citizens of the rights to private property and personal pursuits. Furthermore, it is the specific intent of Meriwether County in enacting this article to regulate only the time, place, and manner of events and not the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-3. - Application review. 
(a)	The zoning administrator, as defined in section 16.1 of appendix A, zoning ordinance, as amended 2006 of the Code of Ordinances of Meriwether County, shall be vested with the responsibility of receiving applications and granting or denying permits for conduct in public spaces and facilities in Meriwether County. 
(b)	The zoning administrator shall determine whether to permit or to refuse to permit any event in or about public spaces solely on the basis of the factors or combination of factors set out hereinafter, and in light of a presumption that all events that do not frustrate or conflict with the goals of this article shall be permitted at all reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-4. - Use of public spaces and facilities. 
Without first being permitted by the zoning administrator after application made according to the requirements set out in section 8-5, no person shall: 
(1)	Conduct a public assembly, parade, demonstration, or other like event, either fixed or processional, involving more than fifty (50) individuals for a common purpose, due to either prior planning or spontaneous gathering, on, over, upon, or burdening the public properties of Meriwether County, or utilizing the facilities thereon, which has the effect, intent, purpose, or propensity to attract the notice of people who are not a part of such public assembly, parade, demonstration, or event; 
(2)	Circulate or distribute any leaflets, handbills, notices, pamphlets, books, documents, or papers of any kind in any indoor public facility of Meriwether County, except during those events regulated or sponsored by Meriwether County; 
(3)	Bring, land, or cause to ascend or descend or alight any airplane, helicopter, flying machine, balloon, parachute, or other apparatus for aviation on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County, or facilities thereon, except airplanes that have the authorization of the Meriwether County Airport Authority to land at Roosevelt Memorial Airport in Warm Springs, Georgia; 
(4)	Bring a non-domestic, supervised, and controlled or restrained animal for limited non-commercial or promotional purposes on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County or facilities thereon; 
(5)	Station or erect any building, stand, bandstand, stage, tower, scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum or other structure on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County; 
(6)	Create or emit any electronically amplified sound on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County, except from a radio, recorder or other device, which is possessed and used by an individual for his/her own enjoyment and is operated in such a manner so as to not interfere with the use and enjoyment by any other person; or 
(7)	Conduct any exhibit, fair, circus, or radio or television broadcast, other than a news transmission on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County; or station or use any electrical or electronic device or equipment that would require outdoor auxiliary power; 
(8)	Consume, serve, or use alcoholic beverages in, on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County, or the facilities thereon; 
(9)	Use, ignite, or fire any fireworks, explosive, firecrackers, sparklers, glow worms, noise makers, poppers, or snappers on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County; 
(10)	Discharge any firearm, bow and arrow, spring gun, air rifle, slingshot, or any other device which discharges a projectile by any means, on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County; or 
(11)	Possess a bow and arrow, slingshot, or any other device, other than a "firearm" as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-11-171, which discharges a projectile by any means, on, over, or upon the public properties of Meriwether County. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-5. - Application. 
(a)	Within no less than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to an event, the person or persons associated in fact, whether or not a legally recognized entity, who wish to conduct an event requiring a permit as set forth herein shall apply to the zoning administrator for such permit. 
Such application shall at a minimum include: 
(1)	The name, address, gender, and birth date of the applicant. If the applicant is an association of persons in fact or in law, the application shall contain a description of the entity; the name of said entity, if named; the registered or recognized address of the entity, if any; the name of the person making the application on behalf of or as a representative of said entity; such person's relationship to said entity; and some demonstration or recitation of the authority of the person making the application to act on behalf of the entity. 
(2)	A plan for review by the zoning department head, which plan will include:
a.	The anticipated number of persons participating in the event;
b.	The date or dates of the event;
c.	The hours of each day the event will be conducted;
d.	The exact location of said event, or, if the event is processional or mobile, the route of the event; 
e.	Whether sound amplification equipment will be employed;
f.	Whether artificial lighting will be employed;
g.	Whether temporary static structures will be constructed or employed; whether vehicles will be employed, and if so, a description of same sufficient to permit the administrator to evaluate the permitting factors set out hereinafter; 
h.	A description of the anticipated need for safety, police, medical, sanitation, and other required personnel and equipment, with the anticipated needed numbers and posting by location and time of such personnel and equipment; 
i.	A description of provisions necessary to the safety and welfare of the participants in the event and members of the public in the area where the event will be conducted and routes of access to and from the event; 
j.	Whether the event will require that the public spaces or facilities to be used or burdened, or the routes and means of access thereto and therefrom, be temporarily diverted from their dedicated or customary uses, or the public or private users thereof be diverted or excluded from, or limited in their use or enjoyment of, or their access to or through, said spaces or facilities, before, during, or after the event; and 
k.	Whether a sign(s) or any other kind of display, post, placard, or banner will be used, and if used, the size, material, and components of the sign(s), and whether such will be handheld or not. 
(3)	A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has in the past conducted or participated in an event of a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject to the instant application, and, if so, where and when such prior event(s) took place, and whether as a result of such event(s) the applicant or entity became the subject, whether or not then operating under the same name, as plaintiff or defendant, of any legal action, civil, criminal, or administrative. 
(4)	A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has defaulted upon or is in arrears as to any judgment civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant or entity, whether or not then operating under the same name, as a result of participation in any prior event(s) of a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject to the instant application, and if so, a description of said judgment or order and an explanation for non-compliance. 
(5)	Payment of rent for the property being requested if the Meriwether County Zoning Department has an established fee for its use. Payment shall be in the form of cash, certified funds, or U.S. Postal money orders. In lieu of submitting payment with an application, payment may be made at any time up to 5:00 p.m. on the day of the event so long as applicant gives a statement of assurance to this effect. 
(b)	If, as a direct consequence of exigent, unanticipated, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, applicant is unable to file an application not less than fourteen (14) calendar days before an event, nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the filing of an application at a later time, but in such case the time limits for review of an application by the zoning administrator and for review of an appeal of a denial of a permit to the county administrator shall remain the same. 
(c)	Where an event conducted on, over, upon, or burdening public properties, or employing the facilities thereon, which is also to substantially involve or take place partly or wholly upon private property with the consent of the owner(s) thereof, such owner(s) or their authorized representatives must join as an applicant for any permit for such event. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-6. - Review by the zoning administrator. 
(a)	Within fourteen (14) working days of the receipt of a fully completed, executed, and filed application, the zoning administrator shall review the application in light of all of the contents thereof and the goals, intentions, and presumptions of this article, and render a decision and communicate same to applicant, either permitting the event as planned or denying a permit for same. If the permit is denied, the zoning administrator shall provide the applicant in writing a statement of the reasons therefore. (First-class mail to the address provided by applicant, postmarked no more than fourteen (14) working days after receipt of the fully completed, executed, and filed application, shall be sufficient for this purpose, though not the exclusive means of notice.) 
(b)	Nothing in this process shall prevent the zoning administrator, at his/her sole option and within the fourteen (14) working-day period for approval or denial, to confer with applicant with respect to modifications of applicant's plan for the event, and amend the application to reflect such modifications if agreed to by applicant. However, applicant may neither supplement nor amend its application within said fourteen (14) working-day period except at the invitation of the zoning administrator. Any attempt to do so sua sponte shall be deemed a separate and new application. 
(c)	The zoning administrator may deny the application for permit upon any of the following reasons or combination of reasons: 
(1)	The application does not contain all required information or materials, or the information set out in the application is so incomplete, vague, or ambiguous as to prevent full and proper review by the zoning administrator; 
(2)	The application contains material omissions, falsehoods, or misrepresentations;
(3)	The applicant, or entity represented by applicant, is incompetent to contract, sue, or be sued; 
(4)	The person applying lacks authority to represent the entity for which the application is made; 
(5)	The applicant or entity represented by applicant has on prior occasions damaged public property, or has not paid in full for such damages, or is in arrears as to any judgment civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant or entity, whether under the same name or another; 
(6)	The applicant or entity represented by applicant has on prior occasions violated permitting ordinances in connection with events of a substantially similar nature; 
(7)	The plan of the event as proposed is likely to present a danger to the health or safety of participants in the event or other members of the public (though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public); 
(8)	The plan of the event as proposed is likely to restrict and/or congest traffic (vehicular or pedestrian) on any of the public roads, right of ways, sidewalks, or waterways in the immediate vicinity of such event; 
(9)	The plan of the event as proposed is likely to cause a disturbance of the peace, or is likely to burden lawful commerce in the area at the time of the proposed event, or is likely to intrude upon the privacy or property of citizens in the area of the proposed event; 
(10)	The plan of the event as proposed includes activities which are prohibited by laws of the United States, the State of Georgia, or ordinances of Meriwether County, or activities which constitute nuisance or tortious conduct with respect to public or private property or persons; 
(11)	The plan of the event as proposed would conflict with previously planned programs or events organized and conducted by Meriwether County and previously scheduled for the same time and place; 
(12)	The plan of the event as proposed is prohibited by or is inconsistent with the classifications and uses of the proposed or desired location; 
(13)	A fully executed prior application for permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of that particular space; or 
(14)	The plan of the event as proposed includes the use of sign(s), display(s), post(s), or placard(s), banner(s) which exceed 2 feet x 3 feet in size, are made of a material other than paper, cardboard, poster board, or foam, are attached or affixed to any wooden, plastic, metal, or other type of support, or are draped or affixed to any Meriwether County property, including, but limited to, the ground, trees, and buildings within Meriwether County. 
(d)	It is the specific intent of Meriwether County in enacting this ordinance to regulate only the time, place and manner of events and not to regulate the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. The factors enumerated above in subsection 8-5(c) and the factors enumerated in section 8-4 of this article, which we find express and support the substantial and compelling interests of this governing body in the preservation of the rights and liberties of its citizens and the safety, health, and good order of its society, are the only basis upon which the zoning administrator shall decide to issue or deny a permit applied for hereunder and no such decision shall be made or justified based upon the anticipated or predicted content of the speech or expressive conduct of any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-7. - Revocation. 
(a)	For events that have been granted a permit or events that do not require a permit, the zoning administrator with the support of the sheriff's department shall have the authority to terminate an event at any time, or prevent its initiation, should traffic, weather, or other conditions develop which present an imminent danger to those participating in the event or to the public at large. If an event is permitted and is terminated pursuant to this section, the permit shall be revoked for that day only. 
(b)	The zoning administrator with the support of the sheriff's department shall have the authority to terminate the event at any time or prevent its initiation should any consideration or combination of considerations enumerated herein as a ground for denial of a permit arise or first become apparent to the zoning department after the grant of a permit. If an event is terminated pursuant to this section, the permit shall be permanently revoked. 
(c)	If in preparation for or after the start of an event for which a permit has been issued, participants in said event violate the terms of the permit or deviate in material fashion from the plan submitted in the application for the permit, the zoning administrator with the support of the sheriff's department shall have the authority to terminate the event at any time or prevent its initiation. If an event is terminated pursuant to this section, the permit shall be permanently revoked. 
(d)	If a state of emergency is declared, as defined and set forth in the emergency management ordinance, any and all events, permitted or otherwise, shall automatically be terminated and any permits therefore shall be permanently revoked. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the terms of the permit or to deviate from the plan submitted in the application for the permit. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons who have been permitted to conduct an event to remain on the permitted location or facility, after an event, permitted or otherwise, has been terminated pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-8. - Appeals. 
(a)	Upon receipt of any decision by the zoning administrator denying an application, an applicant may, within five (5) calendar days, file an appeal of said denial with the county administrator. Such appeal shall be in writing and sent to the county administrator by certified U.S. mail or hand delivery. 
(b)	The written appeal must state succinctly the grounds upon which it is asserted that the determination should be modified or reversed and shall be accompanied by copies of the application for permit, the written notice of determination to which appeal is being made, and any other papers relevant to the denial. 
(c)	Within seven (7) calendar days of the receipt of a written appeal, the county administrator shall set a hearing date. The county administrator shall cause notice of the hearing to be served upon the applicant by certified U.S. mail. Such notice shall include the date, time, and location of the hearing. 
(d)	At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to produce any and all evidence concerning the appeal. 
(e)	Within seven (7) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, the county administrator shall make a written decision on the appeal, which shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision being appealed. The notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant at the address set forth on the application for permit by certified U.S. mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(f)	The decision of the county administrator shall be binding on all parties, subject to the right of appeal as provided by O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-9. - Time allotment. 
At or prior to the expiration of the time allotted and permitted for an event, the permitted person or persons shall have completely vacated the permitted location or facility so as to allow any subsequent permittee to occupy and conduct an event at said location without interference or delay. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-10. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-11. - Severability. 
Should any section, provisions, or clause of any part of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent of Meriwether County that this article would have been adopted had any such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-12. - Violations. 
Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever herein the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of such provision shall be an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of at least $500.00, not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment of at least 24 hours, not to exceed 60 days, or both. Any person who violates this article may be subject to immediate arrest. The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-13. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)	A governmental agency, including its employees or officials, acting within the scope of its functions or conducting official governmental business; 
(2)	Uses, activities, or events being conducted on the public properties of Meriwether County, or the facilities thereon, that do not have the effect, intent, purpose, or propensity to attract the notice of people who are not a part of such use, activity, or event shall not require a permit hereunder; 
(3)	Events that are sponsored by Meriwether County within the scope of its functions; and 
(4)	Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-14. - Participation fees. 
Permittees may charge fees for participation in a permitted event. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 8-15. - Alcoholic beverages. 
Alcoholic beverages are not allowed at any Meriwether County facility. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-22-13) 
Secs. 8-16—8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAKE MERIWETHER AND LAKE MERIWETHER RECREATIONAL FACILITY 

Sec. 8-26. - Organization and operational guidelines of the governing board of Lake Meriwether. 
(a)	There shall be a governing board appointed by the board of commissioners to oversee the operations of Lake Meriwether and the Lake Meriwether Recreational Facility. 
(b)	This governing board shall be composed of five (5) members, with full rights of voice and vote, and two (2) advisory members, who shall have right of voice only. 
(c)	This governing board shall be composed of:
(1)	Full members: 
a.	One (1) county commissioner.
b.	One (1) City of Woodbury Councilmember.
c.	Three (3) at-large members selected to represent the widest possible geographic areas of county. 
(2)	Advisory members: 
a.	One (1) county agent.
b.	One (1) county soil conservationist.
(d)	This governing board shall be subject to the authority of the board of commissioners in all matters of personnel, finance, usage, restrictions and operations of the Lake Meriwether Recreational Facility. 
(e)	Each member shall be appointed to the governing board of Lake Meriwether for a term not to exceed two (2) years. 
(f)	Each member of the governing board may succeed himself in office for additional terms of service as approved and appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(g)	The members of this governing board shall serve staggered terms of office, with four (4) members coming up for appointment one (1) year, and the other three (3) coming up the next year. 
(h)	The term of appointment shall run from January first to December thirty-first, biennially, except for special interim appointments. 
(i)	The first class of appointments to this governing board shall serve a one-year term of office, in order to implement this plan of rotation and staggered terms. 
(j)	It is understood that the members of the governing board serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners and are subject to recall upon a simple majority vote of the commissioners in any regular session of business. 
Sec. 8-27. - Duties and functions. 
(a)	The governing board of Lake Meriwether shall meet for the purpose of conducting business at least once every six (6) months. Dinner, twice annually, shall be at county expense. 
(b)	They shall elect each year a president and a secretary of the governing board from among their membership. 
(c)	The president shall call the meetings as needed, and shall serve as chairman of these meetings. He shall also call a meeting at any time if requested by any three (3) of the members. 
(d)	The secretary shall notify all members of the date and time of such meetings, and shall keep minutes of the business conducted. He shall submit a copy of the minutes of these meetings to the county clerk within fifteen (15) days to be filed as a record. The clerk's office can provide typing and xerox assistance to the secretary, if requested. 
(e)	In the absence of the president or secretary, the membership present shall elect a president pro tem, or secretary pro tem to serve in that capacity until they return to duty. 
(f)	A quorum of the membership necessary for the conduction of business shall include:
(1)	The president and any three (3) voting members, or
(2)	The president pro tem and any three (3) voting members.
(g)	The president, or president pro tem, of the governing board of Lake Meriwether shall not vote on any issue, except in the event of a tie vote. 
(h)	The governing board of Lake Meriwether shall:
(1)	Develop and encourage use of the Lake Meriwether Recreation Facility by all citizens of the county. 
(2)	Make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning matters of personnel, fees, finance and maintenance, suggesting changes or improvements where needed. 
(3)	Keep accurate records of receipts and disbursements and shall turn copies of such records over to the county clerk monthly. 
(4)	Charge all parties the posted fees for use of any part of the lake facilities. Municipalities within the county are exempt from this requirement, as are civic groups, church organizations established within the county, and citizens sixty-five (65) years and over. 
(5)	Permit overnight campers within the boundaries of the Lake Meriwether facility for a maximum period of two (2) weeks stay, with access to one-hundred-ten-volt electric hookups, and water use, but no sewage connections. Campers shall reside in RVs, camper trailers, or tents. No mobile homes shall be permitted with the exception of those in use by the county. 
(6)	Permit and encourage municipalities within the county to reserve the entire lake facility for special functions, on a first come, first served basis. Such municipalities shall pay no fee, but shall present to the county a statement of receipts and disbursements incurred during the special function. 
(7)	Restrict overnight campers during the times reserved by municipalities within the county, provided that the municipalities provide the governing board ninety (90) days of notice prior to the reserved dates. 
(8)	Protect and preserve the Lake Meriwether Recreation Facility as a source of water for the City of Woodbury and any future users, under the guidelines and restrictions laid down by the appropriate state and federal agencies. 
(9)	Offer public service advertisements annually in county papers to inform citizens of services offered, fees charged, and other information pertinent to the use of the Lake Meriwether Recreation Facility. 
(Mo. of 7-10-85)
Sec. 8-28. - Restrictions on entering Lake Meriwether for fishing. 
Fishing in Lake Meriwether without entering the front gate and paying the usual fees or without owning property or residing as a member of the immediate family of a person owning property adjacent to Lake Meriwether shall be considered a misdemeanor violation of the ordinances of Meriwether County and, upon conviction, shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Res. of 5-28-85)
Sec. 8-29. - Parking restrictions in vicinity of Lake Meriwether. 
Parking of a motor vehicle on the public right-of-way on the L. W. Owens Road (CR 138) within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the Lake Meriwether Dam, or on the dam itself, shall constitute a misdemeanor violation of the Ordinances of Meriwether County and, upon conviction, shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 10-14-87(2))
Sec. 8-30. - Docks, piers, boathouses. 
All new private docks, boathouses, piers or related structures are prohibited in a one hundred fifty-foot buffer area measured from the waters edge and in the reservoir. Existing structures are permitted provided that: 
(1)	Structure was existing before the adoption of these regulations.
(2)	Structure can not be improved or enlarged. This requirement does not prevent property owner from maintaining a safe and hazard free structure. 
(3)	No vessel shall be stored in a boathouse with a gasoline, diesel or other internal combustion engine or power plant. Storage will be limited to electric motored vessels, canoes, and kayaks only. 
(4)	No cleaning agents are allowed for storage or any other purpose in or on the docks, piers or boathouses. 
(5)	The county assumes no responsibility or liability for the integrity or soundness of said structures. 
(6)	The county reserves the right to require docks, piers or boathouses be moved, relocated or removed from the reservoir at the property owners expense upon reasonable request at any time for purposes of maintaining water quality. 
(7)	The county reserves the right to remove the dock, pier or boathouse from the reservoir at the owner's expense and without liability for damage to the dock or the owner's private property if the owner fails to comply with the county's rules, regulations and directions. 
(8)	Cleaning of docks, decking, piers, boathouses or boats moored at same with soaps or solvents is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-31. - Public access. 
The county reserves the right to, at any time, restrict or prevent the use of the reservoir during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restrictions or prevention of use. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-32. - Additional restrictions on use of Lake Meriwether Reservoir and Lake Meriwether Park. 
The following are expressly prohibited at the reservoir and reservoir property. 
(1)	The possession or consumption of alcohol, drugs or any controlled substance.
(2)	The possession or use of fire arms, ammunition, bow and arrow, loaded firing devices or explosives. 
(3)	The operation or use of any audio or noise producing devices in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy or endanger other individuals. 
(4)	Glass containers of any kind.
(5)	Littering or dumping.
(6)	Jet-skis, wind surfer boards or similar motorized or non-motorized vessels.
(7)	Cleaning of boats with soaps or solvents.
(8)	Boats that do not carry appropriate flotation devices.
(9)	The discharge of any pollutant.
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-33. - Damage, trespassing. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to damage, tamper with, trespass, or alter any property, barricades, structures or appurtenances owned by the county. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-34. - Dam and intake restrictions. 
The dam, intake structure and immediate surrounding area is not available to private property owners and/or the public without authorization from the county. This does not prohibit crossing of the dam. No person shall enter the restricted area, attempt to operate or tamper with said structures, physically climb or attempt to reach by shoreline such structures, or in any way attempt to manipulate water levels around said structures. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Secs. 8-35—8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANE CREEK PUBLIC RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 8-51. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to and govern activities in the Cane Creek Recreational Development, Site Number 2. 
(Mo. of 9-13-73)
Sec. 8-52. - Picnicking. 
Picnicking is covered by admission fees. 
(Mo. of 9-13-73)
Sec. 8-53 - Boating. 
Boats on the Lake Meriwether Reservoir are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Except as otherwise provided herein, no vessels shall be operated on reservoir waters with a gasoline, diesel, or other internal combustion engine or power plant. Electric motors, canoes and kayaks are permissible. 
(2)	This section pertains to all vessels or water craft, including, but not limited to, power boats, cruisers, houseboats, sailboats, rowboats, canoes, kayaks, jet skis, wind surfboards or any other such equipment capable of navigation on water, whether in motion or at rest. 
(3)	Compliance with all federal and state laws regarding boat and water safety.
(4)	No individual under the age of sixteen (16) shall operate a boat.
(5)	The maximum speed of boats on the reservoir shall be five (5) mph.
(6)	No boat shall be operated at more than five (5) mph within fifty (50) feet of any dock, pier, boathouse or fisherman. 
(7)	All vessels when not in actual operation shall be removed from reservoir waters.
The county reserves the right to prohibit any boat and/or vehicle from the reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-54. - Swimming/wading. 
Swimming and/or wading is not permitted in the reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-55. - Fishing. 
All individuals fishing in the reservoir must comply with all fishing rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources concerning safety, licenses, creel limits and all other applicable requirement. Trot lines and set or bank poles are not permitted. Fishing from roads and bridges adjacent to or over the reservoir is not permitted. Fishing at night is not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-56. - Hours of operation. 
The recreational site shall be open to the public between the hours of sunrise and sunset, seven (7) days a week. 
(Mo. of 9-13-73; Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
Sec. 8-57. - Fees. 
The following fees shall be charged for the use of the recreational site: 
(1)	Admission fees:
a.	Each vehicle .....$2.00 
(2)	Use fees, per day:
a.	Fishing, per day .....2.00 
b.	Camping, per vehicle, per day .....10.00 
(3)	Church groups, civic groups and youth groups shall be admitted free.
(4)	Other groups per day .....35.00 
(Mo. of 9-13-73; Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-11-01)
ARTICLE IV. - RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 8-58. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Recreation Advisory Board Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 6-3-15; Ord. No. 2015-03(Amend.), 11-24-15) 
Sec. 8-59. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to create and establish a recreation advisory board to sit and serve in an advisory capacity to the county parks and recreation department for the consideration of policies of the department and to make recommendations for its operation and the advancement of the recreational programs and facilities throughout the county. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 6-3-15; Ord. No. 2015-03(Amend.), 11-24-15) 
Sec. 8-60. - Operation generally. 
(a)	The board shall consist of nine members. One member shall be appointed from each city within the county limits by the commissioner representing said city, one member shall be a school board representative appointed by the school board, and one at-large member shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Terms of office shall be two years. Each member of the board may serve successive terms as approved and appointed by the appointing body. 
(c)	The members of this board shall serve staggered terms of office, with four members coming up for appointment one year and the remaining five coming up the following year. 
(d)	The term of appointment shall run from January first to December thirty-first, biennially, except for special interim appointments. 
(e)	Five of the appointments to this advisory board shall serve a one-year term of office, to effectuate the plan of rotation and staggered terms. 
(f)	It is understood that the members of the board serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners and are subject to recall upon a simple majority vote of the commissioners in any regular session of business. 
(g)	The seat of any member of the recreation advisory board shall be declared vacant if such member misses three consecutive meetings without cause. Any board vacancy shall be filled as provided for by the Meriwether County Code of Ordinances. 
(h)	This recreation advisory board shall be subject to the authority of the board of commissioners in all matters of personnel, finance, usage, restrictions and operations of the department of parks and recreation; 
(i)	The board shall establish regular meeting times for the purpose of conducting business of the recreation board. Board shall meet at least once every six months. 
(j)	The board shall elect each year a chairman and a secretary of the recreation advisory board from among their members. 
(k)	The secretary shall notify all members of the date and time of such meetings and shall keep minutes of the business therein conducted. The secretary shall transmit a copy of the same to the commissioners, county manager and county clerk. 
(l)	In the absence of the chairman or secretary, the membership present shall elect a chairman pro tem, or secretary pro tem to serve in that capacity for the duration of the absence of the respective officer. 
(m)	A quorum of the membership necessary for the conduction of business shall include:
(1)	The chairman and any four voting members, or
(2)	The chairman pro tem and any four voting members.
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 6-3-15; Ord. No. 2015-03(Amend.), 11-24-15) 
Sec. 8-61. - Board duties. 
(a)	The recreation advisory board shall perform duties including, but not limited to:
(1)	The board shall provide written recommendations to the commissioners, county manager, county clerk, and recreation director when deemed necessary by the board concerning the operations and programs of the county department of parks and recreation; 
(2)	The board shall review financial statements of the parks and recreation department with a representative from the finance department at their regular meetings. 
(3)	The board shall inspect and conduct site visits to facilities of the parks and recreation department at least once per year; 
(4)	The board shall review the county department of parks and recreation policies and procedures at least once per year and make any recommendations for amendments as deemed necessary by the board; 
(5)	Perform any other activities or duties as requested by the board of commissioners.
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 6-3-15; Ord. No. 2015-03(Amend.), 11-24-15) 
Chapter 9 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Floodplain regulations, Ch. 7; parks and recreation, Ch. 8; signs, Ch. 10; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 11; zoning, App. A.
State Law reference— County commissioners' authority to establish, alter or abolish roads and bridges, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1—9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 9-26. - Compliance. 
All roads constructed in the county after November 1, 1987, shall meet the specifications set forth in this article. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Sec. 9-27. - Right-of-way. 
The minimum right-of-way for roads shall be sixty (60) feet and legally deeded to the county. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Sec. 9-28. - Road bed. 
(a)	The road bed shall have a width of at least thirty (30) feet, as follows:
(1)	The road base shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide with a minimum six-inch compacted (100%) approved soil or gravel base. 
(2)	Three-quarter-inch to one-inch minimum thickness triple surface treatment overlaid on compacted soil or gravel base, twenty (20) feet wide (#5's, #7's and #8's and #9's gravel layers, plus asphalt tar sealer and binder); or 
(3)	Three-quarter-inch to one-inch minimum thickness asphalt plant mix road surface overlaid on compacted soil or gravel base, twenty (20) feet wide (type G, GP1 or GP2, including bituminous materials; asphalt levelling plant mix, including bituminous materials; and using bituminous tack coat). 
(4)	Five-foot wide shoulders, each side, minimum, of compacted soil or gravel.
(5)	Five-foot wide inside slope to ditch, each side, at a slope of three (3) to one (1) or less. 
(6)	Two-foot wide by two-foot deep ditches, each side.
(7)	Six-foot wide outside slope to ditch, each side at a slope of one (1) to one (1) or less. 
(b)	All shoulders and slopes shall be set out in grass: fescue, bermuda or an approved alternative. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Sec. 9-29. - Drainage. 
An approved drainage pipe with a minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches and a minimum length of twenty (20) feet shall be installed under all driveways, with sufficient cross-train pipes to handle the flow of water from the ditches to the point of drainage as determined by the topography of the site. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Sec. 9-30. - Approval. 
Construction of roads shall be subject to inspection and approval by the county road supervisor, with final approval resting with the board of commissioners. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Secs. 9-31—9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAY CULVERTS 

Sec. 9-51. - Purpose. 
In order to promote safety for vehicles and assure proper drainage along paved and unpaved county roads and drainage easements, the board of commissioners does hereby ordain and enact into law the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-0516(2), § 1, 5-16-90)
Sec. 9-52. - Interpretation. 
The regulations in this article are not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. Where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use of property or require greater space than is imposed by other regulations, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these regulations shall govern; however, these regulations are not intended in any way to supersede the requirements of the state department of transportation. 
Sec. 9-53. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person installing a driveway or driveway culvert pipe without having secured a permit or obstructing a drainage easement shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-11. Each day of violation may be considered a separate offense. 
(b)	Any person installing a driveway or driveway culvert which does not meet county specifications shall immediately remove same upon notification by the county. In the event the person refuses or fails to remove such driveway or driveway culvert the county building and zoning official shall remove same and a lien will be filed against the property owner for cost of equipment and labor. 
Sec. 9-54. - Short title. 
This article may be known and cited as the "Meriwether County Culvert Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 90-0516(2), § 1, 5-16-90)
Sec. 9-55. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install a driveway or driveway culvert pipe in the right-of-way of a county road without having secured a permit from the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 90-0516(2), § 1, 5-16-90)
Sec. 9-56. - Permit application. 
Prior to the installation of a driveway or driveway culvert pipe a permit shall be secured from the building and zoning department and shall contain but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)	Property owner and/or contractor.
(2)	Mailing address.
(3)	Description of property:
a.	Legal description or plat.
b.	Location, road, subdivision, etc.
c.	Acreage.
d.	Existing driveways.
(4)	Size and location of culvert pipe and description of work to be completed. (Property owner shall also clearly identify the proposed location of culvert pipe by stakes at the property line.) 
(5)	Signature of applicant or authorized agent.
(Ord. No. 90-0516, § 1, 5-16-90)
Sec. 9-57. - Installation. 
(a)	Specifications. Driveways and culvert pipes shall be installed to the latest county specifications which may be obtained from the office of the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Material. Material and size of culvert pipe shall be approved by the county building and zoning official prior to construction. A twelve-inch culvert pipe shall be the minimum; however, where drainage and grade conditions warrant, the building and zoning official shall require a larger size. 
(1)	Culvert pipe for agricultural and residential purposes shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in length nor more than thirty (30) feet in length. For commercial and industrial uses culvert pipes shall not exceed forty (40) feet in length. 
(2)	Culvert pipe ends shall be riprapped when required by the building and zoning official.
(c)	Location. The end of a culvert pipe shall not be less than five (5) feet from the side property line extended. 
(d)	Separation. The distance between culvert pipes shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
(e)	Length. The total length of all culvert pipes shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot frontage in residential districts and forty (40) percent in industrial or commercial districts. In the event lot frontage is less than one hundred (100) feet the property owner shall be entitled to one (1) twenty-foot driveway culvert pipe. 
(Ord. No. 90-0516(2), § 1, 5-16-90)
Sec. 9-58. - Hardship variance. 
Where, due to unusual conditions, the board of zoning appeals find that strict compliance with these regulations may result in excessive hardship or practical difficulties, certain variances may be authorized by the board of zoning appeals; provided substantial justice is done, the public interest secured, and the variance will not nullify the intent or purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-0516, § 1, 5-16-90)
Sec. 9-59. - Temporary driveways. 
Temporary driveways for logging, clearing and construction shall use a culvert pipe unless otherwise authorized by the building and zoning official. Temporary driveways and pipe shall be removed and drainage ditch restored to original condition at the completion of the project. Any damage occurring to the road and drainage ditch shall be corrected at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 90-0516(2), § 1, 5-16-90)
Sec. 9-60. - Obstruction drainage. 
No debris, trash, dirt or other obstruction shall be placed in a road drainage ditch or drainage easement. 
Sec. 9-61. - Use of the right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful to utilize the right-of-way of a county road for storage, logging, loading and unloading, construction and/or landscaping without the expressed permission of the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 9-62—9-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NAMING AND CHANGING ROAD NAMES 

Sec. 9-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-08, § 1, adopted July 9, 2001, repealed § 9-81 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to reference to road number as related to naming and changing road names. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 9-82. - Petition to rename road. 
A petition signed by one hundred (100) percent of the landowners of property along the road will be necessary to rename a county road. In order to avoid duplication and confusion a petition will not be considered that proposes a new road name that is the same or similar to an existing road in the county. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87; Ord. No. 01-08, § 2, 7-9-01)
Sec. 9-83. - Presentment of petitions. 
The petitions provided for by this article shall be presented to the board of commissioners in a regular meeting by the petitioner. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Sec. 9-84. - Action by board. 
The board of commissioners shall not act on a petition filed under this article until the next regular meeting of the board. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Sec. 9-85. - Publication. 
The name or name change of a county road shall be published in the county newspaper for a period of two (2) weeks. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Sec. 9-86. - Listing of name. 
The name of a county road shall be listed on the county road list and placed on the county road map upon its next reprinting. The state shall be so informed of such naming or renaming in writing. 
(Mo. of 9-22-87)
Secs. 9-87—9-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; operation of motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7.

Sec. 9-106. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County". 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § A, 2-21-90)
Sec. 9-107. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, march, walk-a-thon, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition, function, activity or procession of any kind involving the use of or on the public streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, parks or other public property of the county or state. 
Parade permit means the permit authorized and required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § B, 2-21-90)
Sec. 9-108. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a permit therefor shall have been obtained from the county clerk. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § C, 2-21-90)
Sec. 9-109. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § C(1)(a), 2-21-90)
Secs. 9-110—9-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HEAVY EQUIPMENT ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 9-120. - Scope of article. 
This article shall cover any person, association or business entity that uses a county right-of-way in carrying out its business by loading, transporting or unloading materials of any nature whether on the road surface or a county right-of-way or crossing the unpaved portion of the right-of-way, including ditches or embankments. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 12-13-93)
Sec. 9-121. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Access site means any temporary roadway, drive, structure, fill or device, existing or constructed, that is used or employed for the purpose of travel upon or use of county road rights-of-way. 
County right-of-way means, for the purpose of this article, the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain and back slope, facility or any appurtenance of any county road as herein defined. 
County road means any county owned or maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
Heavy equipment machinery and vehicles shall be defined as any and all devices in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn including but not limited to semitrailers, trailers, tractors and trucktractors; provided, however, that vehicles in use immediately for the control or extinguishing of wild fire shall be exempt from this statute. 
Loading and unloading shall be defined by its everyday meaning but also shall include any activity known as harvesting or mining or any product or material. 
Operations means those activities contemplated by this statute, including the loading or transporting of raw materials such as stone, timber, oil, fill dirt, produce and kaolin. 
Operator means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or private organization or any character, and the officer's agents, and employees thereof carrying out the activities contemplated by this statute. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 12-13-93)
Sec. 9-122. - Commencement of operations. 
All persons loading, unloading or transporting materials in excess of three (3) tons per load across a county road or right-of-way must provide in writing to the county board of commissioners' clerk the following information within forty-eight (48) hours before commencing operations on county right-of-way: 
(1)	The name, address and phone number of the party which will be loading and unloading;
(2)	The approximate location of access site(s) to the county road;
(3)	The date work commenced; and
(4)	Name of titled owner of tract.
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 12-13-93)
Sec. 9-123. - Release of liability. 
Operator shall give oral or written notification upon completion of operations to the clerk of county commissioners within forty-eight (48) hours. Upon site inspection by a designated county official, the clerk of county commissioners shall provide written notice of release of liability to operator within eight (8) days of notification from operator. Should said notification by the clerk of county commissioners not be made on a timely basis, operator shall not be held responsible or liable under this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 12-13-93)
Sec. 9-124. - Arbitration. 
(a)	If it is determined by the designated county official either during or at the conclusion of operations that the county road and access site are not in a proper state of repair, the operator shall have ten (10) days to correct the site or to appeal the decision. 
(b)	Upon receipt of a written appeal, the board of commissioners shall have five (5) days to impanel an arbitration board. The arbitration board shall consist of three (3) people: one (1) person selected by the board of commissioners, one (1) person selected by the operator, and one (1) person mutually agreed upon by the two (2) persons selected. 
(c)	Once the arbitration board has been selected, the arbitration board shall have no more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the letter of appeal in which to reach a decision. The decision of the arbitration board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 12-13-93)
Sec. 9-125. - Bonding requirements. 
If repairs are not made by operator within ten (10) days of the decision of the arbitration board, or within ten (10) days of notification from the appropriate county official, then repairs shall be made at operator's expense. If this occurs, the board of commissioners shall be authorized to require posting of a security bond or letter of credit in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by designated firm, company or individual for future operations on county rights-of-way. Said bond will remain in force until the conclusion of operations with access points and roads being in satisfactory condition as prescribed by this ordinance. At which time said bond will be returned to operator within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 12-13-93)
Sec. 9-126. - Performance standards. 
(a)	Harvesting, mining or loading materials. All harvesting or loading shall be conducted at a loading site off the county rights-of-way and behind the established ditch line of county roads. 
(b)	Ditches. Ditches within fifty (50) feet of temporary driveway or right-of-way crossing shall be kept clear of all debris or residue at all times to allow for proper drainage. Culverts shall be installed at temporary entrances, as needed, to facilitate proper drainage flow. 
(c)	Warning signs. Any firm, company or person operating on county rights-of-way shall be required to post warning signs at least five hundred (500) feet on both sides of the temporary driveway adequately warning oncoming traffic of persons, vehicles, equipment or machinery entering roadway. 
(d)	Roadway. County roads shall be kept serviceable at all times for school buses, emergency vehicles, mail carriers and traffic of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 12-13-93)
Secs. 9-127—9-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HARVESTING TIMBER 

Sec. 9-151. - Applicability. 
This article VII of chapter 9 of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia, shall apply to all persons, firms and or entities harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of Meriwether County, Georgia, for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard, processing plant or other related enterprise or property located inside or outside this state. 
It is not intended, however, for this article to apply to small tree trimming, removal and/or clean-up operations involving the subject property's owner(s), the owner's respective agents or other contracted businesses such as tree surgeons, tree trimming and/or removal, storm-related clean-up, and/or landscaping for which the primary purpose of the tree trimming, removal, and/or clean-up is not for the harvesting of timber. 
(Ord. of 9-27-05(1))
Sec. 9-152. - Bond required. 
(a)	In accordance with the authority provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, any person, firm or entity engaged in the cutting, removing or harvesting of standing timber in any unincorporated area of Meriwether County, Georgia, for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard, processing plant or other related enterprise or property located inside or outside this state shall first deliver to the building and zoning department a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation or other legal surety entity authorized to transact business in this state in the amount of no less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per permit entrance to protect the Meriwether County road system against any damage caused by such person, firm or entity; or, in the alternative and at the option of the person, firm or entity intending to harvest said timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit in an amount no less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a bank or other financial institution as defined by O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4 may be submitted to the building and zoning department in lieu of the valid surety bond. 
(b)	As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, the surety bond and/or irrevocable letter of credit required under this section shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is delivered and no more than one (1) year from the date said bond/letter of credit is delivered to Meriwether County. 
(c)	While said surety bond and/or irrevocable letter of credit shall not be valid for more than one (1) year from the date of delivery to Meriwether County, said bond and/or letter of credit may be transferred for the purposes of securing another permitted location as many times as may be approved by Meriwether County during the calendar year that the original bond and/or letter of credit was delivered to Meriwether County. 
(Ord. of 9-27-05(1))
Sec. 9-153. - Notice required. 
(a)	No person, firm or entity harvesting standing timber in Meriwether County for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard, processing plant or related enterprise or property located inside or outside this state shall begin to cut, remove or harvest standing timber in any unincorporated area of Meriwether County without first providing notice of such harvesting operations to the building and zoning department or other designated agent for Meriwether County, Georgia, at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to cutting, removing or harvesting any such timber. 
(b)	Said seventy-two-hour prior notice shall be required to be in writing and will be required from any person, firm or entity harvesting timber as described herein; and, shall be required for each separate tract to be harvested by said person, firm or entity. The form of said notice shall be prescribed by such rule or regulation adopted by the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners or building and zoning director and shall consist of: 
(1)	A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those tracks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)	A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)	The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)	The name, business address, business telephone number, current business registration and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(c)	Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile or such other means as approved by Meriwether County, or by mail. 
(d)	The failure of any person, firm or entity to provide the surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit as provided in this article shall render the notice as required in this section ineffective for any such harvesting operation(s) unless and until said person, firm or entity providing said notice has delivered to the building and zoning department the required valid surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit. 
(e)	Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within such unincorporated area of Meriwether County upon receipt of the same by the building and zoning department or Meriwether County or its designated agent and, compliance with the requirements section 9-127, above, and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the building and zoning department or Meriwether County Board of Commissioners or its designated agent; within three (3) business days after such change. 
(Ord. of 9-27-05(1))
Sec. 9-154. - Ingress and egress permit, inspection and related requirements. 
(a)	For any ingress or egress identified by any harvester pursuant to the notice requirements set forth above and if said ingress and egress so identified shall cross any right-of-way of Meriwether County, the harvester shall be required, in addition to obtaining an ingress/egress permit described below, to comply with the following temporary harvesting driveway requirements: 
(1)	Gravel the temporary harvesting driveway with a minimum pad of thirty (30) feet in width for the first twenty (20) feet from the entrance and then no less than twenty (20) feet after the first twenty (20) feet from the entrance for one hundred (100) feet with five-inch—eight-inch size stone, unless another size shall be approved by Meriwether County, to a minimum depth of three (3) inches to insure that mud and/or other obstructions will not be tracked onto the county roadway. This section, however, shall not waive or otherwise negate the geotextile liner required by state law along state highways. All ingress and egress used by the harvester as a temporary harvesting driveway shall be maintained during the entire harvesting operation. All temporary harvesting driveways shall be piped by the harvester; and, upon completion of the harvesting, said pipe(s) shall be removed and the right(s)-of-way returned to its original condition by the harvester. 
(2)	No harvester or vehicle may be parked on a county right-of-way or used on the county right-of-way as a loading facility. 
(3)	Entrance/egress/ingress signs shall be placed no less than one thousand (1,000) feet in each direction from each permitted entrance. 
(b)	Any person, firm or entity harvesting timber as described by this article VII shall be required to obtain an ingress/egress permit from the building and zoning department and pay a permit fee in such an amount as determined to be reasonable by the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners. 
(c)	For any ingress or egress identified by any harvester pursuant to the notice requirements set forth above, Meriwether County shall schedule the requisite inspection within the seventy-two-hour period referenced in section 9-153 above. The related permit(s) shall be issued or denied upon the completion of the inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-27-05(1))
CHAPTER 10 - SIGN ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—An ordinance adopted April 11, 2007, changed the title of ch. 10 from "Signs" to "Sign ordinance."

Sec. 10-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Meriwether County Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1) § 1.0)
Sec. 10-2. - Statement of findings. 
The county finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals, businesses, and government may convey a variety of messages. Left unregulated, however, signs can become a threat to the public health and safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the overall economic growth of Meriwether County as an aesthetic nuisance. See, e.g., Scenic America, Billboards and Sign Control available at http://www.scenic.org; Jerry Weitz, Ph.D., AICP, The Public Purpose of Rowell's Sign Ordinance and the Implications of Doing Without It: A Position Paper (December 7, 1999) available at http://roswellgov.com. In particular, based on the cited materials and the studies referenced therein as well as other related studies, the county finds that unregulated signs: 
•  Can be a safety hazard to drivers and pedestrians; 
•  Can create unsafe, cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares throughout the county; 
•  Can hamper economic growth; 
•  Can lower property values; 
•  Can adversely impact public investments; 
• Can degrade the utility of public safety signs; and 
•  Can adversely impact the aesthetic quality of the community and surrounding environment. 
The county also finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or business. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The county finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a proprietary purpose, such as identifying markings on utility polls, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
The county finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1) § 2.0)
Sec. 10-3. - Statement of purpose. 
By enacting this chapter, the county intends: 
(1)	To balance the rights of individuals, businesses, and government to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)	To afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination; 
(3)	To preserve and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Meriwether County; 
(4)	To improve traffic and pedestrian safety;
(5)	To maintain and enhance the visual environment, and preserve the right of citizens and visitors to enjoy Meriwether County's scenic beauty; 
(6)	To protect property values of nearby public and private property by minimizing possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)	To avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs;
(8)	To promote economic development;
(9)	To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations; and
(10)	To promote the purposes stated in this section by regulating signs based on objective standards, including, but not limited to height and size, and without regard to the content of the sign message. 
The ordinance from which this chapter derived is adopted under the zoning authority of Meriwether County in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
The ordinance from which this chapter derived is adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Georgia Planning Act of 1989. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 3.0)
Sec. 10-4. - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth below shall apply and govern in all zoning districts. Within the unincorporated portions of the county no sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 4.0)
Sec. 10-5. - Definitions. 
Abandoned sign. Any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. 
Animated sign. Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Audible sign. Any sign which emits a sound which is audible or emits a signal which can be converted into audible sounds, whether by radio or other means. 
Awning/canopy sign. Any sign that is a part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Banner. A sign other than a flag with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, or fabric that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. 
Beacon. Any light with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move. 
Changeable copy sign. Any sign that incorporates changing lights, lettering, or images to form a sign message or messages, whether such changes are accomplished electronically or manually. 
Fall zone. An area equal to one hundred thirty-three (133) percent of the height of the structure in every direction. 
Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbol used as a symbol of a government or other entity or organization. 
Flashing sign. A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
Lot. A parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot area, coverage, and use and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning standards. 
Marquee, marquee sign. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Moving sign. A sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts. 
Obscene. Material is obscene if, to the average person applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion; the material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; and the material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as: (a) acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; (b) acts of masturbation; (c) acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; (d) acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or (e) sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
Pennant, streamer. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
Permit. A sign permit reviewed, approved, and issued by the zoning administrator. 
Permittee. The person and/or entity owning or leasing the land on which the sign is erected or for which an application has been submitted. 
Portable sign. A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure, including but not limited to signs on trailers or signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
Principal building. The building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Nonresidential lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other structures with clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Public sign. Any sign erected by a governmental entity. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building or supported by the roof structure. 
Sign. A sign is an object, device, display, or structure, displayed outdoors or visible from a public way, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location; or to express a point of view, by any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, advertising flags, fixtures, colors, illuminations or projected images. Each substantially different face of a sign shall constitute a separate sign. 
Sign area. The area of the smallest rectangle within which all elements of a flat sign are contained (a flat sign being one with two (2) display surfaces facing exactly opposite directions, or one (1) display surface if against the wall of a building); or the maximum projected surface area (projected in one (1) direction) of any other sign. 
Supporting structures. Supporting structures for signs shall not be counted in the sign area, provided such supporting structures consist of posts, hangers, or brackets of the minimum number and size necessary to support the sign. A wall or fence on which a sign is mounted shall not be counted in the sign area, provided it serves primarily to enclose, divide, or protect an area. Supporting structures of natural-finish brick masonry, stone masonry, or wood shall not be counted in the sign area, provided that: 
(1)	Such structures do not extend more than one (1) foot above or two (2) feet beyond the ends of the sign; 
(2)	The height of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed the maximum height allowed in this chapter; and 
(3)	The area of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed twice the area of the sign itself. 
Sign, freestanding. A sign that is not mounted on a principal building. 
Sign, nonconforming. Any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter at the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto. 
Sign, portable. A sign which is not permanently affixed by rigid structures to a permanent, concrete foundation or a building; including any sign mounted on a vehicle, trailer or other device designed to be moved periodically from place to place. 
Sign, roof. A sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or wholly or partially over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and supported by or attached to the roof. 
Sign, temporary event. A sign for which there is not a need for display more than twenty one (21) days in a six-month period. 
Sign, traffic control. A sign to regulate the safe and ordered flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
Sign, wall. A sign which is mounted parallel on the exterior surface of a building in which the activity advertised by the sign is located. 
Temporary sign. Any sign that is not permanently mounted. 
Window sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass, either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the structure. 
Zoning administrator. The person responsible for enforcement of the zoning ordinances and regulations in force in Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 5.0)
Sec. 10-6. - General provisions. 
(a)	Permit required. A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise noted and shall be issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(b)	Design, material, and maintenance. Any sign not meeting the following provisions shall be repaired or rebuilt in accordance with the specifications of this chapter: 
(1)	All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the International Building Code and The National Electrical Code; 
(2)	The area on private property around the sign on which it is erected shall be properly maintained clear of brush, trees, and other obstacles so as to make signs readily visible; 
(3)	All burned-out bulbs or damaged panels must be replaced;
(4)	All sign copy shall be maintained securely to the face and all missing copy must be replaced; 
(5)	All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times so that the public and traffic safety are not compromised; and 
(6)	It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to maintain and insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Maximum height of freestanding signs. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, the maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be thirty (30) feet in all nonresidential (NHC, I and PUD) zoning districts. In all other zoning districts, the maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be ten (10) feet except for those signs on I-85 and that maximum height shall be fifty (50) feet. This height shall be measured from the grade at the right-of-way boundary line or the grade of the sign site if such grade is higher than the grade at the boundary line of the street right-of-way to the uppermost part of the sign face, base or structure. If the sign is located below the grade at the boundary line of the street right-of-way, sign height shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way to the uppermost part of the sign face, base or structure. 
(d)	Maximum sign areas. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, the maximum sign area of any sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet. Maximum sign areas shall apply to each face separately, but no freestanding sign shall have more than two (2) faces. Where two (2) sign faces are located in a "V" formation, the angle between the two (2) sign faces shall not be greater than sixty (60) degrees. 
(1)	Exception — Residential shall be a maximum of nine (9) square feet;
(2)	Exception — I-85 maximum shall be two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
(e)	Maximum sign number. In addition to any sign allowed by section 10-8 of this chapter and wall signs addressed in section 10-6(i) of this chapter, the maximum number of permitted signs per lot shall be one (1) freestanding sign. 
(1)	Exception — On I-85, the maximum shall be one (1) sign per two thousand (2,000) feet.
(f)	Minimum sign setbacks. Except as otherwise specifically provided, for any freestanding signs the minimum set from the right-of-way lines shall be ten (10) feet and ten (10) feet from the side and rear lot lines. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing, as prohibited by ordinance. 
(g)	Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated by lights that flash, move, change in intensity, or turn on intermittently more than once per day. To prevent glare visible from a public street or adjoining property, the beam of any light shall be directed so as not to be visible beyond the sign at which it is directed, and the light source shall not be visible from any point on an adjacent property or the public right-of-way. 
(h)	Movement or animation. No sign or part of a sign shall rotate, oscillate, or otherwise move or change in appearance, whether such motion is driven by wind, mechanical, electrical, or other means. 
(i)	Wall signs. In nonresidential zoning districts only, one (1) wall sign per establishment shall be permitted unless that establishment has street frontage on more than one (1) side. 
(1)	If a business is located in a structure that is located on a lot that has no street frontage, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted on any single facade for that business establishment in the structure, whether that facade faces the street or not. If a business establishment is located in a structure that is located on a lot that has street frontage, but the portion of the structure where the business establishment is located does not have frontage, the business establishment is entitled to one (1) wall sign on the business establishment's facade. If a business establishment is located in a structure that is located on a lot that has more than one (1) street frontage, one (1) wall sign on each facade of the business establishment which has street frontage for the facade of the business establishment is permitted. A publicly owned alley shall be considered a street. 
(2)	Wall signs attached flat against the exterior surface of a building may extend not more than twelve (12) inches from the wall. Wall signs are not allowed in residential areas. 
(3)	The total area for wall signage shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each linear foot of building frontage attributable to the particular business or businesses which the sign will identify, or fifteen (15) percent of the total area of the one (1) building facade upon which the signage is placed or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. A sign directory is a wall sign. For buildings with multiple tenants having store fronts only, the facade rented by the tenant shall be considered as wall area for a sign. 
(4)	Wall signs require a permit.
(j)	Sign message. In any zoning district, any sign, display, or device allowed under this chapter may contain any lawful noncommercial or commercial message. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to allow regulation of signs based on the content of the sign message. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 6.0)
Sec. 10-7. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Findings. The county finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic characteristics of the county and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact of said signs on motorists and pedestrians. 
(b)	Nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
(1)	Shall not be enlarged or altered except in conformance with this chapter, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe condition; 
(2)	Shall not be replaced, expanded or modified by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted; 
(3)	Shall not be allowed to be increased in height or size or relocated on the property, but may be decreased in height or size; and 
(4)	Is subject to removal if it has deteriorated to a point of making it a hazard or unsightly.
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 7.0)
Sec. 10-8. - Permitted signs. 
A general permit is hereby granted for the following types of signs in any zoning district, provided that such signs are erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable conditions: 
(1)	Traffic control signs;
(2)	Official notices issued by any court with competent jurisdiction or authorized public agency, department or official; 
(3)	Temporary sign(s), but no more than two (2) signs per lot of the height, size and setback requirements of subsection 10-8(5) of this chapter; 
(4)	Any flag, provided that (1) no more than two (2) flagpoles are permitted per lot, (2) no more than two (2) flags are permitted per flagpole, (3) the maximum dimension of the hoist side of each flag shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the height of the flagpole, (4) all flagpoles shall be set back from each property boundary a distance equal to the height of the flagpole or in accordance with subsection 10-6(f), whichever is greater, and (5) all flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair so as not to constitute a threat to public safety. On officially designated county, state, and federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number of flags on display. 
(5)	In addition to any other permitted sign under this section, individual signs of up to ten (10) square feet in sign area, with an aggregate sign area not exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet per lot. Such signs shall be a maximum height of five (5) feet with a minimum setback of ten (10) feet rear and side from side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be ten (10) feet from the property line or outside the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(6)	Window signs, however, no more than fifty (50) percent or thirty-five (35) square feet, whichever is less, of the total available glass area shall be used to display window signs. No window signs are allowed above the first floor unless the building is a multi-tenant office of commercial structure wherein tenants have primary direct access from their space to the outside. The access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designated for public use. In no case shall any window signs be installed above the level of the second floor windows. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 8.0)
Sec. 10-9. - Prohibited signs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following types of signs shall be prohibited anywhere in the unincorporated areas of Meriwether County. 
(1)	Signs imitating warning signals. No sign shall display intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that might mislead or confuse an automobile or other vehicular driver; 
(2)	Signs within street or highway right-of-way. No sign whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic control signs and signals and information signs erected by an authorized public agency or department, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way or at any location where, by reason of position, shape, wording or color, it obstructs the view of pedestrians or vehicular traffic; 
(3)	Certain attached and painted signs. Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts and telephone or other utility poles or signs painted on or attached to rocks or other natural features or painted on the roofs shall be prohibited; 
(4)	Fluttering ribbons and banners. Fluttering ribbons and banners and similar devices are prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to flags; 
(5)	Roof signs. No sign shall be permitted that is mounted on or extends into the air above any roof surface of a building. A sign may be mounted against a parapet of uniform height around the perimeter of a building but may not extend above the parapet; 
(6)	Portable signs. No portable sign shall be permitted unless it qualifies as a temporary sign and complies with all applicable requirements for such signs under this chapter; 
(7)	Painted wall murals. No painted mural shall be permitted unless it complies with the height and size restrictions contained in this chapter; and 
(8)	Obscene signs. Signs or other advertising structures that contain obscene material are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 9.0)
Sec. 10-10. - Sign permits. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a timely and standardized mechanism for reviewing applications for sign permits to ensure signs within the county comply with the objective standards of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the height and size provisions. 
(b)	Authority. The zoning administrator is authorized to review and approve or disapprove an application for a sign permit pursuant to the procedures of this section and the standards of this chapter. 
(c)	Applicability. No sign, except those specified in section 10-8 of this chapter, shall be erected, placed, reconstructed or structurally altered without the sign owner having first obtained a sign permit from the zoning administrator, pursuant to the procedures in this section and the standards of this chapter. 
(d)	Permitted signs by ordinance. Pursuant to section 10-8 of this chapter, a general permit has been granted for those signs listed therein, and no application for a sign permit is required so long as all applicable standards of this chapter are met. 
(e)	Procedure. The following procedure shall govern the application for, and the issuance of, all sign permits under this chapter. 
(1)	Initial submission and review of application. Application for a sign permit shall be made on the form provided by the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by the information and documents listed on the form and the fee as required by the county. An application will only be deemed as complete when all required information and accompanying documents are received. The following information will be required at a minimum: 
a.	The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this chapter.
b.	The value of the sign.
c.	A survey to scale showing the street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located, the proposed location of subject sign on the property, the distance of the proposed sign from the property's boundaries, and all existing structures or buildings on the property. 
d.	The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one (1) sign face. 
e.	The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the sign is to be located. 
f.	Written consent of the owner of the property, or his/her agent, granting permission for the placement, maintenance, size and height of the sign to be placed on the property. 
g.	For wall signs: a set of building elevations.
h.	The name, address, telephone number, and business license number of the sign contractor.
i.	Scaled elevation of the size and height of the proposed sign from ground level and adjacent street level. 
(2)	Action by zoning administrator. Within fifteen (15) working days after the application is determined complete, the zoning administrator shall review the application in accordance with this section and determine whether the application complies with the standards in this chapter. 
(3)	Approval. If the zoning administrator finds that the application complies with the standards of this chapter, the zoning administrator shall approve a sign permit. Sign application for which no action has been taken after fifteen (15) working days after the application is complete shall be deemed approved. 
(4)	Fails to comply. If the zoning administrator determines the application fails to comply with the standards of this chapter, the applicant shall be provided a written notification. If the applicant resubmits the application within thirty (30) days of the written notification of denial, the resubmitted application does not require payment of the fee. The time for resubmission may be extended an additional thirty (30) days for good cause, if requested of the zoning administrator prior to the original deadline for resubmittal. 
(5)	Resubmittal. A revised application shall be resubmitted to the zoning administrator and reviewed by the zoning administrator within fifteen (15) working days after its resubmittal. The zoning administrator shall approve or disapprove the application, based on the criteria in this chapter. 
(6)	Criteria. A sign permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant has demonstrated the application complies with the objective standards of this chapter. 
(7)	Expiration. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been installed and completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance; provided, however, that when an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) ninety-day extension may be granted by the zoning administrator. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be submitted and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(f)	Amendments. A sign permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures established for its original approval. 
(g)	Maintenance of permit. The owner or lessee of a lot containing signs requiring a permit under this chapter shall, at all times, maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for individual lots. 
(h)	Assignment of sign permits. A current or valid sign permit shall be freely assigned or transferred to a successor as owner or lessee of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such application as the county may require and paying any applicable fees. The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval. 
(i)	Vested rights. No person applying for a sign permit or erecting a sign under this chapter shall acquire any vested rights to continue maintenance of such signs. 
(j)	Appeals. The following procedure shall govern the appeal of any decision to deny an application for a sign permit under this chapter: 
(1)	Any applicant aggrieved or affected by the denial of an application for a sign permit may appeal the determination to the board of appeals in accordance with the procedures of chapter 16 of the zoning ordinance. The appeal shall be heard within thirty (30) working days of the filing of the written notice of appeal. 
(2)	Any party aggrieved or affected by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal to the appropriate court. 
(3)	Any party aggrieved or affected by the decision of the board of commissioners may appeal the decision by filing a writ of certiorari with the superior court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 10.0)
Sec. 10-11. - Variance. 
A variance may be granted upon application if an individual case of unnecessary and extraordinary hardship is placed upon the applicant for a sign permit, when such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and the purposes of this chapter. 
(1)	Authority to grant variances. Pursuant to the provisions set forth in chapter 16 of the zoning ordinance, the planning commission is authorized to receive, consider, grant, grant with conditions, or deny applications for variances. 
(2)	Variance application. A request for a variance may be initiated by a property owner or his/her authorized agent by filing an application with the zoning administrator. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and position of the proposed sign in relationship to the surrounding properties as prescribed by chapter 16 of the zoning ordinance. The zoning administrator may require other drawings or materials essential to an understanding of the proposed sign and variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. 
(3)	Fee. Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by the applicable fee, which shall be established by the county. 
(4)	Conditions and criteria for granting variances. The planning commission, in cases where specifically authorized, may grant a variance only after consideration and adoption of findings of fact that all of the following conditions and criteria have been met: 
a.	There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
b.	A literal interpretation of the provisions of the sign ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties; 
c.	Granting a variance requested would not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges that are denied to other similar properties; 
d.	The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
e.	The special circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant;
f.	The variance is not a request to permit a sign that exceeds the height and size limitations contained in this chapter; 
g.	The mere existence of a nonconforming sign or advertising device shall not constitute a valid reason to grant a variance; and 
h.	The variance requested is the minimum variance, which will make possible the logical use of the land and sign. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 11.0)
Sec. 10-12. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator. 
(b)	Notice. The zoning administrator shall give the permittee not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days' written notice, based on the practical considerations of completing measures to comport with the standards of this chapter, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign which is in violation of this chapter. If the permittee refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the zoning administrator will have the sign removed at the expense of the permittee. 
(c)	Penalties. If the violation is not eliminated within the required time period, the sign permit shall be revoked. Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. Each day in which the violation continues to occur shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)	Public nuisance. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e)	Appeal. Any violator may appeal the determination of the zoning administrator to the board of appeals in accordance with the procedures of section 10-10(j) of this chapter. Any appeal shall act as a supersedeas of the county's enforcement of this chapter, except to the extent that violation of this chapter is deemed to present a safety hazard to the public. 
(f)	Legal proceedings. The zoning administrator, upon a finding that any provision of this chapter is being violated, is authorized to institute legal proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter. The violator shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-11-07(1), § 3.0)
Chapter 11 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 06-1, adopted Apr. 12, 2006, amended ch. 11 in its entirety as set out herein. The former ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 01-12, adopted Oct. 23, 2001.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2011-05, adopted Aug. 23, 2011, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 11-1.1, 11-1.2, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 06-1, adopted April 12, 2006.

Sec. 11-1.1. - Title. 
This chapter 11 will be known as the Meriwether County Environmental Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-1.2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Aquifer. Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Best management practices (BMP's). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board. The board of natural resources. 
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
Corridor. All land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in section 11-5.6 of this chapter. 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District. The Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division. The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drastic. The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeology settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. The drastic methodology is the most widely-used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 11-2.2(c) of this chapter. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Generalized wetlands map. The current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the city/county, Georgia. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hazardous waste. Any solid waste, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has developed a list of hazardous wastes based upon corrosivity, reactivity and toxicity. 
Impervious surface. A manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that meets the definition requirements for wetlands as determined by the Army Corps of Engineers. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 11-2.1(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Perennial river. A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Perennial stream. A stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a United States Geological Survey Quadrangle map. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Pollution susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Protected river. Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least four hundred (400) cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of river covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act or Coastal Marshlands Protection Act are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. 
Recharge area. Any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Regulated activity. Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Reservoir boundary. The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
River/stream bank. The rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor. All the land, inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, shall be considered in areas of a protected river and being within one hundred (100) feet horizontally on the western side of the river as measured from the river banks. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Sensitive natural area. Any area, as defined now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)	Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species;
(2)	Rare or exemplary natural communities;
(3)	Significant landforms, hydro forms or geological features; or
(4)	Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources; and which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Significant recharge area. Those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1998) edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type, thickness, slope density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant recharge areas are as follows in the various geologic provinces of Georgia: 
In the Piedmont and in the Blue Ridge, rocks have little primary porosity with most groundwater being stored in the overlying soils. The significant recharge are those with thicker soils. Field mapping indicates thick soils in the Piedmont and Blue Ridge are characterized by a density of two (2) or more geologic contracts per four (4) square miles (source: 1976 1:500,000 Geologic map of Georgia) and slopes lower than eight (8) percent. 
Single-family dwelling. A dwelling structure designed for the use of one (1) family. 
Small water supply watershed. A watershed that contains less than one hundred (100) square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally-owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Utility. Public, private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Water supply reservoir. A governmentally-owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one (1) or more governmentally-owned public water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2011-05, adopted Aug. 23, 2011, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 11-2.1—11-2.8, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 06-1, adopted April 12, 2006.

Sec. 11-2.1. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 11-2.2 (c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-2.2. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in this section of the article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)	A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 11-2.2(c)(15) and (16) in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2); 
(15)	Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 11-2.2(b) and 11-2.2(c). 
(e)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-2.3. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of unincorporated Meriwether County without first obtaining a permit from the building and planning director to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building and planning director and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 11-2.3(c) of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 11-2.2(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 11-2.2(c) (15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 11-2.3(b)(6) have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 11-2.2(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 11-2.2(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 11-2.3(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-2.4. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The building and planning director will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)	The county building and planning department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)	The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-2.5. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop-work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 11-2.3(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. 
(1)	Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-2.6. - Education and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-2.7. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Meriwether County Commissioners within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Meriwether County. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
Sec. 11-2.8. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)	Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the 24th day of August, 2011. 
(b)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 8-23-11)
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE PROTECTION 

Sec. 11-3.1. - Finding of fact. 
Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities, as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides, herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste and septic tank effluents contribute to deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-3.2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to establish criteria to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections and other development pressures. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-3.3. - District delineation. 
The groundwater recharge area districts are hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of Meriwether County, Georgia, that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in "Most Significant Recharge Areas of Georgia, Hydrological Atlas 18" (1989 edition). In addition, each recharge area shall 
be determined to have a pollution susceptibility rating of high, medium, or low based on the "Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992". Said maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter together with all explanatory mater thereon and attached thereto. Standards for this district shall comply with the DNR Rule 391-3-16-02, criteria for the protection of groundwater recharge areas. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-3.4. - Protection criteria and permitted uses. 
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the groundwater recharge area protection district. The following are additional requirements for specific uses in the groundwater recharge area protection district: 
(1)	All new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, shall have the secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest take in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(2)	New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within:
a.	A high pollution susceptibility area.
b.	A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifteen (15) acre-feet in size; and 
c.	A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifty (50) acre-feet in size. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five (5) × ten (10) cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly known as the U.S. Soil Conservation Service). 
(3)	New homes served by septic tank/drain field systems shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (herein after ADHR Table MT-1"). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
a.	One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.	One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.	One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(4)	New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of the Department of Human Resources Manual for On Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter referred to as "DHR Table MT-2"). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
a.	One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.	One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.	One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(5)	Lots of record approved prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derived are hereby exempt from the requirements of subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
(6)	No construction shall proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Meriwether County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On Site Sewage Management (herein after DHR Manual 10), and [subsections] (3) and (4) of this section. 
(7)	New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks, in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one (1) day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire code requirements. 
(8)	Any new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner.
(9)	Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
ARTICLE IV. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 11-4.1. - Findings of fact. 
The wetlands within Meriwether County are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation, water quality maintenance pollution control; flood control; natural resource education; scientific study; and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-4.2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, flood plan and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. This article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practical as determined through the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-4.3. - District delineation. 
These regulations shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within Meriwether County. The Wetlands District Overlay Map, adopted as part of this chapter, shows the general location of wetlands, according to the 1987 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. These maps shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands maps and are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The general wetlands maps do no necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Meriwether County, Georgia, and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. No local government action under this article relieves the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-4.4. - Wetlands development permit requirements. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from Meriwether County, Georgia. If the area proposed for development is located near or in close proximity to a wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the zoning administrator, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-4.5. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted by right within the wetland district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein. (The activities listed in this section are exempted from Section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual Section 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances: 
(1)	Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in the Clean Water Act. 
(2)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided the conservation or preservation does not affect water of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual Section 404 permit. 
(3)	Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(4)	Natural water quality treatment or purification.
(5)	Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-4.6. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in a wetland district: 
(1)	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; and
(2)	Hazardous or sanitary landfills.
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
ARTICLE V. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 11-5.1. - Findings of fact. 
In order to provide for the health, safety, welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Meriwether County and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies making water treatment more complicated, expensive and rendering water resources unusable. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby drinking water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-5.2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the water resource district regulations is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply for Meriwether County which will minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, and maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds. This article shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within the Meriwether County. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-5.3. - District delineation. 
The Lake Meriwether Water Supply Watershed Districts are hereby designated, and shall comprise the land areas that drains to the public water supply intakes and/or reservoirs identified below. The boundaries of these districts are defined by the ridge lines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius seven (7) miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes and/or reservoirs. These districts shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Resource Districts Map of Meriwether, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
The following water supply watershed districts and reservoirs are hereby defined and boundaries shall be identified on the water resource district map: 
The Lake Meriwether Water Supply Watershed is a small water supply watershed. An intake for the City of Woodbury is located on this lake. This water supply watershed contains a reservoir within the jurisdiction of Meriwether County. 
The Blue Creek Water Supply Watershed is a small water supply watershed. A portion of the watershed is located in Meriwether County. The portion of the watershed located in Meriwether County is protected under this chapter. 
The Flat Creek Water Supply Watershed is a small water supply watershed. A portion of the watershed is located in Meriwether County. The portion of the watershed located in Meriwether County is protected under this chapter. 
The Cascade Creek Water Supply Watershed is a small water supply watershed. An intake for the Roosevelt Warm Springs Institute of Rehabilitation is located on this creek. 
The Town Creek Water Supply Watershed is a small water supply watershed with a reservoir. The City of Greenville owns a reservoir on this creek. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-5.6. - Permitted uses. 
The following regulations shall apply to the Lake Meriwether, Blue Creek, Flat Creek, Town Creek and Cascade Creek Water Supply Watersheds identified on the water resource district map as a small watershed with reservoir for Lake Meriwether and Cascade Creek. Uses which are lawful at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be allowed to continue as lawful land uses until such time as the use is abandoned. All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this chapter are permitted in the water supply watershed district, subject to the following standards: 
(1)	Natural buffer requirements. 
a.	Within the seven-mile radius upstream of the public water intakes, a natural buffer one hundred (100) feet wide shall be maintained on both sides of all perennial streams, measured from the stream banks. Similarly, within the water supply watershed but outside the seven-mile radius, a natural buffer of fifty (50) feet shall be maintained on both sides of the stream. 
b.	A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one-hundred fifty (150) feet from the boundary of any existing or future water supply reservoir. 
c.	The Lake Meriwether Reservoir is owned by Meriwether County and will be protected by Meriwether County. 
(2)	Impervious surface limitations. 
a.	The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
b.	Within the seven-mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a one-hundred-fifty-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams as measured from the stream banks. Septic tanks and drain fields are prohibited in the one-hundred-fifty-foot buffer. 
c.	Outside the seven-mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within the seventy-five-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks. Septic tanks and drain fields are prohibited in the seventy-five-foot buffer. 
d.	New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one (1) day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements of the standard fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. - 11-5.7. Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback requirements if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
(1)	Utilities. Utilities are exempt in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
a.	Utilities shall be located as far as reasonably possible from the stream bank and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water system. 
b.	Utilities shall be installed and maintained without changing the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
(2)	Forestry and agricultural activities. 
a.	Agricultural activities involving the planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and USDA. 
b.	Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
c.	The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water system.
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-5.8. - Prohibited uses. 
The following are prohibited uses within the Water Supply Watershed District Overlay: 
(1)	All sanitary landfills without synthetic liners and leachate collection systems.
(2)	All hazardous waste manufacture, handling, storage, treatment or disposal facilities.
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
ARTICLE VI. - FLINT RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION 

Sec. 11-6.1. - Description of district. 
The limits of the Flint River Corridor Protection (FRCPD) District are hereby defined to be all areas within one hundred (100) feet horizontally on the western side of the river as measured from the river bank. This area shall remain in an undisturbed vegetative buffer. The one-hundred-foot buffer is measured from the uppermost part of the river bank, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the buffer area, the area between the top of the river bank and the waters edge shall be included in the FRCPD District. 
Because these protective measures allow some latitude with land uses and because the district is not intended to prescribe a specific land sue but rather, to define a range of acceptable land uses, the Flint River Corridor Protection District is designed as an overlay district. Within the range of land uses which can be located within the district, this article establishes performance standards which apply to development within the district. The regulations of the underlying zoning district shall be maintained and not affected, except in the event of conflict or discrepancy between the FRCPD District and the underlying district. In that case, the more stringent requirements shall be observed. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-6.2. - Intent. 
The intent of the regulations within this protection district is to limit the use of the Flint River Corridor, in conjunction with other governmental entitles along the Flint River Corridor, in order to: 
(1)	Assure that the section of the river in Meriwether County will not become polluted and unsuitable as a source for potable water; 
(2)	Protect the river corridor by establishing a natural vegetative buffer area bordering the river; 
(3)	Preserve those qualities that make the river corridor suitable as a habitat for wildlife;
(4)	Help control erosion and to absorb floodwaters.
The further intent of this district is to protect and safeguard the health and welfare of all the citizens of Meriwether County by providing protection of the river that is or may be used as a source of drinking water. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-6.3. - Conditions and performance standards. 
Within in FRDPD District, the following conditions and performance standards shall apply, in addition to the regulations of the original district on which the FRCPD District is superimposed: 
(1)	Within the buffer area, single-family dwellings, including the usual appurtenances, are subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The dwelling shall be located on a tract of land containing at least two (2) acres and meeting all other zoning regulations. For the purposes of these standards, the size of the tract of the land shall not include any area that lies within the protected river, (that is, for tracts of land that include portions of a protected river, the area between the river banks cannot be counted towards the two-acre-minimum size). 
b.	There shall be only one (1) such dwelling on each two-acre or larger tract of land.
c.	A septic tank or tanks serving such a dwelling may be located within the buffer area; however, septic tank drain fields shall not be located within the buffer area. 
(2)	Industrial and commercial land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the Flint River Corridor Protection District are exempt from these criteria, provided that: 
a.	Industrial and commercial uses shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
b.	Industrial and commercial activity within the FECPD District shall meet all applicable state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
c.	Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields serving industrial and commercial uses are prohibited within the buffer area. 
(3)	The construction of road crossings and utility crossings, provided that the construction of said crossings shall meet all requirements of the Meriwether County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
(4)	Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions:
a.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
b.	Agricultural activity shall not impair the water quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act; 
c.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all applicable state and federal environmental regulations, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)	Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions:
a.	Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission; 
b.	Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking water quality of the river water as defined by the Georgia Clean Water Act. 
(6)	Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(7)	Wastewater treatment facilities.
(8)	Natural water quality treatment or purification facilities.
(9)	Recreational usages consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criteria, but a hard-surface tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criteria, but paths and walkways would be. 
(10)	Other uses as permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-6.4. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)	Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous wastes.
(b)	Disposal facilities for hazardous or solid wastes.
(c)	All construction activities within the buffer area, except as provided for in the following exempt uses. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-6.5. - Exempt uses. 
(a)	Land uses prior to the promulgation of the Flint River Corridor Protection District.
(b)	Mining activities, if permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.
(c)	Utilities, if such utilities cannot feasibility be located outside the buffer area, as determined by the local government, provided that: 
(1)	The utilities shall be located as far from the river bank as reasonably possible;
(2)	Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer area to the extent reasonably possible; 
(3)	The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any utility construction; 
(4)	Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water.
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
ARTICLE VII. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 11-7.1. - Notice to comply. 
(a)	The building department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities of which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	The building department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)	The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the counties or municipalities erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities, which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authorities ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. Is such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.S. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county of municipality so notified shall have thirty (30) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary correction action within thirty (30) days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-7.2. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop-work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 11-2.3(b)(7). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, permitting conditions, or stop-work order shall be liable for a monetary penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days in jail or both fine and jail or work alternative. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-7.3. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the zoning board within thirty (30) days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieve by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Meriwether County. 
(c)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(d)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall constitute proof or nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved by the governing authority or pollute any Waters of the State of Georgia as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
ARTICLE VIII. - EFFECTIVE DATE, REPEAL AND ALL LAWFUL PURPOSES 

Sec. 11-8.1. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall become effective immediately after the second reading and upon approval by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-8.2. - Repeal. 
It is the intent of the adoption of this 2006 Amendment to repeal all prior provisions of chapter 11 and any other prior and/or conflicting local laws. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Sec. 11-8.3. - Lawful purposes. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for any lawful purpose consistent with the provisions set forth herein and the provisions related to federal and state law, rule and/or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-1, 4-12-06)
Chapter 12 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; water and sewerage, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-277.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 12-26. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Meriwether County Antilitter Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-101)
Sec. 12-27. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. 
Aircraft means any contrivance invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in the county. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)	Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or
(2)	Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)	Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this county; or 
(4)	Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter means "garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definitions of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper." 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the county, owned or used by the county and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except bodily wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-102)
Sec. 12-28. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be tried in the magistrate's court of the county and, if convicted, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. Such proceeding shall be as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-120)
Sec. 12-29. - Litter in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the county except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official county dumps. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-103)
Sec. 12-30. - Placement of litter in receptacles. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-104)
Sec. 12-31. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the county the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-105)
Sec. 12-32. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the county the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-106)
Sec. 12-33. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the county. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-107)
Sec. 12-34. - Truck loads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the county unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the county, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-108)
Sec. 12-35. - Litter in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the county except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-109)
Sec. 12-36. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a part of or elsewhere within the county. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-110)
Sec. 12-37. - Commercial, noncommercial handbills—Throwing in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the county. No person shall hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. It shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the county for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-111)
Sec. 12-38. - Same—Placing on vehicles. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle, unless such is securely fastened thereto. It shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-112)
Sec. 12-39. - Same—Deposit on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-113)
Sec. 12-40. - Same—Prohibited where posted. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near, the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-114)
Sec. 12-41. - Same—Inhabited private premises. 
(a)	No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises. In the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-115)
Sec. 12-42. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the county any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-116)
Sec. 12-43. - Litter on public or private property. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or to permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this county or any waters in this county, unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state, county, or any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the county or state to use such property; 
(2)	The litter is placed in a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)	The person is owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)	It is specifically provided that none of the above three (3) listed exceptions shall apply unless the acts are done in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon any other private property under different ownership or control. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-117)
Sec. 12-44. - Clearing litter from open private property by county. 
(a)	Notice to remove. Any employee of the county is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the county or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to such owner at his last known address. 
(b)	Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (a) above, or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the city because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the county administrator, or other official designated by the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the county. 
(c)	Charge included in tax bill. When the county has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date of completion of the work, shall be charged to the owner of such property and such may be collected in any manner provided by law, in addition to the other criminal penalties which are herein provided. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-118)
Sec. 12-45. - County receptacles. 
The county authorities may maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations and may provide receptacles for the dumping therein of household garbage only. As used herein in this section, household garbage means refuse and remains of meal by-products, other household refuse such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics and wrapping or packaging material. If a container is clearly marked household garbage only, it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material into the container other than household garbage as such is herein defined. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit medical waste, appliances, tires, wood products, or any refuse from a commercial establishment into these receptacles. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents or indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of or otherwise vandalize any containers provided by the county for the dumping of trash or garbage or to overturn the same. 
(Ord. of 11-27-89, § 1-119; Ord. No. 92-0825, 8-25-92)
Secs. 12-46—12-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WASTE PRODUCTS CONTROL 

Sec. 12-66. - Dumpster regulations. 
(a)	The following notice shall be painted on all dumpsters in the county: "Household Garbage Only, Littering Grounds is a Misdemeanor, Violators will be Prosecuted." 
(b)	The state law regarding the use of dumpsters will be strictly enforced in the county. It is a misdemeanor for a person to dump any refuse other than household garbage into a dumpster; to set fire to the contents of a dumpster; to indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of a dumpster; or to vandalize any dumpster. Any person convicted of violating this article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Mo. of 11-12-79)
Sec. 12-67. - Restrictions on transportation and processing of waste products. 
(a)	No person shall bring in, transport or move into this county any refuse, sewerage, sludge, products of any waste treatment plant of any county, state or municipality, or any type of waste matter or fertilizer, or any other similar material across the county boundary or into the county for the purpose of dumping such products, placing such products or of bringing any of such products into the county for the purposes of utilizing the same commercially in any way, converting the same into any type of products of any kind, including but not limited to compost or any other similar products, or for the purpose of use of the same in any type of containers, or for use in manufacturing or changing such waste and products in any matter to be stored or sold, or for the purpose of dumping the same or disposing of the same in any matter, or for using the same in any type of commercial operation whatsoever of any kind at any and all places or locations within the county, without the express approval and permission of the board of commissioners who shall thoroughly and exhaustively investigate any project or undertaking of any kind of this nature, or of any other kind which might be similarly in any manner related thereto for the purposes of determining the absolute and total safety of the environment not only in any specific location, but as to the transport of any of such waste, sewerage, or any products which might be the result of a waste treatment plant, or of any other type of product that might be dangerous as to the health and well being of all of the citizens of the county. This prohibition shall apply not only to the location but equally as well as to the transport upon any public roads located in the county. 
(b)	Any violation of this section will be treated as a violation of a county ordinance and subject to a fine of up to and including one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or punishment by a jail sentence of up to six (6) months for each and every infraction of this section, to be prosecuted in the small claims court of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-11-85)
State Law reference— Garbage, trash, waste or refuse not to be transported across state or county boundaries for dumping without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16. 
Secs. 12-68—12-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 99-03, arts. I—III, adopted August 24, 1999, set out provisions for the regulation of solid waste and collection franchising. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included in the Code as §§ 12-91—12-125 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-91. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following ordinances and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, ordinances used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Ordinances used in the present tense include the future. 
Brown goods means furniture (sofas, chairs love seats, etc.) and mattresses and box springs. 
Commercial establishment means any business, industrial establishment, hotel, motel, apartment dwelling, rooming house, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a one (1) or two-family dwelling unit or condominium. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by store, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial waste. 
Condominium means individual ownership unites in a multifamily residential structure with a front and back entrance to each unit on the ground level. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations performed to houses, commercial buildings, pavements and other structures. Such waste includes but is not limited to containers, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material and other nonputrescible waste which has a low potential for groundwater contaminations. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to satellite collection stations, convenience centers, the central transfer station, or any future disposal facilities. Solid waste shall not be allowed to be stored at any location overnight. 
Franchise approved container means the container approved by a franchisee licensed by the county for the disposal of all household waste. The container must be available for purchase at local commercial establishments. 
Franchise area means the unincorporated area of the county. 
Franchise means a person, persons or entity granted a franchise by the county governing authority who, under written agreements for compensation by those receiving services, collects and transports solid waste from commercial establishments and residential dwellings, excluding an individual collecting and transporting waste from his or her own residential dwelling. 
Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation or animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Household waste means solid waste, primarily consisting of garbage, produced by residential units. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act (OCGA § 12-8-62 et seq.). Such waste includes but is not limited to waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food-related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastic and ruins; pulp and paper, rubber and miscellaneous plastic products, stone, glass, clay and concrete products, textiles; transportation equipment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste, including sanitary waste in septic tanks, derived from residential dwellings, hotels and motels, campgrounds, picnic grounds and recreation areas. This term includes commercial solid waste, but does not include construction/demolition waste and solid waste from mining, agricultural, silvicultural or industrial processes or operations. 
Open dump means an accumulation of solid waste from one (1) or more sources left to decompose, burn or create a threat to health or the environment. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, renting, occupying, possessing or managing any premises in the county. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, public or private entity in Georgia or any other state. Public entity includes but is not limited to the federal government and its agencies or institutions, the State of Georgia and its agencies or institutions, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, and includes any officer, department or governing body of any such public entity. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible waste include but are not limited to kitchen waste, animal manure, official hatchery and poultry processing plant waste, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing material from solid waste for future use. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have a known use or recycling potential, and can be feasibly used, re-used or recycled, and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, re-use or recycling whether or not subsequent separation and processing is required. 
Recycling means any process by which material which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means garbage; rubbish or commercial solid waste. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one (1) family. 
Rubbish means discarded wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, three branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass, crockery, dunnage and/or singular materials. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material, including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. § 1342; source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Special waste means: (1) solid waste containing free liquids; (2) solid waste containing sludge, as defined in 40 CFR § 241/101 as amended; (3) off-specification, outdated or discarded chemical products; (4) petroleum products and petroleum contaminated soil; and (5) solid waste generated by an industrial process other than cardboard or other inert substances or materials. 
Transfer station means the central transfer station owned by Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Waste stream means the total flow of solid waste from residential units, commercial establishments, condominiums, apartments, institutions and the like to its ultimate disposal site or facility. 
White goods means stoves, refrigerators, microwaves, water heaters, etc. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operation. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. I, § 1, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-92. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall throw, litter, dump, or deposit (or cause or permit to be deposited) any waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)	In or on any public highway, road, street, alley or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)	In or on any fresh-water lake, river, canal or stream: and
(3)	On any private property without the express permission of the owner.
(b)	No owner or occupant shall allow the accumulation on his or her residential unit or commercial establishment of solid waste where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or their citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul or obnoxious odors which continue either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)	The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry or similar facility shall be responsible for the disposal of all solid waste accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution or similar facility to the transfer station, or with a county-approved franchisee. No person shall allow solid waste, as defined herein to remain on his premises more than seven (7) days. Each day the solid waste remains on the premises after the seven (7) day requirement may constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(d)	No person may store more than ten (10) scrap tires anywhere in this county, except as permitted by O.C.G.A § 12-8-40.1(g). Any storage of more than ten (10) scrap tires shall be by those entities possessing a permit to do so and a business license. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. I, § 2, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-93. - Exemptions. 
Provisions of this article shall not apply to any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity not collecting and disposing of municipal solid waste, commercial solid waste, construction waste or industrial waste for a fee but who are holders of valid solid waste handling permits from the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division 391-3-4.02 and 391-3-4.06 for disposal or on-site burial. Such disposal shall be governed by state environmental protection regulations and by requirements of the current county development regulations. Provisions of this article shall not apply to any individual disposing of solid waste originating from his or her own residence onto land or facilities owned by him or her when disposal of such wastes not thereby adversely affect the public health. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. I, § 3, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-94. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced in the same manner as other article of the county, and violations shall be a misdemeanor for which the violator may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for a term of six (6) months either or both in the discretion of the courts. Each offense shall be considered separately for purposes of this article. Continuing offenses may, in the discretion of the courts, constitute a separate offense for each day that offense continues. 
In its discretion, the court may also order the violator to remove or render harmless any waste thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped in violation of this article, repair or restore property damaged by or pay damages resulting from such dumping or perform public service related to the removal of illegally dumped waste or to the restoration of an area polluted by such waste, including but not limited to directing the violator to pick up and remove litter from any public street, highway or right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile. In its sound discretion, the court may also order that the names of violators of this article be published in the legal organ, and assess the cost of such publication in addition to any other fine imposed pursuant to this article. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of this state and county are authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of said conveyance has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. I, § 4, 8-24-99)
Secs. 12-95—12-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISES 

Sec. 12-101. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall engage in solid waste handling except in such a manner as to conform to and comply with this article and all applicable state and federal legislation, rules, regulations and orders. 
(b)	No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall collect and/or dispose of municipal solid waste for a fee without obtaining a franchise from the governing authority. 
(c)	No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his properly as defined by the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, EPD. 
(1)	A person shall be presumed to have violated this provision if, upon written notification by the enforcement officer that litter or solid waste has been dumped on the person's property, not otherwise subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-51—16-7-54, that person fails to provide the endorsement officer or his/her designee within fifteen (15) days of notification with written assurance that the accumulation of litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within thirty (30) days from the original date of notification. 
(2)	No person who first informs the enforcement officer in writing that illegal dumping has occurred on a particular parcel of that person's property shall be deemed to have violated this provision if such person provides written assurance that all accumulated litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within forty-five (45) days of the date of such written notification and subsequently provides proof of such disposal. 
(d)	No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impair the air quality; impair the quality of the ground or surface waters; impair the quality of the environment; or likely create other hazards to the public health, safety, or well-being as may be determined by the solid waste management director or his/her designee. 
(e)	Provisions of this article apply to all persons presently engaged in solid waste handling as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. II, § 1, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-102. - Franchises. 
(a)	Copies of this article shall be available for public inspection in the offices of the county clerk, and at other locations as may be designated by the clerk. 
(b)	Nonexclusive franchises for residential or commercial collection and disposal shall be granted upon application to the county administrator or his designee, provided franchises meet at least the minimum requirements set out in section 12-103. 
(c)	The board of commissioners reserves the discretionary authority to revoke or rescind any such franchise in the interest of the health, safety, welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. II, § 2, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-103. - Requirements for franchises. 
All franchises must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	Permit. Prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the county, a franchise must have obtained a solid waste handling permit from the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or any successor agency authorized to issue permits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. 
(2)	Insurance. At the time of submission of a signed franchise agreement and prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the county, and annually thereafter, each franchise shall provide to the county administrator, proof of insurance as follows: 
a.	At least the minimum statutory workers' compensation insurances required by Georgia law. 
b.	Comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
c.	Vehicle liability:
1.	Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
2.	Comprehensive covering all owned, non-owned and hired vehicles.
3.	All insurance contracts must specify vehicles for "solid waste collection."
d.	All comprehensive general liability and vehicle liability shall show the board of commissioners as an additional insured and shall provide for thirty (30) days notice of cancellation to the board. 
(3)	Indemnification. The franchise shall, at its sole cost and expense full indemnify, defend and hold harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents, against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments from third parties for damages which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortious conduct arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, whether or not the action or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article. 
(4)	Vehicles. 
a.	All vehicles and containers used for collection operations shall comply with the requirements of Rule 391-3-4-.06 of Ordinance 391-3-4 (Solid Waste Management) of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, and must be compactor-type trucks, covered or enclosed vehicles. All vehicles must be constructed to be substantially leakproof, constructed of durable metal, easily cleanable and designed to prevent litter from escaping during movement of the vehicle. 
b.	Vehicles and containers shall meet all requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation for highway safety and local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets which must be traveled for pickup. All vehicles shall be subject to unannounced inspection by county officials for compliance with environmental and highway safety standards. 
c.	Franchisees shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. Nothing in this article shall prohibit franchisees from sharing back-up vehicles with other franchisees provided that such sharing is adequately covered by insurance. 
(5)	[Franchisee records.] The franchisee shall maintain at its place of business books and records showing the names and addresses of all owners and tenants with whom the franchise contracted for solid waste handling services, including the street address for the property served. The franchisee shall submit upon reasonable request of the county to a customer audit. 
The above information shall be compiled for state reporting and compliance purposes by the county. 
(6)	Disposal assurance. As a condition of the franchise and/or franchise renewal, all applicants shall dispose of solid waste only at the transfer station. 
(7)	Franchise fee. The franchisee shall pay an annual fee of $500.00 to the county for any franchise granted pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. II, § 3, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-104. - Collection services. 
All franchisees granted a franchise for solid waste collection and removal for any area(s) shall provide a minimum of the following services. 
(1)	The franchisees shall provide at a minimum weekly collection of waste packaged in a sanitary manner. Each franchisee shall set uniform fees for collection; and charges for residential collection and removal services shall be charged to the owners of the real property served, except that by requesting services, any tenant may become jointly bound to pay same. Franchisee may not charge one (1) area of the county a different rate than another. 
(2)	Collection and removal services for disabled persons and senior citizens sixty-five (65) years old and older as defined in section 12-105 shall be made and billed as directed in that section. 
(3)	The county assumes no responsibility to franchisee for the failure of any customer to keep current solid waste collection payments. Franchisees shall cooperate fully in any legal action taken by the county for failure of any owner or resident to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(4)	For all customers, the franchisee shall provide recycling services. The franchisee shall establish its own collection schedule, provided, however, the franchisee must provide weekly collection at a minimum. 
a.	No additional fee, over the amount charged for curbside collection of waste, shall be charged by the franchisee for regular collections of recovered materials. 
b.	Franchisees, at their option, may credit customers' accounts for collection of waste, shall be charged by the franchisee for regular collections of recovered materials. 
c.	In lieu thereof, franchisee may establish recycling centers or designated areas.
(5)	At the time that recovered materials are placed in recycling containers for regular collection, they shall become the property of the franchisee collecting waste for that address. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any individual, organization or other entity from donating, selling or otherwise disposing of recovered material, if such disposal does not violate any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance. 
(6)	Service shall be offered by each franchisee to all unincorporated residents and the city of Lone Oak; in areas where residents are not accessible due to the condition of the road, franchisees must provide pick-up at the nearest accessible location. 
(7)	Franchisees shall provide at a minimum monthly collection of white and brown goods in a sanitary manner, at no additional fee to residential customers. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. II, § 4, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-105. - Elderly and disabled. 
(a)	Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit the franchisee from offering discounts to senior citizens or the disabled. 
(b)	Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential dwelling unit as described above and who is disabled to the extent that he or she is incapable of moving his or her refuse shall obtain a physician's certificate as to such disability. Such disabled persons who have no other able-bodied individuals residing with them shall not be required to place the refuse at the curbside. This subsection shall not apply unless all of the adult persons in a residential unit are disabled and the disabled person produces a physician's certificate. Certificates must be provided to the franchisee with a copy to the county administrator. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed ninety (90) days. Franchisees may make reasonable rules for noncurbside collection for elderly and disabled persons. 
(c)	Franchisees shall provide recycling services to disabled and elderly persons to the same extent such services may be provided under section 12-104. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. II, § 5, 8-24-99)
Secs. 12-106—12-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS RELATING TO INDIVIDUALS, FRANCHISEES AND OTHERS 

Sec. 12-121. - Containers. 
All containers used by any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity for the storage or collection of garbage, debris or trash must comply with all county regulations. All garbage, debris or trash not placed in containers shall be kept free of rodents and insects. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. III, § 1, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-122. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)	Domestic household garbage and all other garbage shall be placed in franchisee-approved containers. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to place automobile parts, firm implements, construction/remodeling debris, or parts thereof, dead animal carcasses or parts, trees or limbs, industrial, manufacturing or processing waste or any other solid waste that is not household garbage in or around solid waste handling or disposal facilities. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to scavenge, or remove the contents of solid waste containers or disposal facilities. 
(d)	If shall be unlawful to set afire the contents of solid waste containers or disposal facilities or to place burning or smoldering materials in solid waste containers or disposal facilities. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. III, § 2, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-123. - Private landfills and dumps prohibited. 
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who receives solid waste from another for disposal upon property located in Meriwether County that it owns or operates shall be guilty of a violation of this article, without obtaining a proper permit from the Environmental Protection Division. 
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity that provides solid waste to another for disposal upon property located in Meriwether County that the other owns or controls or who disposes of said waste onto the property of another without the consent of the owner of the property shall be guilty of a violation of this article, without obtaining a proper permit from the Environmental Protection Division. 
For purposes of this section, "owner" shall mean the actual holder of legal title of property located in Meriwether County. 
These provisions shall apply whether the disposal is for payment or is gratis. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. III, § 3, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-124. - Open burning. 
Open burning is prohibited at all disposal sites and solid waste handling facilities. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. III, § 4, 8-24-99)
Sec. 12-125. - Permission required for haulers outside of county. 
No person, firm, corporation or employee shall transport garbage from some other Georgia county or from any other state for the purpose of dumping same at the convenience centers or transfer station without first receiving written permission from the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, art. III, § 5, 8-24-99)
Chapter 13 - TAXATION, LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; signs, Ch. 10; zoning, App. A.
State Law reference— Power of taxation, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1—13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—An ordinance adopted November 14, 1994 was treated as superceding §§ 13-26—13-41. Formerly, such sections pertained to business license taxes and derived from §§ II, IV of an ordinance adopted 10-14-87(3), §§ 1—4 of an ordinance adopted 2-15-89 and §§ 3, 3A of an ordinance adopted 12-9-87.
State Law reference— County's authority to levy, assess and collect business and occupational license taxes and license fees; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-22; levy of license, occupation or professional tax by counties and municipalities only at place of principal office, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5.

Sec. 13-26. - Required. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the county building and zoning administrator or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of such county, upon request. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-36)
Sec. 13-27. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)	Wherever the term "Meriwether County" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "Meriwether County, Georgia"; wherever the term "county" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean "Meriwether County, Georgia". 
(b)	As used in this article, the terms:
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
(1)	Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred;
(2)	Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness;
(3)	Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services;
(4)	Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and
(5)	Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income.
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)	Sales, use or excise tax;
(2)	Sales returns, allowances and discounts;
(3)	Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2); 
(4)	Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and
(5)	Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaries practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purpose. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize fifty (50) percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-37)
Sec. 13-28. - Administrative fee structure. 
(a)	For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, a nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be required on all business and occupational tax accounts that were not registered in the county in prior years. Business and occupational tax accounts registered in the year 1995 are specifically excluded from the payment of this fee. 
(b)	If an application was required to have gained a license pursuant to this article prior to January 15, he shall pay an administrative fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for application made after the January 15 deadline. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-38; Ord. No. 95-02, § 1, 2-13-95)
Sec. 13-29. - Levied; restrictions. 
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)	The number of employees of the business or practitioner.
(2)	Reserved.
(b)	Occupation tax schedule.
Number of employees—The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the county board of commission: 

 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-39)
Sec. 13-30. - Business with no location in state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the businesses' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-40)
Sec. 13-31. - Business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county building and zoning office and that line of business being noted by the county building and zoning office upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-41)
Sec. 13-32. - Multiple number of businesses. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-42)
Sec. 13-33. - Practitioners exclusively employed by a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-44)
Sec. 13-34. - Purpose of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-45)
Sec. 13-35. - When tax due and payable; penalty. 
(a)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 15th of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the county in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a flat fee penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the county building and zoning administrator and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the county judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, either or both in the discretion of the county building and zoning administrator. 
(b)	In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-46)
Sec. 13-36. - Exemption for charitable business. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless fifty (50) percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-48)
Sec. 13-37. - State registration; displayed. 
(a)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-49)
Sec. 13-38. - Qualifications of business. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-50)
Sec. 13-39. - Failure to register business. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-51)
Sec. 13-40. - When registration due and payable; penalty. 
(a)	Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained, unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before January 15 of each year, and on January 15 of each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 13-41. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applies. 
(b)	The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the county building and zoning administrator, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-52)
Sec. 13-41. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days, either or both, in the discretion of the magistrate judge. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-53)
Sec. 13-42. - Building and zoning administrator; powers. 
The county building and zoning office and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 (this law) and succeeding years. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-54)
Sec. 13-43. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Chapter 3 of Title 46.
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq.
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-55)
Sec. 13-44. - Exempted by laws. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United State. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-56)
Sec. 13-45. - Occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the county, at the office of the treasurer, on January 1 of each year and delinquent if not paid on or before January 15 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-59)
Sec. 13-46. - Registration and tax of multiple businesses. 
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) place or where the business includes more than one (1) line, such business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-61)
Sec. 13-47. - Amendment. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 19-67)
Secs. 13-48—13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-61. - Mobile ice cream dealers. 
The applicant for a license to deal in ice cream products (retail) from motor-driven vehicles shall obtain a health certificate from the county department of health dated within thirty (30) days of such application certifying to his good health. 
(Ord. of 12-9-87, § 3)
Sec. 13-62. - Dance halls. 
All dance hall applications are to be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-9-87, § 3)
Sec. 13-63. - Food service and food preparation businesses. 
Meriwether County Board of Commissioners does hereby adopt Chapter 290-5-14 of the Rules of the Public Health Division of the Georgia Department of Public Health, as said chapter may be amended from time to time, with such amendments incorporated herein, as adopted. 
(Res. of 10-26-10)
Secs. 13-64—13-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BILLIARD ROOMS AND COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); operators of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.

Sec. 13-76. - Short title. 
This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Billiard Room and Coin-Operated Amusement Devices Ordinance of the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County." 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § A, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards or pool and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
Coin-operated amusement device means any amusement device, or machine, or video game operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged in any manner. A coin-operated amusement device is also any machine, apparatus, or contrivance which is used or may be used as a game with skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by the machine or by human skill. The term does not include vending machines that do not have incorporated any game or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical device. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § B, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-78. - Punishments for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division, in addition to the revocation or suspension of such license as above-mentioned, may upon conviction be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § G, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-79. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of operating a billiard room or coin-operated amusement device without first having obtained the proper license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § C, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-80. - License application. 
(a)	No license to operate a billiard room shall be issued to any person who is not twenty-one (21) years of age and a citizen of the United States or who has been convicted of a felony. 
(b)	Every application for a license shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the applicant sworn before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, stating that the applicant is a citizen of the United States; that he has not been convicted of a felony; that he will not permit vagrants or persons under the influence of intoxicating liquors to enter or play in his place; that the applicant will have personal charge and management for the business; that he will not permit gambling nor permit the billiard tables to be used in any manner other than as provided by law. 
(c)	The application for a license shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the board of commissioners on a form to be provided and approved by the board and shall specify: 
(1)	The name, age and address of the applicant.
(2)	The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices, or pool or billiard tables are to be operated together with the character of the business as carried on at such place and the business hours of such premises. 
(3)	The number, trade name and general description of the device or devices to be licensed and the type of pool table or tables with the name of the manufacturer and their number, or other identifying data. 
(4)	Substitutions which may be made within the number licensed upon a written showing of the change in applicant's inventory of devices. 
(5)	The name and addresses of all employees who may have control of the operation of the devices or pool tables other than the applicant; such list shall be kept current and posted in plain view. 
(6)	The proper number of devices, billiard or pool tables that shall accompany each application; this inventory shall be displayed with any license issued. 
(d)	The application for a license hereunder shall be referred to the county clerk who shall make or cause to be made such an investigation as he deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-81. - Bond. 
There shall also be filed with the application for a license under this division a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) payable to the state and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all provisions of this division, signed by the applicant as either principal and either a surety company or two (2) individuals as securities, which bond shall be approved by the board of commissioners and filed in that office. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D(2)(a), 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-82. - Affidavit. 
There shall also be filed with the application for a license required by this division an affidavit by the owner of the property where the billiard room or coin-operated amusement devices will be operated. This affidavit shall contain a statement, under oath, by the record owner of the property that he is the record owner and that he is aware that the premises he owns will be used as a billiard room or as a place to operate coin-operated amusement devices. If such premises are leased by the applicant, a copy of the signed lease must accompany that application. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D(3), 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-83. - Inspection of premises; investigation. 
(a)	The sheriff or deputy sheriff shall inspect or cause to be inspected any premises that is licensed for the operation of such coin-operated amusement devices or billiard or pool tables and, by the application, is authorized to investigate the number of devices contained on the premises, the hours of operation and any and all matters related to public and fire safety. 
(b)	Prior to the licensing, the sheriff shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain if the applicant is of good, moral character and shall investigate the proposed location of such licensed devices and billiard or pool tables, and upon completion of such investigation shall either recommend approval or disapproval of such application and submit such investigation and his recommendation to the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § F(1), 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-84. - Standards for issuance. 
(a)	The county clerk shall issue a license under this division when, from consideration of the application and such other information as may be otherwise available, including, but not limited to, the sheriff's investigation, he finds that: 
(1)	The coin-operated amusement devices or billiard tables will not be maintained or operated as herein defined in or within three hundred (300) feet of any church building, school building or educational building. 
(2)	The operation of the coin-operated devices or pool or billiard tables will not operate as to constitute a public nuisance, in that the licensee or applicant will be responsible for maintaining order on the licensed premises at all times. It shall also be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the licensed premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health and safety to the persons therein. 
(3)	The applicant will not operate the premises of such amusement center or game room so as to permit the giving of prizes, awards or money in connection with the use of the operation of such devices or billiard or pool tables. 
(4)	The applicant will have one (1) supervisor who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older that shall be present on the premises during the time that such devices or billiard or pool tables licensed hereunder are available to the public for their use, play or exhibit. It shall be the responsibility of the license holder to see that such machines are disconnected from the power source during the time for which their use is prohibited above. 
(b)	The board of commissioners may, in its discretion, refuse to issue a license for any music machine whenever it is made to appear that such a machine is detrimental to peace, health, morals, welfare or good order of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-14-87(3), § III; Ord. No. 90-0221, § E, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-85. - Issuance. 
When the application for a license required by this division and the required bond have been filed and approved, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall issue a license for the current year or unexpired portion thereof upon the payment of the license fee provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D(3)(a), 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-86. - Appeal from denial. 
If the application for a license required by this division is disapproved, for whatever reason, by the clerk, the applicant may appeal that decision to the board of commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal with that office within ten (10) days from the receipt of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D(3)(a), 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-87. - Fee. 
The fee for a license required by this division shall be in an amount determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the clerk of the commissioner's office. The fee paid by an applicant shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D(3)(b), 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-88. - Duration. 
The license issued under this division shall be valid for the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-89. - Display. 
Each license issued under this division shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-90. - Assignment, transfer. 
A license issued under this division shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall only apply to the premises for which such license is issued for such devices or billiard or pool tables. The same may not be moved or operated in any location other than that shown as the address of the premises in the license application. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § D, 2-21-90)
Sec. 13-91. - Revocation, suspension. 
The board of commissioners shall revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division, if the licensee shall directly or indirectly permit any operation contrary to the provisions of this division or any violation of this division or of the laws of the state or of the United States of America. Upon failure to comply with any or all of the terms of this division in the securing of a license or in the failure to operate as provided herein, it shall constitute grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license granted. If after the issuance of a license, the sheriff or his lawful deputy determines that the license should be suspended or revoked, he shall give written notice to the licensee specifying the reasons for such suspension or revocation. Such notice shall state that licensee has ten (10) days in which to surrender his license or appeal the decision of the sheriff to the board of commissioners. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence relevant thereto in opposition to such revocation or suspension; and the decision of the board of commissioners shall be based upon evidence submitted at such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 90-0221, § F(1), 2-21-90)
Secs. 13-92—13-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchants Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.

Sec. 13-101. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or upon any private residence, apartment, commercial establishment, or premises in the county for the purpose of soliciting from the occupants thereof, or to canvass for orders or goods, wares, merchandise or services of any character or description, or for the purpose of offering to give or to furnish, or to give or furnish any goods, wares, merchandise or services to any such occupants to induce or invite such orders, without having first applied for and received from the sheriff a permit to do so. 
(Ord. of 12-9-87, § 1)
Sec. 13-102. - Application. 
(a)	Any person desiring to secure a permit under this division shall apply therefor in writing over his signature to the sheriff on forms provided by the county, and such application shall state the: 
(1)	Name and address of applicant.
(2)	Name and address of the person by whom employed.
(3)	Length of service of such applicant of such employer.
(4)	Place of residence and the nature of employment of an applicant during the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(5)	Nature or character of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant. 
(6)	Personal description of the applicant and any vehicle used by the applicant or agents of the applicant. 
(b)	Such application shall be accompanied by such credentials and other evidence of the good moral character and identity of the applicant as may be reasonably required by the sheriff. 
(Ord. of 12-9-87, § 2)
Sec. 13-103. - Issuance, duration. 
If the sheriff shall determine after reasonable investigation that the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial or professional enterprise, he shall issue the permit applied for, which permit shall expire on the thirtieth day following such issuance. This permit may be renewed after that thirty-day period with the approval of the sheriff. 
(Ord. of 12-9-87, § 3)
Secs. 13-104—13-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PAWNBROKERS[5] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.

ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX ON DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.

Sec. 13-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Depository financial institutions means state and national banks, state buildings and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Res. of 9-14-83, § 1)
Sec. 13-117. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of twenty-five hundredths (0.25) percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. 
(Res. of 9-14-83, § 1)
Sec. 13-118. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Res. of 9-14-83, § 2)
Sec. 13-119. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the county tax commissioner on March first of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The county tax commissioner shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Res. of 9-14-83, § 3)
Sec. 13-120. - Due date. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than thirty (30) days after filing of the return prescribed by section 13-119 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 9-14-83, § 4)
Sec. 13-121. - Administrative provisions. 
The county clerk is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the county and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the county. 
(Res. of 9-14-83, § 5)
Secs. 13-122—13-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1(c); county tax on other than life insurance companies based on gross direct premiums, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2.

Sec. 13-141. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of this county, in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. of 1-1-84, § 1)
Sec. 13-142. - Administrative provisions. 
The county clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the insurance commissioner within ten (10) days of the enactment of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Res. of 1-1-84, § 2)
ARTICLE VI. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX 

Sec. 13-143. - Applicability. 
This article VI of chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia, and the imposition of the Meriwether County hotel/motel tax shall be levied throughout the county, including the areas within the various municipalities within the boundaries of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-27-05)
Sec. 13-144. - Tax. 
The amount of the tax imposed pursuant to this article shall be at a rate of five (5) percent pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 9-27-05)
Sec. 13-145. - Expenditure of amounts collected. 
Any amounts collected pursuant to this article shall be expended in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 9-27-05(2))
ARTICLE VII. - IMPOSING A 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE 

Sec. 13-146. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of 75 cents. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 7-26-11)
Sec. 13-147. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 7-26-11)
Sec. 13-148. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this article and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten (10) days of enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 7-26-11)
Sec. 13-149. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 (f). 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 7-26-11)
Chapter 13.5 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13.5-1. - [Certain uses of rights-of-way prohibited.] 
(a)	Intent. The county board of commissioners (hereby referred to as the "board") is charged with the protection and maintenance of county roads and rights-of-way and it expends significant sums of public funds from the taxpayers of the county in an effort to do so. The board does hereby find and declare that the use of said rights-of-way as lanes of travel and/or as recreational areas for motorized vehicles damages, accelerates and exacerbates the erosion of the rights-of-way. Thus the board hereby declares that the welfare of the citizens of the county requires it to protect county roads and rights-of-way from damage as set forth herein. 
(b)	Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meaning given herein: 
County road means any county owned or maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour, or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
County right(s)-of-way means the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, back slope, facility or any appurtenance of any county road as defined herein; provided, however, that, for purposes of this section only, "county right(s)-of-way" shall not include the area within twenty (20) feet on either side of the mailbox of any residence or commercial establishment. 
Motorized vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on or off-road, and that devices powered from any source other than muscle or wind, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(c)	Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, through the non-emergency operation and use of a motorized vehicle upon a county right-of-way, or through any other means, to: 
(1)	Damage a county right-of-way by rutting, gouging, undercutting, digging up, displacing earth from, excavating, denuding and/or defoliating the right-of-way (with the exception of routine lawn care and mowing by homeowners/landowners and maintenance by public utilities such as mowing and herbicide application). 
(2)	Cause dirt, mud or other debris to accumulate upon a county road or county right-of-way to such an extent that it becomes a nuisance or hazard to persons traveling upon said roads or right-of-way, or that it creates an unsightly condition upon the county road or county right-of-way. 
(3)	Cause any other type of public nuisance on county roads or county rights-of-way within unincorporated Meriwether County. 
(4)	Allow dirt, mud, or other debris resulting from that person's use of the county right-of-way to accumulate in ditches and drainage areas of said right-of-way to such an extent that the usual flow of water or runoff is stopped, disturbed, altered, impeded, changed, or interrupted. 
Not withstanding any other provision of this section, it shall not be unlawful for any person to use a county right-of-way in any otherwise lawful manner that does not cause damage to the right-of-way or creates a public nuisance as provided herein. 
(d)	Penalty for violation. The minimum punishment for violation of any provision of this section shall be no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and the maximum punishment for violation of any provision of this section shall not exceed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days, or both; provided, however, that the trial court may suspend the sentence upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, for performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to the county for the cost of repair of the damaged right-of-way, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one (1) year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(e)	Limitation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person, or Meriwether County, Georgia, to damages or other relief on account of injuries to person or property arising out of a violation of this section and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefore. 
(Ord. No. 02-01, §§ I—V, 3-13-02)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-01, §§ I—V, adopted March 13, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code, hence; inclusion as § 13.5-1 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 13.5-2—13.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR VEHICLE RACEWAYS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 98-02, adopted June 8, 1998, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. VI, §§ 2-200—2-206. For purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included herein as Art. II, §§ 13.5-21—13.5-27 at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table.

Sec. 13.5-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to develop an orderly system of rules governing the operation of motor vehicle raceways within the county, and to protect the safety, health and general welfare of the citizens by preventing the creation of excessive noise and pollution. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 6-8-98)
Sec. 13.5-22. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Motor vehicle refers to a motor vehicle which participates at motor vehicle raceways. 
Motor vehicle raceways means any premises used for the purpose of the operation of any motorized vehicles in competition with each other or in competition determined by elapsed time. 
Noise disturbance means any sound that annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities. 
Warm-up means the operation of a motor vehicle during practice, noncompetitive, run on the raceway track. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 6-8-98)
Sec. 13.5-23. - Schedule of races. 
Prior to the commencement of the racing season, the operator shall file a schedule of racing days with the county clerk, which schedule shall clearly state the date of racing and each and every proposed alternate rain date. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 6-8-98)
Sec. 13.5-24. - Days and hours of operation. 
(a)	No motor vehicle raceway shall permit any motor vehicle to warm up or race except during the hours of 11:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday or 1:00 p.m. through 7:00 p.m. on Sundays a maximum of two (2) days per week, exclusive of rescheduled events, during the months of April, May, June, July, August and September. 
(b)	In the event of the cancellation of a scheduled event due to weather conditions, the motor vehicle raceway may reschedule the event to the following week upon reasonable notification [of] the county commissioners office. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 6-8-98)
Sec. 13.5-25. - Mufflers required. 
All motor vehicles operating upon the motor vehicle raceway shall be equipped with a muffler as defined in O.C.C.G. 40-8-71. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 6-8-98)
Sec. 13.5-26. - Loudspeakers and public address systems. 
No person, in connection with the operation of a motor vehicle raceway, shall use, operate or permit the operation of a loudspeaker, public address system, mobile sound vehicle or similar device so as to create a noise disturbance in areas of the county zoned for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 6-8-98)
Sec. 13.5-27. - Penalties for offenses. 
No person shall operate or allow the operation of a motor vehicle raceway or operate a motor vehicle at such raceway except in conformity with the requirements of this article. Any person convicted of violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 6-8-98)
Chapter 14 - WATER AND SEWERAGE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; roads and bridges, Ch. 9; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 11; waste products control, § 12-66; zoning, App. A.
State Law reference— Power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAUNDRY DETERGENT CONTROL 

Sec. 14-26. - Declaration of policy. 
It is the public policy of the county to encourage the use of clean phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than five-tenths percent phosphorous by weight. The board of commissioners finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in waste water discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. of 1-17-90, § 1)
Sec. 14-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundry cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)	A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes. 
(2)	The detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment.
(3)	A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner. 
(4)	A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics or health care facilities or in agricultural production. 
(5)	A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning.
(6)	A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the state.
(7)	A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, engineering laboratory. 
(8)	A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for any hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(Ord. of 1-17-90, § 2)
Sec. 14-28. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-17-90, § 4)
Sec. 14-29. - Sale restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than five-tenths percent phosphorus and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. of 1-17-90, § 3)
Sec. 14-30. - Civil enforcement action. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 14-28, the board of commissioners may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-17-90, § 5)
Sec. 14-31. - Civil actions not restricted. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right to any person to any damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Ord. of 1-17-90, § 6)
Secs. 14-32—14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER CONSERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 91-0708, §§ 1—6, adopted July 8, 1991, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as art. III, §§ 14-51—14-56, of this chapter at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 91-0708, § 1, 7-8-91)
Sec. 14-52. - Prohibited residential installations. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the county for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)	Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of two and one-half (2.5) gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one (1.0) gallon of water per flush;
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two (2.0) gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and one-half (2.5) gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. No. 91-0708, § 2, 7-8-91)
Sec. 14-53. - Prohibited commercial installations. 
On or after July 1, 1991, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections 14-52 (1) through (5). 
(Ord. No. 91-0708, § 3, 7-8-91)
Sec. 14-54. - Applicability. 
The requirements of section 14-52 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1991, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. No. 91-0708, § 4, 7-8-91)
Sec. 14-55. - Exemptions. 
(a)	New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 14-52, 14-53 and 14-54 when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; or 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; or 
(3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are:
a.	Specifically designed for use by the handicapped;
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Toilets for juveniles.
(b)	The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building and zoning official for the county. A fee in an amount determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the office of the clerk of the commission shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 91-0708, § 5, 7-8-91)
Sec. 14-56. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)	This article shall be enforced by the office of the building and zoning official of the county. Citations for violations may be issued by the building and zoning official. 
(b)	Any person violating this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 91-0708, § 6, 7-8-91)
Sec. 14-57. - Outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)	Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens;
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(13)	Hydroseeding.
(b)	Enforcement. 
(1)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)	The building inspector shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The county administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-8-10(1), §§ 1, 2)
Secs. 14-58—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 02-04, adopted July 23, 2002, did not specifically amend this Code but was treated as superseding the provisions of article IV at the discretion of the editor. Said ordinance provisions have been included as §§ 14-81—14-99 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table.
Cross reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7.

Sec. 14-81. - Applicability. 
These rules will have application in all except the following cases: 
(1)	Any facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the department of natural resources or its successor; 
(2)	Any public or community sewage treatment system;
(3)	Other shared jurisdiction by Memoranda of Agreement or other agreements.
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-82. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning as indicated beside each listing: 
Absorption field means a configuration of absorption trenches installed in a portion of land and used for the absorption and final treatment of sewage. 
Absorption line means a pipe line of perforated pipe laid in an absorption trench to serve as a conduit for sewage effluent. 
Absorption trench means an excavation in which an absorption line is laid. 
Absorption trench bottom and side soil area means the total interface of bottom and side soil area with undisturbed soils of all absorption trenches in an absorption field and occurring horizontally and downward from the point of distribution into the soil, expressed in square feet. 
Aggregate means washed gravel or washed stone meeting the Georgia Department of Transportation standards for hardness or other materials approved by the department that shall be one-half (½) inch to two (2) inches in diameter. 
Alternative on-site sewage management system means any approved on-site sewage management system which differs in design or operation from the conventional or chamber septic tank system or privy. 
Approved or approval means compliance with applicable specifications or criteria developed or accepted by the department. 
Auxiliary system means a system to serve a portion of a residence, a pool house or other adjunct facility. 
Bedroom means any room that is designed primarily for sleeping purposes, as shown on the building plan. 
Black water means wastewater generated by water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a building drainage system inside the walls of a building, which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage systems and conveys the discharge to the building sewer. 
Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system beyond the building drain which receives the discharge from the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, on-site sewage management system or other disposal. 
Central on-site sewage management system means an on-site sewage management system serving more than one (1) building, business, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
Chamber septic tank system means a septic tank and a chamber system as defined below. 
Chamber system means a system of chambers with each chamber being a molded polyolefin plastic, arch shaped, hollow structure with an exposed bottom area and solid top and louvered sidewall for infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and sidewall soil areas. Chambers may be of different sizes and configurations to obtain desired surface areas. 
Community subsurface treatment system means any system which treats primarily domestic wastewater other than those serving single-family residences or non-domestic sewage systems. 
Conventional system means a traditionally used system that is composed of perforated pipe surrounded by gravel or stone masking for the infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and side soil areas. 
Conventional septic tank system means any septic tank and conventional system as defined above, but does not include alternative or experimental systems. 
County board of health means the county board of health established by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. 31-3-1) or its designee. 
Department means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia or its designee. 
Distribution device means a watertight structure which receives sewage effluent from a septic tank, dosing tank or other sewage retention device and distributes it in equal portions to two (2) or more absorption lines. 
Dosing tank means an approved watertight tank, located after a septic tank or other sewage retention device, to receive and retain sewage effluent, and so equipped as to discharge sewage effluent intermittently to a distribution device, either by pump or by siphon. 
Experimental on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and provisionally approved for such purposes by the department, but which has not been fully proven under field use. 
Failure means an on-site sewage system in such a condition that it constitutes a public hazard by inadequate treatment and/or disposal of sewage. 
Filter means an approved device that removes solids or other materials from the effluent that could cause failure of an on-site sewage management system. 
Floodplain means a generally flat plain or depression susceptible to being flooded from any source, including small and intermittent water courses and coastal areas subject to intermittent tidal action. 
Gray water means wastewater generated by water-using fixtures and appliances, excluding water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals. 
Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease may be skimmed or otherwise removed for proper disposal. 
Individual water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks or other facilities, utilizing groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
Manual for on-site sewage management systems means the technical handbook currently adopted and periodically updated which is used by the department in the implementation of this article and is available for inspection at the appropriate state office in Atlanta or at local health departments. The manual for on-site sewage management systems and its provisions are herein adopted unless inconsistent with other provisions of law or regulation and is hereafter referred to as the "manual" or "manual for on-site sewage management systems". 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land developed for subsequent rental or lease for placement of two (2) or more mobile homes. 
On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system serving one (1) or more buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences, or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Such term shall include, without limitation, conventional and chamber septic tank systems, privies, and experimental and alternative on-site management systems which are designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent that may be approved by the department. 
Percolation coefficient means the ratio of trench bottom area to percolation time; it is expressed as the allowable rate of sewage application in gallons per square foot per day. 
Percolation rate means the time, expressed in minutes per inch, required for water to seep into saturated soil at a constant rate. 
Percolation test means the method used to measure the percolation rate of water into soil as described in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, or association and may extend and be applied to bodies, both political and corporate. 
Physical development means development which includes, but is not limited to site preparation, erection of a structure, road construction, well construction or installation of on-site sewage management systems. 
Privy means a structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human wastes without the aid of water carriage; the term does not include chemical, composting, portable or incinerator toilets. 
Public water supply system means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily, at least sixty (60) days out of the year. 
Septage means a waste that is a fluid mixture of partially treated or untreated sewage solids, liquids and sludge of human or domestic waste, present in or pumped from septic tanks, malfunctioning on-site sewage management systems, grease traps or privies. 
Sewage treatment system is a system that provides primary treatment and disposal, including absorption field components, devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include a conventional or chamber septic tank system. The system shall be designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Sewage means and includes human excreta, all water carried wastes, and liquid household waste from residences or commercial and industrial establishments. 
Sinkhole means a depression in the land surface, generally in a limestone region, which communicates or has the potential to communicate with a subterranean passage developed by solution; typical sinkholes can be broad, closed basin-like features or steep-sided dropouts, or variants thereof. 
Site means the location where the absorption field will be installed to include replacement area. 
Soil classifier means a person who holds at least a Bachelor of Science degree from an accredited college or university with a major in agronomy, soil science, or related field, as approved by the soil classifiers certification advisory committee. Must have completed a minimum of fifteen (15) semester hours or twenty-five (25) quarter hours in approved soil science courses including a course in pedology and have four (4) years or more of full time experience as a soil classifier/soil scientist actively mapping, identifying and classifying soil features, and interpreting the influence of soil features on soil uses. Certification shall be in accordance with guidelines published in the manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
Any person who holds a valid certificate of registration as a geologist issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. Chapter 19 of Title 43, or who holds a valid certificate of registration as an engineer issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. Chapter 15 of Title 43 and is practicing within his or her area of engineering competency may register with the department as a soil classifier. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into five (5) or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites, or other divisions, resulting in any single lot of less than three (3) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or legacy, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided; however; that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of previously platted lots or portions thereof where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform to the standards of these rules. 
(2)	The division of land into parcels, all of which are three (3) acres or more in size with minimum width of one hundred and fifty (150) feet for a distance sufficient to provide an adequate area for the placement of structures and improvements including wells and approved installation of approved on-site sewage management systems. 
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-83. - General provisions. 
(a)	On-site sewage management system required. Where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property, designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide an approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use or frequent the building, residence or other property for two (2) hours or more. Connection shall be made to a public or community sewage treatment system when such system is available within two hundred (200) feet of the property line, or available in a public right-of-way abutting the property. Where a public or community sewage treatment system is to be constructed, or an existing public or community sewer is to be extended to serve a lot, or an approved on-site sewage management system is to be used, the building sewer shall be installed so that it will insure gravity flow at a self-cleaning velocity throughout. If an existing on-site sewage system fails, immediate connection shall be made to a public or community sewerage system if such a system is available. 
(1)	Any facility that produces a waste stream with BOD5 (biochemical oxygen demand) and TSS (total suspended solids) higher than 200 mg/L shall be required to pretreat the waste to reduce the BOD5 and TSS to 200 mg/L or below before disposal through a conventional or chamber septic tank system. 
(b)	On-site sewage management system construction permit required. No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon, where an on-site sewage management system will be utilized, nor install an on-site sewage management system or component thereof without having first applied for and obtained from the county health department a construction permit for the installation. 
(1)	Application for such a construction permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the county board of health. The county board of health shall approve or disapprove such application within twenty (20) days after the receipt of a completed application. The application shall include: 
a.	Name and address of the owner and the applicant, if other than the owner;
b.	Location of property;
c.	Plans and specifications including location and design of the proposed on-site sewage management system including surface and subsurface drainage and piping; 
d.	Nature of the facility to be served;
e.	Location of all water supplies, geothermal systems, or other utilities and trash pits on or off the lot, which will bear upon the location of the on-site sewage management system; 
f.	Number of bedrooms in the dwelling, or the number of persons to be served in other types of establishments, or other sewage flow or water usage data; 
g.	Soil characteristics, including soil types and capabilities, frequency and evaluations of seasonal high groundwater tables, occurrence of rock and other impervious strata; 
h.	Signature of the owner or agent applying for permit; and
i.	Any additional information deemed necessary to determine the suitability of the site.
(2)	The county board of health may waive submission of part of the information required for the application, provided the board deems that such information is available from previously submitted subdivision or mobile home park data, or from other sources. The information must be sufficient to make an adequate appraisal of the acceptability of the proposed lot for the installation of an on-site sewage management system. 
(3)	Repairs, replacement, or additions to existing systems must be permitted and inspected.
(4)	Any person preparing to modify a lot for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit for the installation of an on-site sewage management system shall submit plans showing the type and extent of modifications. No modifications shall be carried out prior to the approval of the plans by the county board of health. Such approval shall be in accordance with the provisions of the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(c)	Requirements for on-site sewage management system construction permit issuance or denial. On-site sewage management system construction permits shall be issued only after a site inspection by the county board of health shows favorable findings relative to absorption rates, soil characteristics, groundwater, rock and any other factors which would affect the acceptability of the lot. No construction permit for an on-site sewage management system shall be issued prior to the approval of the public water supply system, where a public water supply system is to be utilized. Lot suitability and approval is to be determined by the criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
Lots shall be sized according to the regulations of the county board of health. The county board of health may deny or revoke an on-site sewage management system construction permit upon finding the lot unsuitable or for failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-1, 31-5-2, 31-5-3, 31-5-4, 31-5-5 and 31-5-6. On-site sewage management construction permits shall remain valid for not more than twelve (12) months from the date of issue. 
(1)	Issuance of a construction permit for an on-site sewage management system, and subsequent approval of same by representatives of the county board of health shall not be construed as a guarantee that such systems will function satisfactorily for a given period of time; furthermore, said representatives do not, by any action taken in affecting compliance with these rules, assume any liability for damages which are caused, or which may be caused, by the malfunction of such system. 
(2)	On tracts or parcels of land of three acres or more, the conventional or chamber septic tank system may be utilized where the percolation rate does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) minutes per inch. All other conditions must comply with the requirements of the regulations for on-site sewage management systems. 
(d)	Inspections. No person may backfill or use an on-site sewage management system until final inspection has been made by the county board of health to determine compliance with the provisions of the construction permit issued under section 14-83(c) and written approval has been issued by the county board of health. 
(1)	A copy of the final inspection of an on-site sewage management system shall be provided to the owner, builder, developer or agent, whichever is appropriate. 
(2)	Grading, filling, digging trash pits or other landscaping or construction activities on the lot subsequent to final inspection by the county board of health which may adversely affect the onsite sewage management system shall render the approval void. Removal or alteration of system components after final inspection by the county board of health shall render the approval void. 
(e)	Design limits for conventional or chamber septic tank systems. To provide for the maintenance of sanitary conditions through the proper functioning of a conventional or chamber septic tank system for a reasonable period of time, no such system may be installed, constructed, or used, having a septic tank design capacity of less than one thousand (1,000) gallons or greater than ten thousand (10,000) gallons, or where the total length of absorption trenches required would exceed three thousand (3,000) linear feet, or where the total absorption trench bottom area required would exceed nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(f)	Submission of plans, specifications, and soil data. Plans, specifications, soil data and, if required, absorption test data, submitted to the county board of health for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit to install an on-site sewage management system, which will produce a sewage flow in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons per day, shall bear the registration number and signature of a registered professional engineer, certified and registered under the laws of this state. The county board of health may accept plans, specifications, soil data, and absorption test data for facilities with sewage flow of two thousand (2,000) gallons or less per day, when prepared in accordance with these rules, from any person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county board of health that they have sufficient knowledge of on-site sewage management system design. 
(g)	Soil data acceptability for individual lots. Soil evaluations shall be conducted by individuals meeting the requirements established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-84. - Sewers. 
(a)	Size of sewers. Sewers connecting component parts of on-site sewage management systems shall be of sufficient size to serve anticipated flow conditions. 
(b)	Sewers. All solid pipe and fittings used in an on-site sewage management system, beginning at the house, shall be NSF International schedule 40 PVC or equivalent and shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in diameter. Sewers under driveways or similar areas of load or impact shall be of material capable of withstanding anticipated loads or installed so as to provide protection from crushing. 
(c)	Construction. Sewers, other than perforated pipe or drain tiles used in absorption fields, shall be laid with sealed, watertight, root-resistant joints. Such sewers shall be laid on a firm foundation, shall not be subject to settling, and shall be installed on a grade that will insure a self-cleaning velocity. Where on-site sewage management systems are used, and where installation of building drains and building sewers is not covered by duly adopted local plumbing codes, or in the absence of a local plumbing code and/or plumbing inspections, the county board of health may verify the adequacy and acceptability of all or any portion of the building sewer or the building drain. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-85. - Septic tanks. 
(a)	Minimum design and construction. Septic tanks shall provide a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours of retention and shall be designed and constructed to equal or exceed minimum design and construction criteria established by the department as published in the current manual for on-site sewage management systems. After the effective date of these regulations, any person seeking approval of septic tanks to be used in on-site sewage management systems, shall submit detailed plans and specifications for tank manufacture and other information as may be required by the department. Manufacturers and suppliers may be subject to periodic inspection, and approval by the county board of health or the department. Both the inlet and outlet tees shall be ASTM 3034 rated or equivalent. In addition, an approved filter shall be installed on the outlet end of the septic tank in compliance with the manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)	Location. No septic tank shall be installed less than fifty (50) feet from existing or proposed wells/springs, sink holes, or suction water lines, and tanks shall be located downgrade from wells or springs if physically possible; less than twenty-five (25) feet from lakes, ponds, streams, water courses, and other impoundments; less than ten (10) feet from pressure water supply lines, or less than ten (10) feet from a property line. No septic tank shall be installed less than fifteen (15) feet from a drainage ditch or embankment. Septic tanks shall be installed so as to provide ready access for necessary maintenance. Normally, the distance a septic tank should be located from a building foundation is at least ten (10) feet but, lesser distances may be allowed by the county board of health. The county board of health, after site inspection, may require greater separation distances than cited herein due to unusual conditions of topography, or other site configuration; subsurface soil characteristics and/or groundwater interference. 
(c)	Capacity. The liquid capacity of septic tanks for single family dwellings shall be one thousand (1,000) gallons for one (1), two (2), three (3) or four (4) bedrooms, and two hundred fifty (250) additional gallons for each bedroom over four (4). Septic tank capacity shall be increased by fifty (50) percent where garbage grinders are to be used. Auxiliary systems serving single-family residences or other facilities shall be based on the maximum daily flow. 
(d)	Compartmented tanks. Two (2) compartment tanks shall be required. The first compartment shall be at least two-thirds (2/3) the liquid capacity of the tank. 
(e)	Tanks in series. The county board of health may approve the installation of two (2) septic tanks placed in series provided that the capacity of the first tank is at least one thousand (1,000) gallons and at least equal to the capacity of the second tank. When tanks in series are used, they shall be connected with a sealed sewer line, and all sewage shall initially enter the first tank. 
(f)	Foundation and backfill. Septic tanks will be constructed or installed level, on a foundation that will prevent settling; backfill shall be placed so that a stable fill results and undue strain on the tank is avoided. Earth backfill shall be free of voids, large stones, stumps, broken masonry, or other such materials. A minimum earth cover of six (6) inches over the tank is recommended. With proper documentation the county board of health may approve less cover. All openings and manholes shall be constructed so as to prevent the entrance of surface water. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-86. - Distribution devices and dosing tanks. 
(a)	Minimum design and construction of distribution devices. Distribution devices shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)	Minimum design and construction of dosing tanks. Where required, dosing tanks shall be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance with the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-87. - Absorption fields. 
(a)	Absorption area. The absorption area shall be based upon the anticipated volume of treated sewage and upon the characteristics of the soil in which absorption fields are to be located as specified in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. Soil characteristics and other related data, including percolation tests, may be required by the county board of health. Absorption areas shall be classified as follows: Aggregate, non-aggregate and other. 
(b)	Prior approved systems. Any "prior approved system" as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 31-2-7(a)(4) is approved for installation according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(c)	Location No absorption field will be constructed less than one hundred (100) feet from existing or proposed wells, springs or sinkholes; less than ten (10) feet from water supply lines and buildings with basements and less than five (5) feet from buildings without basements, other structures, drives and property lines; less than fifteen (15) feet from an embankment, drainage ditch or trash pits; not less than fifty (50) feet from the normal water level of any impoundment, tributary, stream, or other body of water, including ponded areas of wetlands. If the water supply line crosses or comes within ten (10) feet of the absorption field, the water supply line shall be installed at least twelve (12) inches above the top of the aggregate layer of the absorption line, non-aggregate absorption line or other absorption line, and shall be encased in a single length of larger diameter water pipe. No absorption field shall be installed in areas where groundwater, soil characteristics or adverse geological formation may interfere with the absorption or effective treatment of sewage effluent. 
(d)	Minimum design and construction for absorption fields. Absorption lines and absorption trenches shall be designed and installed in accordance with the minimum design and installation criteria established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-88. - Privies. 
Minimum design and construction. Privies shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-89. - Alternative on-site sewage management systems. 
(a)	"Alternative on-site sewage management system" means any approved on-site sewage management system which differs in design or operation from the conventional or chamber septic tank or privy. 
(b)	Design and construction. Alternative on-site sewage management systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. The department shall maintain a list of approved alternative on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-90. - Experimental on-site sewage management systems. 
"Experimental on-site sewage management system" means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and provisionally accepted for such purposes by the department's technical review committee. Any limitations to the use of experimental systems shall be decided by the department's technical review committee. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-91. - Septage removal and disposal. 
(a)	Permit required. No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of septic tanks, pit privies, or other on-site sewage management or experimental systems without having first applied for and obtained from either the department or a county board of health a septage removal permit, renewed annually, for such activities. The application for such septage removal permit shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the department or the county board of health at least ten (10) days prior to engaging in such activities. The application shall include but not be limited to: The business name and address, name and address of the applicant, the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported and given final disposal, and such other documentation as may be required by the county board of health, including evidence that septage removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. 
(1)	Suspension and revocation. The permit shall be subject to suspension and revocation for failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations or the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)	Pumping and disposal methods. Approved methods of pumping and disposal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be: Discharge to a public or community sewage treatment system for treatment in a wastewater treatment plant, treatment at separate septage handling facilities, or direct land application. Pumping and disposal shall be in accordance with the requirements of the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(c)	Vehicle identification. The name and address of the person or firm engaging in the removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems and the permit number shall be lettered on both sides of each vehicle used for septage removal purposes. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two (2) inches in height and shall be readily visible. 
(d)	Vehicle maintenance. Every vehicle used for removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be equipped with a watertight tank or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained to prevent leakage. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-92. - Grease traps. 
(a)	Grease traps required. Grease traps shall be required for commercial or industrial establishments with on-site sewage management systems where it is determined by the county board of health that the amount of grease introduced into the system is in excess of fifty (50) mg/l. 
(b)	Grease trap design. Plans and specifications for grease traps shall be submitted to the county board of health for approval. The county board of health shall review the grease trap design in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. Effluent from grease traps shall be disposed of in a septic tank and not directly discharged to the absorption field. Grease traps shall be located, installed and constructed so that the temperature of the sewage will be reduced to permit congealing or separation of grease, and easy access for cleaning is provided. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-93. - Sewage flow. 
The design sewage flow of an on-site sewage management system shall be determined from the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. The daily sewage flow may be determined by the department after due consideration of data submitted by the owner or his agent on design criteria. Calculations will be made on the basis of peak flow and not on long-term averages. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-94. - Subdivision and mobile home parks. 
(a)	Pre-development review. It is recommended that developers considering subdivision or mobile home park development, where public or community sewage treatment systems will not be available, seek a predevelopment review by the county board of health prior to developmental improvements. A predevelopment report which indicates disapproval or tentative approval may be obtained by submitting a boundary plat including: 
(1)	A vicinity map;
(2)	A topographic map;
(3)	A preliminary soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)	Proposals and plans required. The following information is required for subdivision and mobile home park proposals: 
(1)	A boundary plat drawn to a reasonable scale which includes:
a.	A vicinity map;
b.	Proposed lots and streets including lot identification, dimensions, building lines and square footage of lots; 
c.	A topographic map depicted in two (2) foot contour intervals. Lesser contour intervals may be approved by the county board of health if the slope is sufficiently steep; 
d.	A soil map and soil descriptions based on a high intensity soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems; 
e.	The location of all present and proposed wells, water systems, water courses, flood plains, sewage systems, structures, rights-of-way, utilities, storm water drainage systems and easements on the property and within one hundred (100) feet outside the perimeter of the property; and 
f.	The name, registration number and seal of the professional surveyor or engineer that prepared the development plan. 
(2)	A completed subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the department.
(3)	A copy of the following documents issued by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources: 
a.	The land disturbance activity permit issued by either the environmental protection division or the local "issuing authority". For the purposes of this section, "issuing authority" means the governing authority of any county or municipality, which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) by the director of the environmental protection division; 
b.	A letter of approval to begin construction of a public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized; and 
c.	For a development, which will result in the disturbance of more than five (5) acres, a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) submitted to the environmental protection division to be covered under NPDES Permit GAR100000 for the discharge of storm water associated with construction activity. 
(c)	Approval required. No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a lot or lots in a subdivision or mobile home park until written approval of plans for water supply and sewage disposal has been obtained from the county board of health. This approval constitutes general acceptance of all lots, except those lots excluded, for development with on-site sewage management systems. (Excluded lots may receive further consideration based on additional information.) 
(d)	Limits on use of on-site sewage management systems for subdivision and mobile home parks. Approval of subdivisions and mobile home parks utilizing on-site sewage management systems shall not be granted: 
(1)	When a public or community sewage system is available within five hundred (500) feet off the subdivision or mobile home park; 
(2)	When soil maps, descriptions, and reports compiled by a registered soil classifier indicate that soil conditions prohibit safe development of on-site sewage management systems. 
(3)	Prior to receipt of a letter(s) from the environmental protection division approving the plans to construct the public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized. 
(e)	Construction permits. Construction permits for on-site sewage management systems shall be issued in accordance with section 14-83(b)(1) of the rules for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-95. - Subdivision, mobile home park water and sewage. 
(a)	Subdivision and mobile home park water supply. 
(1)	Connection to a public water supply system shall be required if available within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed subdivision or mobile home park. 
(b)	Subdivision and mobile home park percolation tests. Where required for planning purposes and determination of the general absorptive capacity of soils, the number of percolation tests to be made shall be one (1) per lot, in the area where absorption fields are to be located. Before construction of on-site sewage management systems, individual lots within the proposed development shall comply with section 14-94 of the rules for on-site sewage management systems. 
(c)	Subdivision and mobile home park test bores. Where required for planning purposes, test bores to determine groundwater elevations and subsurface rock formations shall be made at locations, in numbers and at depths to be determined by the department or county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-96. - Technical review committee. 
(a)	Technical review committee. The department shall appoint and maintain a technical review committee consisting of a maximum of fifteen (15) individuals with technical or scientific knowledge relating to on-site sewage management systems. The duties of the committee will be to approve new systems, periodically review systems performance, assist the department with the development of standards and guidelines for new technology, assist with the periodic updating of the manual for on-site sewage management systems, revisions to standards and serve as the authority for product approval, evaluation, and the development of installation standards. The committee shall also maintain a list of approved systems. 
(b)	Membership. The committee shall include at least one individual from the following disciplines: 
(1)	An environmental health section staff person who shall serve as the secretary;
(2)	Local county environmentalist;
(3)	Health district environmentalist;
(4)	Engineering;
(5)	Manufacturing;
(6)	Home Builders Association;
(7)	Soil classifier;
(8)	University/academia;
(9)	District health director;
(10)	Environmental protection division;
(11)	Well driller;
(12)	Georgia On-Site Wastewater Association;
(13)	Land developer;
(14)	Septic tank contractor.
(c)	Meetings. The committee shall meet as deemed appropriate by the department. 
(d)	Fee. The department shall adopt a fee schedule for the technical review of new products and technology. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-97. - Certification and decertification of septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel. 
(a)	Certification required. Individuals performing services related to site approval, the design, location, installation, inspection and maintenance of an on-site sewage management system, must be certified by the department. 
(1)	Guidelines defining certification qualifications for septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel shall be established by the department and shall be published in the manual for on-site sewage management systems. The guidelines shall be based on education, experience, testing and performance. 
(2)	The department shall write a protocol for decertification of persons certified under the provisions of this section. 
(3)	Certification shall be required every two (2) years and shall be based on meeting continuing education requirements. 
(b)	Fee. The department shall adopt a fee schedule for the certification and recertification of the persons listed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-98. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)	Prohibited discharge. No person shall allow the unapproved discharge or spillage of sewage, nor shall an on-site sewage management system be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent from such system to the ground surface, to a water course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, groundwater, or other body of water. 
(b)	Maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for properly operating and maintaining the on-site sewage management system to increase the life expectancy and prevent failure. Maintenance of the system shall be in accordance with the criteria established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. Where an on-site sewage management system is proposed to serve facilities under separate ownership, a contract to insure proper operation and maintenance of the system signed by all owners, shall exist as a precondition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of an on-site sewage management system. 
(c)	Additives. No strong bases, acids or organic solvents shall be used in the operation of an on-site sewage management system. 
(d)	Existing system evaluations. If a performance evaluation of an existing system is conducted, the evaluation shall be performed in accordance with the procedure established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(e)	Variances. The county board of health may grant variances in the cases of hardship where existing systems are malfunctioning. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Sec. 14-99. - Enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-5. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, 7-23-02)
Secs. 14-100—14-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INDIVIDUAL AND SEMI-PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 02-03, §§ 1:00—10:00, adopted July 10, 2002, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence inclusion of said ordinance provisions as §§ 14-126—14-135 was at the discretion of the editor to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table.

Sec. 14-126. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules is to set forth minimum standards to be followed in the design and construction of individual and semi-public water supply systems, to define words used herein, to require permits for the drilling and boring of wells and to eliminate, as far as possible, pollution of ground and surface waters of Meriwether County, and thereby, controlling the spread of water-borne diseases. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 1:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-127. - Definitions. 
Abandoned well means any well whose use has been discontinued and is in such disrepair that continued use for the purpose of obtaining ground water is impractical or is determined to be a health or accident hazard by the Meriwether County Board of Health. This is to include all holes that are drilled, bored, dug or driven which are determined to be unsatisfactory for development as a source of water supply. 
Agricultural well means a well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes including "stock wells", but not for human consumption. 
Annular space means the space between the well casing and earth wall of the well. 
Approved or approval means compliance with applicable specifications or criteria developed by the department. 
Bored well means a well that is constructed by means of an auger-type device, as distinguished from one that is dug, drilled or driven. 
County board of health means the Meriwether County Board of Health as established by the Georgia Health Code (O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1) or its designee. 
Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water, the other containing water of unknown or questionable potability. 
Department means the Meriwether County Health Department, Meriwether County Board of Health, the Georgia Department of Human Resources, or their designee. 
Disinfection means the killing of living, potentially infectious organisms by the chemical means directly applied. 
Drilled well means a well that is constructed by means of raising and dropping a heavy drill bit and stem, or by rotary drilling method. 
Driven well means a well that is constructed by driving a casing, at the end of which there is a drive point, without the use of any drilling or boring device. 
Dug well means a well that is constructed by means of hand tools or by means of a power shovel or other earth excavation machinery. 
Grout means any stable, reasonably impervious bonding material capable of providing a seal between the well casing and the earth wall of the well. 
Ground water means water obtained from drilled, driven, bored or dug wells, or springs used as a source of water for individual and semi-public water supply systems. 
Individual water supply system means a single source of piping, pumps, tanks or other facilities, utilizing a source of groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
Semi-public water supply systems means a system for the provision of piped water for human consumption, if such system serves an average of less than twenty-five (25) individuals daily, or provides water to the public for less than sixty (60) days per year, but not including individual water supply systems. 
Lot means a parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both, excluding any part of the right-of-way of a street or a road. 
On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system serving one (1) or more buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences, or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Such term shall include, without limitation, conventional and chamber septic tank systems, privies, and experimental and alternative on-site management systems, which are designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent that may be approved by the department. 
Potable water means water having bacteriological quality conforming to the latest revision of the U. S. Public Health Service "Drinking water standards", or those devised by any succeeding federal agency and approved by the Meriwether County Board of Health. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, or association, and may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate. 
Pumping equipment means any equipment or material utilized or intended for use in withdrawing or obtaining groundwater for any use including, but not limited to pumps, seals and tanks, together with fittings and controls. 
Permit means written authorization granted to a person by the Meriwether County Board of Health, or its authorized agent to construct and operate an individual or semi-public water supply system. 
Repair means any action, which results in a breaking or opening of the well seal or pipe, or replacement of a pump. 
Spring means a natural surface feature where groundwater flows from the rock or subsoil. 
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground by which water is sought or obtained. 
Well cap means an overlapping, impervious watertight cover at the upper terminal end of the well to prevent contaminated water or deleterious material from entering the well. 
Well contractor means any individual, partnership, corporation, or company who bores, digs, or drills well in Meriwether County. 
Well seal means a device used to cap a well or to establish and maintain a junction between the casing of a well cover and the piping or equipment installed therein to prevent pollutants from entering the well at the upper terminal. 
Well slab means a concrete slab placed around the well at the ground surface to prevent surface water contamination from entering the well. 
Well vent means an outlet at the upper terminal of the well casing to allow equalization of air pressure in the well. 
Yield means the quantity of water per unit of time, which may flow or be pumped from a well. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 2:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-128. - General provisions. 
(a)	No well contractor shall begin to bore, drill, dig, alter, or extend an individual or semi-public well without first having applied for and obtained from the Meriwether County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section a permit to construct, alter or extend such a system. Site selection must be approved prior to the commencement of construction. Application for a permit shall be made on forms provided by the department. This permit expires twelve (12) months from the date of issue. 
(b)	An individual or semi-public water system record form shall be filed by the well contractor with the Meriwether County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section on each well installed in the county, no later than the tenth day of each month (forms to be furnished by the department). 
(c)	No person may construct, alter or extend and operate an individual or semi-public water supply system on property served by an on-site sewage management system and where a connection can be made to a public or community water supply distribution line, if the installation of such system will restrict or eliminate any possible or potential installation of the initial or one hundred (100) percent conventional replacement area for the on-site sewage management system on that lot or any other lot as is required by rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Chapter 290-5-26. Nor can any on-site sewage management system be installed in an area that could eliminate the installation of an individual or semi-public well for purposes of human consumption when no other means of water is available. In the case of a well being installed on any lot that is also served by a public or community water supply system, a back-flow prevention device must be installed on the public or community supply line in order to prevent any cross contamination. This device must be in compliance with the owner of the public or community water supply system. 
(d)	The Meriwether County Board of Health may deny a well construction permit to any person or suspend or revoke a permit issued to any person for failure of the person to comply with these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5. 
(e)	Issuance of a well construction permit and subsequent approval of such system by representatives of the Meriwether County Board of Health shall not be construed as a guarantee that such system will function satisfactorily for a given period of time; furthermore, said representatives do not, by any action taken in effecting these rules, assume any liability for damages which are caused, or which may be caused, by the malfunction or possible contamination of such system. 
(f)	These regulations are to be enacted in accordance with guidelines recommended in "Manual of Individual Water supply Systems", U. S. Public Health Service, CDC. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 3:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-129. - Location of wells. 
(a)	All well contractors constructing an individual or semi-public water supply system shall conform to the following table in establishing minimum acceptable distances between a well and potential pollutants located on either the same or adjoining lots: 

 
Wells shall be located uphill when possible from these sources of pollution. 
(b)	No well shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the foundation of any building that has been or is to be treated for termites. This is to prevent the contamination of the well by this treatment. 
(c)	No well shall be located in an area subject to flooding from a lake, stream or river.
(d)	In the construction of any particular individual or semi-public water supply system, the distance may be increased, when considered necessary by the Meriwether County Board of Health, or its representatives in order to protect the water supply system from any potential source of contamination due to unfavorable local topography, soil or geological condition encountered. 
(e)	For any well which is to be used for human consumption and is located in a area where livestock concentration is present, a fence should be provided to prevent the entry of livestock within a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet from the well site. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 4:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-130. - Well construction and protection. 
(a)	The well site shall be graded, if necessary, to facilitate rapid drainage of surface water to a distance of not less than ten (10) feet from the well in all directions or a diversion ditch or trench shall be constructed to effectively divert surface water from the well site. Pump platforms, pump room floors, and well slabs shall be protected from flooding by being located not less than two (2) feet above the high water level of any nearby lake, pond or stream. The casing, liners, screens and any other manufactured material used in the construction of well shall be of new material. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the well contractor to assure the protection of all bored wells from surface contamination by a four (4) to six (6) inch thick concrete well slab extending at least two (2) feet in all directions from the casing and sloping away from the well. Bored or dug wells shall be cased and the annular space around the casing shall be sealed with cement grout to a depth of ten (10) feet below the ground surface. Minimum thickness of the grout shall be six (6) inches. The top of the casing must be capped with a concrete cap and/or well seal. Bored wells of less than twenty-five (25) feet shall not be approved. 
(c)	All openings into a well, except a screened well vent, shall be sealed. Well vents are required for all drilled wells. When a vent is used, it shall be a riser pipe of a design where the screened opening terminates downward at least twelve (12) inches above the surface or be of a design approved by the board of health. When pumping equipment is enclosed within a pump house or other enclosed shelter, a gravity drain from the structure shall be provided. Bored wells with the pump or terminals located below grade or within the well shall not be approved. This does not include submersible pumps designed and approved for this use. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 5:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-131. - Spring protection. 
(a)	A spring to be developed as a groundwater source shall be protected by a concrete-enclosed or other impervious structure approved by the board of health. The walls of the structure shall extend down to a bedrock, or into the subsoil sufficiently to provide for a proper foundation to prevent water seepage. 
(b)	All surface water runoff shall be diverted from the spring.
(c)	The overflow pipe from the structure shall be designed to prevent contamination of the spring. 
(d)	If the spring is located in an area where livestock are to be concentrated, a fence should be provided to prevent the entry of livestock within a distance of fifty (50) feet from the spring site in all directions. Other distance requirements are as listed in section 14-129. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 6:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-132. - System approval. 
(a)	Approval of an individual or semi-public water supply system shall be based on the location and construction of the system and the results of bacteriological analysis for a potable water supply. Each system must pass final inspection to determine if it conforms to all applicable rules of these regulations. 
(b)	In addition, the minimum acceptable requirements for a semi-public water supply are:
(1)	A history of satisfactory bacteriological samples to include at least two (2) negative samples taken no closer than one (1) month apart. At least one of which shall be taken following completion of construction, and the other within one (1) year of construction. 
(2)	Adequate storage shall be provided to make up any deficit occurring between peak demand and total available from the source during the peak demand period. 
(3)	The owners or agents of all semi-public water supplies shall furnish the board of health all information deemed necessary for a complete evaluation of the adequacy of the water supply. 
(c)	The minimum acceptable requirements for an existing water supply system constructed before the effective date of these rules are: 
(1)	Sanitary seal. 
(2)	Suitable well slab. In the absence of an acceptable well slab and grouting, a curtain wall shall be installed in the absence of proper grouting. The curtain wall shall extend a minimum of eighteen (18) inches below the slab for the entire perimeter. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 7:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-133. - Pump installation. 
(a)	No person may use material in a well or pump that may result in the delivered water being toxic or having an objectionable taste or odor. All metallic and non-metallic materials shall have sufficient structural strength and other properties to accomplish the purpose for which installed. All plastic pipe used shall bear the approval of the National Sanitation Foundation for potable water applications, or approved equal. 
(b)	Cross connections shall be prohibited.
(c)	Hand pumps shall be of the force type equipped with a packing gland around the pump rod, a delivery spout which is closed and downward directed, and a one-piece ball-type base which is part of the pump stand. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 8:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-134. - Disinfection. 
Any person constructing an individual or semi-public water supply system shall disinfect or cause to be disinfected the water supply system before the system is placed into operational service. The water supply system shall be disinfected by introducing a chlorine solution into the well or spring in such a manner that a concentration of at least fifty (50) ppm of available chlorine exists in the well, water pipes, storage tanks and other parts of the system in which potable water is delivered, treated or stored. After a period of not less than twelve (12) hours the chlorinated water shall be flushed from the system. After the system has been flushed free of chlorine, a water sample shall be taken by a representative of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 9:00, 7-10-02)
Sec. 14-135. - Abandoned wells. 
(a)	Any person who is a property owner, lessee or agent of a property owner, on whose property an abandoned well is located, shall restore the surface conditions which existed before the well was constructed by filling an abandoned or dug well with earth, or by sealing an abandoned drilled well by grouting with puddled clay, concrete or other stable bonding material. 
(b)	An abandoned well shall not be used by any person for disposal of refuse, sewage, dead animals or other waste material. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 10:00, 7-10-02)
Secs. 14-136—14-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC SEWER USE 

Sec. 14-201. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act and the Act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as it may be amended. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means any one of the following: 
(1)	A principal executive officer at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)	A person designated by an authorized representative as defined in subsections (1) or (2) of this definition where such designated person is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter, mg/1. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Categorical standards means national pretreatment standards or any regulation applicable to industrial users and containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act. 
Chemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the oxidation of organic and oxidizable inorganic material, measured by using a strong chemical oxidizing agent in an acidic medium, expressed in milligrams per liter, mg/1. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
Composite sample means the accumulation of a number of individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the nature of the wastewater. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Designated county representative means the county administrator or his duly authorized agent. 
Domestic wastewater means wastewater derived principally from dwellings, business buildings and institutions, exclusive of industrial wastewater. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Environmental Protection Agency and EPA mean the regional administrator or other duly authorized official of such federal agency. 
Environmental Protection Division and EPD mean the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division or any authorized official of such state agency. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Any wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the domestic or commercial handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
General pretreatment regulations means "The General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, on June 26, 1978, and any revisions to such document. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastewater stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastewater stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease means a group of substances including fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils and certain other nonfatty materials. 
Grease trap means a tank or vessel designed to remove floatable oil from the wastewater stream prior to discharge to the municipal system. 
Grit means the heavy suspended mineral matter present in water or wastewater such as sand, gravel or cinders. 
Grit trap means a tank or vessel designed to interrupt the flow of wastewater so as to cause sand, grit and similar heavy particles to be removed from the wastewater stream prior to discharge to the municipal system. 
Industrial waste means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Interference means inhibition or disruption of the water pollution control facilities, wastewater treatment processes or operations, or sludge processes, use, or disposal, which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the NPDES permit issued to the county or to any entity that receives wastewater generated in the county by agreement with the county, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or to the prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance with the following federal statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or county regulations): Section 405 of the Act, (33 USC 1345), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic Substances Control Act. An industrial user significantly contributes to such a permit violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance with authorities cited in this definition whenever such user: 
(1)	Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that permitted by the provisions of this article or by federal or state law. 
(2)	Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents from the user's average discharge; or 
(3)	Knows or has reason to know that the user's discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in an NPDES permit violation by the county or by any entity that receives wastewater generated in the county by agreement with the county or prevent sludge use or disposal in accordance with the authorities cited in this definition as they apply to the selected method of sludge management of the county or of any entity that receives wastewater generated in the county by agreement with the county. 
Mass emission rate means the weight of material discharged during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per year of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
May is permissive; shall is mandatory. 
Metered water means the amount of all sources of water, including wells, consumed by the sewer customer. 
National categorical pretreatment standard means any national pretreatment standard specifying properties which may be discharged to a water pollution control facility by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories found in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
National pretreatment standard and pretreatment standard mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. 
New source and new industrial user mean any new discharge, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards (under Section 307(b) of the Act) for such discharges. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 107. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or the legal representatives, agents or assigns of such entity or individual. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging such pollutants into water pollution control facilities. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works and POTW mean a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), whether owned by the county or not, that receives and treats wastewater generated in the county. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such a treatment works, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the county's wastewater disposal system who (i) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; or (ii) has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the county's wastewater treatment system; or (iii) has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or defined in the laws of the state; or (iv) is found by the county, state control agency or the Environmental Protection Agency to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
Sludge means the accumulated solids separated from liquids during wastewater processing. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect wastewater treatment works. 
Standard industrial classification means a classification pursuant to the standard industrial classification manual issued by the executive office of the president, office of management and budget. 
Storm drain and storm sewer mean a sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling waters. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA under the provision of the Clean Water Act, Section 307(a) or other acts. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the county's wastewater system. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and commercial establishments, together with those groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. The term "wastewater treatment works" is sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant or water pollution control plant. 
(b)	The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings:

 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-202. - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the public health and welfare, the county finds it is necessary to set uniform requirements for all users of the water pollution control facilities of the county or of any entity that receives wastewater generated in the county by agreement with the county; to establish effluent limits; to require pretreatment, where necessary, by system users; to regulate the use of municipal pollution control facilities through the issuance of permits to certain industrial users; to establish charges and fees for the equitable distribution of costs; and to enable the county to comply with all applicable state and federal laws. The purposes of this article are to prevent the introduction into the municipal pollution control facilities of pollutants which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; to prevent the introduction into municipal pollution facilities of pollutants which would pass through the facilities, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the facilities; to improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the facilities; and to provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal pollution control facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-203. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	The owner of each house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated in any area under the jurisdiction of the county, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the county, shall install at his expense suitable toilet facilities therein, and shall connect the facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that a public sewer is within 200 feet of the owner's property line and access is available over public land or through a public utility easement. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the county in any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any storm drain or natural outlet within the county, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-204. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)	Private wastewater facilities, including privies, cesspools and septic tanks, are prohibited in all areas where public sewers are available as defined in subsection 14-203(a). 
(b)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(c)	The type, capacities, location and layout of all private wastewater disposal systems shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. Before commencement of construction on any private wastewater disposal system, except for septic tanks, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the designated county representative. Septic tank installations are under the jurisdiction of the county health department. All septic tanks constructed in the county shall be approved by the inspector of the health department of the county before the tank is placed in service. All building permits issued by the county, where a septic tank is required, shall be issued subject to the approval of the septic tank by the health official or inspector of the health department of the county. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to discharge septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain, ditch, stream, or well penetrating water-bearing formations. 
(e)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the county. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-205. - Water not to be furnished to premises with improper sewage disposal. 
No county water shall be furnished to any premises which is required to be connected to the county wastewater system unless such premises is properly connected thereto. No water shall be furnished to any premises for which a sewer connection is not required unless such premises is properly connected to a permitted septic tank or private wastewater disposal system meeting the standards prescribed by the state and county. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-206. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the designated county representative. 
(b)	No unauthorized person shall remove covers, deface, destroy, disturb, cover or enter any manholes of the public sewer system without permission from an authorized representative of the county. 
(c)	There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (i) For residential and commercial service; and (ii) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the county. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the designated county representative. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and a permit and inspection fee for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the county at the time the application is filed. 
(d)	All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the county from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(e)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as the one building sewer, but the county does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection as provided in this subsection. 
(f)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the designated county representative, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(g)	The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the county. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the standard plumbing code shall apply. 
(h)	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(i)	No unauthorized person shall construct any structure or other facility on or perform any grading or substantially disturb the ground on a sewer easement or right-of-way of the county without submitting a written request to and obtaining approval of the county. Plans for such an encroachment may be required. 
(j)	No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, swimming pool drains or other sources of surface runoff, groundwater or other unpolluted water to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(k)	No person shall install, extend, connect, alter or enlarge any wastewater facilities unless plans and specifications are prepared by a qualified person as required by law and such plans and specifications are approved by the authorized representative of the county and the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(l)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the county, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the standard building code. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the designated county representative before installation. 
(m)	The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the designated county representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the designated county representative. 
(n)	All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the county. 
(o)	The installation of all building sewers and connections into the public sewer shall conform with all pertinent OSHA requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-207. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge any wastewater to the POTW except as authorized by the designated county representative in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, unpolluted industrial process water or uncontaminated cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times and may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by written permission of the designated county representative. 
(c)	Stormwater other than that exempted under subsection (b) of this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the designated county representative and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the designated county representative and the EPD to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(d)	Pollutants introduced into the POTW by a nondomestic source shall not pass through the POTW or interfere with the operation or performance of the works. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(e)	No person shall introduce into the POTW any of the following pollutants which, acting either alone or in conjunction with other substances, interfere with the operation or performance of the POTWs: 
(1)	Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene; ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the county, EPD or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)	Any wastewaters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 at any time, or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the water pollution control facilities. 
(3)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, spent lime, stone or marble dust, sand, mud, grass clippings, spent grains, spent hops, straw, shavings, metal, glass, glass grindings or polishing wastes, rags, feathers, gas, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, tar, plastics, paint or ink residues, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, animal guts or tissues, hair and fleshings, entrails, offal, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(f)	The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharge to the municipal system to concentrations or quantities which will not, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or land application field or will not otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The designated county representative may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations in this subsection if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the objectives of this subsection. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of a discharge, the designated county representative will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the designated county representative are as follows: 
(1)	Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or LAS and/or state disposal system permit and/or the receiving waters quality standards and/or the discharge requirements to the land application field. 
(2)	Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degree Fahrenheit or that would raise wastewater treatment works influent temperature above 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)	Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1. 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material at the point of discharge exceeds the limits established as follows: 

 
Or any element which in the judgment of the designated county representative will damage collection facilities or be detrimental to the treatment process. The limits set forth in this subsection may be amended if such amendment is deemed necessary to protect the facilities or life or health and/or to comply with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(6)	Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gas or solid, capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry of workmen into the POTW for maintenance, inspection and repair. 
(7)	Any waters containing quantities of radioactive wastes or isotopes in excess of applicable state or federal regulations or permits issued by state or federal agencies. 
(8)	Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other wastes which are highly colored. 
(9)	Any water or wastes that contain more than ten parts per million, by weight, of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide. 
(10)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters or land application site. 
(11)	Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(12)	Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. Any water or waste having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 500 mg/1 or containing more than 500 mg/1 of suspended solids is prohibited. Sewer use surcharges will be applied for discharges having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 250 mg/1 containing more than 250 mg/1 of suspended solids. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrated or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. Where, in the opinion of the designated county representative, the biochemical oxygen demand does not provide meaningful measurements of wastewater strength, the county representative may substitute chemical oxygen demand limits of 500 mg/1 for application of surcharges and 1,000 mg/1 for prohibition of wastes, in lieu of the BOD limits. 
(13)	Any waters having ammonia nitrogen concentrations greater than 100 mg/1 are prohibited. Sewer use surcharges will be applied for discharges having ammonia nitrogen concentrations in excess of 50 mg/1. 
(14)	Any substance which will interfere with the reclamation or reuse of residues, sludges or scums or any substance discharged to the POTW that causes the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria under Section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to sludge management. 
(15)	Any slug load, in accordance with subsection (f)(12) of this section, discharged to the POTW unless specifically authorized, in writing, as part of the user's discharge permit. 
(g)	If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this section and which in the judgment of the designated county representative may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, receiving waters, or land application site or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the designated county representative shall advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, and develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. The designated county representative may also: 
(1)	Reject the wastes;
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4)	Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
(h)	If the designated county representative permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the designated county representative. Dilution of incompatible wastes with uncontaminated water is not an acceptable method of waste equalization. 
(i)	Grease traps shall be provided on all commercial and industrial discharges containing potentially excessive amounts of oil, grease, flammable wastes or floatable solids. Grit traps shall be provided on all commercial and industrial discharges containing potentially excessive amounts of sand, grit, ash or other harmful solids. All grease and grit traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the designated county representative, and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(1)	Installation of required grease and/or grit traps shall be required prior to issuance or renewal of a county business license. Failure to properly operate or maintain a required grease or grit trap may be justification for revocation of a business license. 
(2)	Grease traps shall be required for all restaurants, hospitals, schools, catering establishments, institutions, or similar places other than dwelling units, where food is prepared for consumption. 
(3)	Grit traps shall be required for commercial and industrial enterprises having car wash facilities, or providing vehicle wash services, with wastewater discharging to the sanitary sewer system. 
(4)	Each required grit and grease trap facility shall be cleaned as often as necessary to maintain proper operation, but not less frequently than the regular interval specified in the sewer use permit issued by the designated county representative. Cleaning shall be accomplished by a currently licensed waste disposal firm at the expense of the owner. 
(5)	All materials removed from grease and grit traps shall be disposed of at the properly certified landfill or at other locations designated by the county. Each licensed waste disposal firm shall report to the county monthly on all grease trap, grit trap and septic tank cleaning services rendered. 
(j)	Where treatment of flow equalizing facilities is provided or required for any waters or wastes, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(k)	When required by the designated county representative the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the designated county representative. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(l)	All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136 or with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association if no standard is shown in 40 CFR 136. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the designated county representative. 
(m)	Certain industrial users are now or shall become subject to categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the environmental protection agency specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the POTW. All industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall comply with all requirements of such standard including any and all applicable reporting requirements for the submission of monitoring reports and other information pertinent to the users wastewater discharge or retreatment facility in accordance with Section 403.12 of the general pretreatment regulations and shall also comply with any additional or more stringent limitations contained in this article or established by the state. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for existing sources subject to such standards shall be within three years following promulgation of the standards unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the standard. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard. Except where expressly authorized by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with such standard. 
(n)	It shall be unlawful for a septic tank hauler or other waste disposal firm to discharge any waste material into the POTW without prior approval by the designated county official of the point of discharge and the payment of fees as established by the county. 
(o)	No requirement contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the applicant of any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction. Compliance with state limitations is required if they are more stringent than federal or local requirements. 
(p)	No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the county and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the county for treatment subject to the approval of the EPD. 
(q)	The county may by ordinance establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system, either for a specific user or for industrial users in general. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-208. - Accidental discharges. 
All industrial users shall provide facilities and/or institute procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, in-plant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, and diked areas or holding ponds. 
(1)	In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW serving the user of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume and corrective actions taken. Users are specifically required to post and maintain on a bulletin board a notice advising employees who they are to call in the event of an unauthorized discharge. 
(2)	Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the county a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, the waters of the state or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-209. - Designated county representative. 
The county administrator or his duly authorized agent shall have administrative authority over the operation and use of the POTW. 
(1)	Duly authorized employees of the county bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the POTW in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-210. - Wastewater discharge permit. 
All significant industrial users of the POTW as defined in section 14-201 shall be required to obtain from EPD a wastewater discharge permit in the manner set forth in this section. In addition, EPD may require the permitting of any nondomestic discharge which by reason of volume, character or strength has the potential of adversely affecting the POTW or of passing through the POTW untreated. Permit application forms will be sent to affected industrial users by the county following promulgation of a categorical standard or a determination by the designated county representative that a permit is required. The designated county representative will forward the application to EPD for review and preparation of a permit, if issuance of a permit is warranted. 
(1)	Industrial users will be required to complete and return discharge application forms within 45 days of their receipt. 
(2)	Wastewater discharge permit applications shall be made using forms prescribed by EPD and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.	Name and address of the industrial user.
b.	Name and title of responsible official.
c.	Location of the industry.
d.	Nature of industrial operation and standard industrial classification.
e.	A description of the wastewater generating process.
f.	A description of wastewater constituents and characteristics, including detailed laboratory analysis for any of the pollutants potentially present, for which limits have been established by this article. 
g.	Estimated maximum daily and average daily wastewater flow rates and slug flow volume and duration if applicable. 
h.	Any specific information required of industrial users subject to national pretreatment standards. 
i.	Any other information specified by EPD to ensure compliance with this article.
(3)	Following receipt and review of a completed discharge permit application, EPD shall issue a permit subject to any conditions considered necessary to protect the POTW. Permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.	Pretreatment requirements.
b.	Average and maximum wastewater pollutant concentrations.
c.	Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
d.	Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities.
e.	Requirements for self-monitoring of wastewater including sampling location, frequency and methods of sampling and analysis. 
f.	Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports relating to wastewater discharge. 
g.	A reasonable compliance schedule to ensure the industrial user's compliance with pretreatment requirements of this article and other applicable law or regulations. 
h.	Requirements for installation of facilities to prevent and control accidental discharge or spills by the industrial user. 
i.	Other conditions deemed necessary by the county or EPD to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinance, law or regulation. 
j.	Requirements for immediately reporting to the designated county representative of any slug discharge. 
(4)	Permits shall remain in effect for a maximum of five years, but shall be subject to modification by EPD upon 30 days' notice to reflect changes to this article or applicable state or federal law or regulation, or as otherwise necessary to protect the POTW. Any change or new condition in a permit shall include a provision for a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(5)	Prior to instituting any change in operations which affects the volume or character of the discharge, an industrial user shall notify the county and shall apply for and receive a revised discharge permit. 
(6)	Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked in whole or in part for the following causes: 
a.	Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater discharge permit.
b.	Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts. 
c.	A change in volume or character of the discharge.
d.	A discharge which, in the opinion of the designated county representative or EPD, may cause interference with the water pollution control facilities or threaten human health or safety. 
(7)	Any industrial user subject to the permitting requirements established in this article shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this article. Such records shall include, for all samples: 
a.	The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the persons taking the samples. 
b.	The dates analyses were performed.
c.	Who performed the analyses.
d.	The analytical techniques/methods used.
e.	The results of such analyses.
(8)	Any industrial user subject to reporting requirements shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the county, EPD or EPA. In addition to reporting requirements described in this section, the industrial user shall be responsible for compliance with the reporting requirements of the general pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR 403.12. 
(9)	Before any wastewater discharge permit can be transferred or sold to a new user, approval must be obtained from EPD for such transfer or sale. Within 90 days of the sale or transfer, the new user shall submit to the county all information needed for issuance of a new permit. 
(10)	Any false statement made in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, shall constitute a violation of this article, and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor in accordance with the provisions of section 98-166. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Secs. 14-211—14-220. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-221. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county administrator and his designated representatives. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Secs. 14-222. - Inspection, monitoring and entry. 
(a)	Duly authorized representatives of the county shall be permitted to enter upon all properties of any user, without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing wastewaters. Such representative may also have access to and may copy any records pertaining to the wastewater discharge. Duly authorized representatives of the state or the environmental protection agency shall have the same rights of access. 
(b)	While performing work on private properties, county representatives shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises, as established by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-223. - Confidential information. 
(a)	Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permits monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the county that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled by law to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)	When requested by the user, the portions of a report entitled by law to protection as trade secrets or secret processes shall not be available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, and/or the state pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-224. - Notification of violation. 
Except in cases of emergency as provided in this article, whenever the designated representatives of the county or EPD determines that there is a violation of the terms of this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, or any other applicable law or regulation, the user shall be notified in writing of such violation, which notice shall specify to the user the period of time in which the user will be allowed in which to correct or abate the violation. The period of time to be specified shall take into consideration the extent of the violation and the hazard the violation poses to the overall wastewater treatment facility of the county. It shall be the responsibility of the user to comply with the requirements of this article within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-225. - Appeals. 
Any user of the POTW shall have the right to object to requirements imposed by the county. Objections shall be made in writing to the county administrator and must be made within 30 days of the related action by the county. The county board of commissioners, or the designated representative of the county board of commissioners shall review the grounds for objection and shall respond in writing within 45 days stating the decision reached and reasons therefor. All decisions of the county board of commissioners or their designated representative shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-226. - Notice to cease and desist. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-227. - Injunctive relief. 
The county may file in the courts of the county a suit seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages or other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this article or other applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all damages suffered by the county as a result of any action or inaction of any user or other person who causes or suffers damages to occur to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-228. - Assessment of damages. 
When a discharge of waste causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment to the POTW, the user making such discharge shall reimburse the county for any and all expenses or damages caused by such discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-229. - Emergency termination of services. 
In the event of an actual or threatened discharge to the POTW of any pollutant which in the opinion of the county presents or may present, an imminent and substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or cause interference with the POTW, the county shall immediately notify the industrial user or other person causing the emergency and request their assistance in abating the emergency. The county may temporarily terminate the water and sewer service of such user as is necessary to abate the condition when such action appears reasonably necessary. Such service shall be restored by the county as soon as the emergency situation has been abated or corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Sec. 14-230. - Penalties. 
The violation by any person of any of the terms or conditions of this article or any person who shall continue any violation, intentional or otherwise, beyond the time limit provided for the satisfactory corrections thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by section 1-11 of this Code. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all departments, divisions or other units of the county government receiving appropriations from the board of commissioners and to other agencies, as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 5-9-12)
Chapter 15 - VACATION RENTAL CABIN 

Sec. 15-1. - Title. 
The rules and regulations contained herein shall be known as the Meriwether County Vacation Rental Cabin Ordinance. 
(Res. No. 10-01, 7-27-10)
Sec. 15-2. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Vacation rental cabin: A dwelling unit built for the purpose of rental to guests for short periods of time. 
Vacation rental cabin development ("development"): A tract of land containing three or more vacation rental cabins. 
(Res. No. 10-01, 7-27-10)
Sec. 15-3. - General procedure. 
When any rental cabin development is proposed and before any permit is issued, the owner shall apply for and secure the approval of the proposed development in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)	Application for preliminary approval: 
a.	The owner shall submit a preliminary plat to the health department for approval prior to submission to the zoning administrator. 
b.	After approval by the health department, the owner shall make an application to the zoning administrator for preliminary plat approval. The application must be accompanied by five (5) copies of the preliminary plat. 
c.	The application and/or preliminary plat must include the following:
1.	All proposed cabins and any permanent dwellings that will be located in the development;
2.	The location and means of access (driveway or walkway) to all proposed cabins and any permanent dwellings; 
3.	The location of all parking areas;
4.	The location and type of water system that will serve the development;
5.	The location and design of all roads within the development including a typical road section of all interior roads; 
6.	The location of any other improvements on the property, including any office buildings and vending areas; 
7.	The total acreage of the development;
8.	The location and type of sewer system;
9.	The estimated time for completion;
10.	Land-disturbing activity plan.
(2)	Final plat requirements: 
a.	The final plat must contain the following statements in bold print on each page: This development is designed according to the Meriwether County Vacation Rental Cabin Ordinance. This property cannot be subdivided into separate tracts without resubmitting the entire development to the zoning administrator and conforming to the subdivision regulations and any other development regulations which may apply at that time. All roads within this development are private roads and will not be maintained by Meriwether County. 
b.	After approval, the final plat must be recorded in the plat records of Meriwether County and a recorded copy provided to the zoning administrator. 
(Res. No. 10-01, 7-27-10)
Sec. 15-4. - Regulations. 
A vacation rental cabin development shall be considered a commercial use and shall be subject to hotel/motel tax. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all provisions of the subdivision regulations, the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, the building codes, and all other county regulations and ordinances apply to vacation rental cabin developments. 
(1)	Lot size: 
a.	The development will be considered a single parcel and not divisible into separate lots without resubmitting the development to the planning commission as a subdivision and meeting all of the subdivision and development requirements in effect at that time. 
b.	The acreage of the development must be at least five (5) acres.
(2)	Cabin density: The total number of cabins in the development shall be limited by the total acreage of the development. There shall be no more than one (1) cabin per acre. 
(3)	Road requirements: 
a.	All interior road design must be approved by the zoning administrator and/or public works department prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
b.	Roads within the Development must be located so as to minimize grading.
c.	All one-way roads must be clearly marked as one way.
d.	All dead end roads must end with a cul de sac and must be clearly marked as dead end.
e.	All roads must be designed to be easily accessible by emergency vehicles.
f.	All road intersections must comply with the requirements set out in the subdivision regulations. 
g.	The entrance road is the road leading from a public road into the development. The entrance road surface shall be of the same kind as the adjoining public road for a distance of at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection and a width of at least twenty-two (22) feet. 
(4)	Cabin construction requirements: 
a.	Each cabin must be clearly identified and marked in such a way as to make location easy for emergency vehicles day or night. 
b.	Cabins must be rustic in appearance with log or wood exterior. Plans, drawings or photographs of the type of cabins proposed must be submitted to the planning and zoning department along with the preliminary plat. 
c.	The development must comply with the Georgia Accessibility Code.
(5)	General regulations: 
a.	All developments consisting of ten (10) or more cabins must have personnel on site during all times the development is open for business. 
b.	Unless submitted and approved during the preliminary plat review, permanent residency in any cabin or dwelling is not permitted. If the need for permanent residency for less than a ten-cabin development is determined at a later date, the owner of the development must submit a variance request to the building and zoning department. 
c.	All walkways, trails and common areas must be rustic and unobtrusive in appearance.
d.	Any permitted campfires, fire pits or outside cooking areas in the development must be in areas designated by the owner or manager of the development and must have a readily accessible water source and hose located nearby. 
e.	All cabins and any approved dwellings must be maintained in a good state of repair.
f.	All trash must be removed from the development on a regular basis and not allowed to accumulate. 
g.	The development must be operated free of any nuisances created by noise, smoke, smell, traffic, or other means. 
(Res. No. 10-01, 7-27-10)
Sec. 15-5. - Plat approval fees. 
(a)	The fee for preliminary plat shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit in the development. Dwelling unit shall include rental cabins and any permanent dwellings. 
(b)	The final fee for plat approval shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per dwelling unit in the development, with a minimum charge of fifty dollars ($50.00). Dwelling unit shall include rental cabins and any permanent dwellings. 
(Res. No. 10-01, 7-27-10)
Chapter 16 - MEDIA PRODUCTIONS 

Sec. 16-1. - Title. 
The rules and regulations contained herein shall be known as the Meriwether County Media Productions Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-2. - Purpose. 
It is the public policy of the State of Georgia to market the state as a location for media productions, recognizing the economic impact this industry provides, as well as the tourism it generates for local jurisdictions, such as Meriwether County is further fortunate to have a diverse number of unique locations to attract movies and television productions to the county. 
Despite the many positive benefits a media production may offer, certain inconveniences may result if the production company and county cannot work in concert to assure minimum standards are met and to assure a thoroughly planned production schedule is followed. These concerns are best addressed through a regulatory permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
High-impact activities means those activities having an intended duration of fifteen (15) or more consecutive days and/or activities that will disrupt normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. Any filming involving automobile crashes or chases, gunfire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft, stunts, and similar activities. High-impact activities are activities that always take place at a location that is outside the boundaries of a permanent filming location. 
Low-impact activities means those activities having an intended duration of no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, with little or no disruption to normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. Low-impact activities are activities that always take place at a location that is outside the boundaries of a permanent filming location. 
Permanent filming activities means those activities that are on-going and occur at a fixed location intended primarily for such purposes and usually using facilities and structures that are permanent or intended to remain in place for an indefinite period of time. These facilities and structures may include, but are not limited to, components of film production such as studios, sound stages, production laboratories, equipment storage areas, fabrication shops, office, accompanying food services, and permanent working sets. Permanent filming locations must contain a minimum of two hundred thirty-five (235) acres. If any residence is less than one thousand (1,000) feet from the filming activity, the notice requirement found in subsection 16-9(4) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-4. - Scope of coverage. 
The permit required by this chapter shall be required for all movies, television, or video series, pilots, feature films and documentaries, commercials, music videos, photo shoots, infomercials and public service announcements, whether the final product is intended for commercial use or not, unless the activity shall wholly occur on private property within an otherwise licensed facility (such as a film or television studio). Any media production on public property, intended to be closed to participation by the public, or restricting access to public property or facilities normally accessible by the public, shall require a permit. For purposes of this chapter, media production activity shall include areas designated for parking of trucks and equipment on public or private property, base camps used during the production activity, and food service areas. No public highway, street or road shall have its public access restricted or limited except by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-5. - Permit requirements. 
(a)	This permit is allowed with conditions in all zoning districts. Whenever a permit is sought for activities in primarily residential neighborhoods, extra consideration shall be given to the conditions imposed to ameliorate as much as possible inconvenience to the residents. 
(b)	General standards. Prior to making application for a permit, it shall be incumbent on the applicant to meet with the zoning administrator and director of public safety, or their designees, to review locations and the general scope of activities planned during the production. A copy of the script shall be made available, upon request, to allow the county staff to better understand the applicant's needs. 
The following general standards shall apply to all permits: 
(1)	No tents, temporary sanitary facilities, trash collection, or food service facilities shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of any property used for residential use, unless the owner or tenant gives written consent; 
(2)	Buildings, depending on their square footage, and other temporary structures may require a separate building permit from the county; any food preparation of food service provided at the location shall require a food service permit from the county health department, or evidence of exemption; 
(3)	Lighting for filming should be oriented away from adjacent or nearby properties as much as possible and shall not interfere with the safe movement of vehicular traffic; 
(4)	Temporary signage must be approved in writing, in advance, prior to erection, by the zoning administrator or his designee; approval of temporary signage is conditioned upon restoration of permanent signage following completion of the media activity; 
(5)	No regulatory traffic control signage within a public right-of-way shall be removed without the prior written consent of the sheriff; 
(6)	No modification to any existing traffic signage, street light, traffic control device or other officially installed facility or improvement shall be made without prior consent of the sheriff; 
(7)	No street, road, alley, or sidewalk shall be closed, barricaded or other obstruction erected within a public right-of-way, and no access shall be denied or restricted to public or private property or facilities unless the closure or restriction is approved as a condition of the permit; reasonable alternative access shall be arranged whenever possible; 
(8)	No trees, vegetation (including grasses), or ornamental shrubs shall be cut or removed from public property without prior written consent of the county in the permit, based upon an agreed landscape restoration plan. A land disturbance permit may be separately required depending upon the nature and extent of the activity. 
(9)	Traffic management plan. The applicant shall submit to the sheriff, a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur, even if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted. Detours shall be determined and approved by the sheriff; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant; the public works director shall also review and approve such plan. 
(10)	Meriwether County shall be listed in the production credits for all permits acquired.
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-6. - Low-impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a low-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and the nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(1)	Low-impact activity permits may be extended by the zoning administrator, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the county. Application shall be made no less than two to five (2—5) business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, on location, at all times while production activity is occurring and shown to county inspectors upon request. 
(2)	Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one (1) hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum. 
(3)	No street closure, obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall occur, including use of on-street parking spaces or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)	Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-7. - High-impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a high-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media production and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(1)	The duration of a high-impact activity permit shall be based upon an agreed production schedule submitted by the applicant. Permits may be extended by the zoning administrator, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the county. Application shall be made no less than two to five (2—5) business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, in location, at all times while activity is occurring and shown to county inspectors upon request. 
(2)	Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one (1) hour of this time frame. Notice shall be kept to a minimum; any activity occurring outside of the above hours involving planned noises in excess of dB at a distance of one hundred feet (100′) from the point of origin shall be addressed in the application. If activity is planned within five hundred feet (500′) of a residential area outside the hours specified, or will involve noises in excess of dB, notice shall be given by the best means available to residents as far in advance as reasonable. 
(3)	Street closures(s), obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall be detailed in the application, including any use of on-street parking spaces and/or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)	The county will not intervene on behalf of any permittee or negotiate access rights to private property with property owners; the permittee is expected to deal directly with private property owners for required permission and consent. 
(5)	Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(6)	Based upon the proposed scope of production activity and in consideration of any potential danger to the safety, health and welfare of the community, particularly private property and residents near the location, the sheriff and/or public safety director may require on-site security (qualified private security or use of off-duty law enforcement officers) and/or may require personnel and equipment be placed on standby for portions of the high-impact activity at the expense of the applicant. The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: pyrotechnics, demolition, discharge of firearms or other weapons, motor vehicle chases, physical stunts, and similar actions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-8. - Application and permit procedure. 
(a)	Applications. All applications shall be made in writing on forms provided by the county. No application shall be deemed accepted unless accompanied by payment of the requisite application fee in U.S. funds. 
(b)	Every application shall state the name and contact information of a responsible representative of the applicant, who shall be available at all times during actual production activity within the county; more than one point of contact may be specified. 
(c)	The application shall contain a detailed narrative of the scope of production activities, and include drawings, maps or plats to illustrate locations, property boundaries, existing material improvements, planned temporary improvements, curb cuts and driveways, adjoining streets, traffic patterns, and similar information helpful to assess the impact of the proposed activity. 
(d)	When activity is to occur in or near residential areas, personal notice of intent to secure a permit and the place, date and time of the proposed media activity shall be provided by the applicant, within five (5) days of filing the application; to the extent feasible, written acknowledgment of the notice shall be obtained from the resident or resident's agent. For purposes of this section, all residential properties with a residence and within one hundred feet (100′) of the outside boundaries of the locations(s) where production activity is to occur should be notified. 
(e)	A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the county attorney, shall accompany the application, together with a certificate of insurance naming the county as an additional insured. The minimum limits of insurance coverage shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
(f)	All applications shall be filed with the zoning administrator, or his designee, who may require such additional information as needed to assess the proposed extent and intensity of the production within the county. 
(g)	Permits. All applications shall be approved with specific terms and conditions, or denied, by the zoning administrator, or his designee, in writing. If approved, the county shall issue a permit to the applicant, in writing with all terms and conditions clearly set forth therein. Low-impact activity applications shall be approved within two to five (2—5) business days of a complete application and high-impact activity applications shall be approved within two to five (2—5) business days of a complete application. If the application is denied, the zoning administrator, or his designee, shall state, in writing the reason(s) for denial. An aggrieved applicant may appeal to the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting occurring more than five (5) days following receipt of a written denial. 
(h)	Permits may be denied, in whole or in part, due to prior scheduled events or activities sanctioned or permitted by the county under other provisions of this Code. 
(i)	Any material variation from the approved scope of work permitted shall be grounds for permit revocation, unless the permit is modified in advance by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-9. - Fees and waivers. 
(a)	Application fees for low-impact activity permits shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the application fee for a high-impact activity permit shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Application fees are non-refundable and must be paid in full, at time of application. 
(b)	Daily permit fees of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each calendar day on which production activity physically occurs within the county shall be paid upon the last day of scheduled activity; if a production is scheduled for a duration in excess of a calendar month, the accrued daily fee shall be due and payable on the last day of each month in which production activity occurred. 
(c)	Additional fees and charges may be assessed based upon specific requirements, including fees for the monitoring of public safety or special services by a county department, based upon labor, time and equipment necessary to provide the service. When using county-owned buildings or property other than public road rights-of-way, for production activities, a separate rental fee or charge may be negotiated. 
(d)	Application fees and daily permit fees for use of county services or facilities may be reduced or waived for charitable or non-profit organizations holding 501(c) status from the I.R.S., or for other governmental agencies. All waivers shall require approval of the county, which may delay permit issuance. 
(e)	Reduction or waiver of daily permit fees may be approved by the board of commissioners for commercial productions providing a greater than normal economic benefit to the community, as determined on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-10. - Liaison. 
The county administrator is hereby expressly authorized to designate an employee as the county's media production liaison to work with and be the county's point of contact with media productions, to assist in coordinating the permitting process for the county, and to promote the county as a "camera-ready community" under a program with the Georgia Office of Film, Music and Digital Entertainment. In making such designation, the county administrator shall define the duties, compensation, and benefits of such employee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-11. - Exceptions. 
Subsections 5.5-28(a)(b) and (c) of chapter 5.5, criminal misconduct, of the Code of Ordinances of Meriwether County shall not apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-12. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this chapter be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining provisions shall continue in force and effect until amended or repealed by action of the county governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 16-13. - Violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided by section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-24-15) 
Chapter 17 - GOVERNMENT PURCHASING AND CREDIT CARDS 

Sec. 17-1. - Title. 
The rules and regulations contained herein shall be known as the Meriwether County Government Purchasing and Credit Card Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county-issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county-issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator means the sitting finance director of Meriwether County as designated by the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners. 
County means Meriwether County and/or the board of commissioners. 
County-purchase card, county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-4. - Designated elected officials. 
The Meriwether County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this chapter or for any purchases that are not authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-5. - Card administrator. 
The board of commissioners has designated as county purchasing card and credit card administrator, the sitting finance director for Meriwether County. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)	Manage county-issued purchasing cards and credit cards.
(2)	Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)	Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card of credit card. 
(4)	Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)	Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards.
(6)	Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary.
(7)	Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this chapter, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)	Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)	Audit and reconcile transactions monthly.
(10)	Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-6. - Use of cards. 
(a)	Authorized purchases. County purchase cars and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this chapter, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per transaction: $1,000.00 
Per month: $1,000.00 
(b)	Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(c)	Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(d)	Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-7. - Review of purchases and audit. 
Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection of misuse or abuse of county-issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)	Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed on a monthly basis by the card administrator according to the following procedure: 
a.	The monthly statements for each purchasing card and credit card issued to an authorized elected official, shall be reconciled monthly with receipts, invoices, other supporting documents and affidavits provided by all authorized elected officials. 
b.	Any item disputed or charge unsupported by a receipt, invoice, other supporting document or an affidavit, shall be investigated by the card administrator and reported to the county administrator. 
c.	In the absence of a receipt, the authorized elected official shall prepare and sign an affidavit stating what was purchased, the purpose of the purchase, the date and location of the purchase and its relevance the county business. 
(2)	Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-8. - Violations. 
(a)	An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county-issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this chapter or the user agreement. 
(b)	In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this chapter may result in: 
(1)	A warning;
(2)	Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
(3)	Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card. 
(c)	Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-9. - Elected constitutional county officers. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing policies, any purchases made with a county issued purchase card or credit card by the clerk of the superior court, judge of the probate court, sheriff, and tax commissioner shall be subject to the sole discretion and approval of said elected official in the exercise of his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-10. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this chapter be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining provisions shall continue in force and effect until amended or repealed by action of the county governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 17-11. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided by section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-10-16) 
APPENDIX A ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Appendix A contains the zoning ordinance of Meriwether County, Georgia adopted on April 12, 2006 and supercedes the zoning ordinance adopted pursuant to a resolution on Sept. 14, 1988.

ARTICLE 1. - ENACTMENT, TITLE, REPEAL, INTENT, RELATED STANDARDS AND RELATED ORDINANCES 
1.1	Enactment. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the board of commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia, the existing "APPENDIX A ZONING" of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County, Georgia, is hereby amended by this "APPENDIX A ZONING ORDINANCE AS AMENDED 2006" as set forth herein. 
1.2	Title. 
This ordinance shall be entitled as follows: "APPENDIX A ZONING ORDINANCE AS AMENDED 2006". 
1.3	Repealed Provisions. 
The former "Appendix A Zoning" is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
1.4	Intent. 
It is the intent of this Appendix A Zoning Ordinance As Amended 2006 to establish an ordinance for the unincorporated Meriwether County, Georgia, that provides for the following: regulating the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; the use of buildings, and land for business, industry, residence, public activities and other purposes; and for dividing the unincorporated area into districts for such purposes and establishing boundaries; providing for a Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals, defining its power and duties; the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions; and repealing conflicting resolutions. 
1.5	Related Standards. 
It is intended for this ordinance to be used in conjunction with other uniform development standards that have been adopted or otherwise implemented in specific industries and/or fields that may be impacted by this ordinance. Specifically, this ordinance refers to the following standards that must be considered, referred to, and complied with in addition to the specific provisions of this ordinance: 
A.	International Building Code (IBC), 2000 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
B.	International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2000 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
C.	International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2000 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
D.	International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2000 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
E.	National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
F.	International Fire Code (IFC), 2000 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
G.	International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
H.	International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2003 Edition;
I.	Standard Excavation and Grading Code, 1975 Edition;
J.	Standard Swimming Pool Code, 1994 Edition, with Georgia Amendments;
K.	Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1985 Edition.
It is not intended for this list of related standards to be complete and otherwise all inclusive. Any uniform, common or otherwise accepted in the related industries or fields that may have been inadvertently omitted from this list or may be adopted and/or implemented in the future should also be considered, referred to and complied with in conjunction with the provisions set forth in this ordinance. 
1.6	Related Ordinances, Resolutions and Regulations. 
It is intended for this ordinance to be used in conjunction with related ordinances, resolutions and regulations adopted by Meriwether County that are not in conflict with this ordinance or have been otherwise repealed by this ordinance. Specifically, this ordinance refers to the following ordinances, resolutions and regulations of Meriwether County, Georgia that must be considered, referred to, and complied with in addition to the specific provisions of this ordinance: 
A.	Chapter 2.5, Airport Regulations, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
B.	Chapter 5, Buildings and Building Regulations, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
C.	Chapter 7, Floodplain Regulations, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
D.	Chapter 8, Parks and Recreation, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
E.	Chapter 9, Roads and Bridges, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
F.	Chapter 10, Signs, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
G.	Chapter 11, Environment Protection, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
H.	Chapter 13, Taxation, Licenses and Business Regulations, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; 
I.	Appendix C, Subdivision Regulations, Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County; and
J.	Meriwether County Joint Comprehensive Plan.
It is not intended for this list of related ordinances, resolutions, and regulations to be complete and otherwise all inclusive. Any ordinances, resolutions and regulations that have been adopted that have been inadvertently omitted from this list or any such ordinances, resolutions and regulations that may be adopted and/or implemented in the future should also be considered, referred to and complied with in conjunction with the provisions set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 2. - PURPOSE 
2.1	The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the use of land and improvements in unincorporated Meriwether County, Georgia. the zoning regulations and districts herein established are designed to: 
Lessen congestion in the streets; 
Provide safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
Promote health, and general welfare; 
Provide adequate light and air; 
Avoid undue concentration of the population; 
Provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
Conserve the value of economy; 
Encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures; 
Promote quality of life for all citizens and 
Provide consistency with the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.2	The requirements of these regulations are minimum permissible standards; and it is expected that developers and the respective decision making authority will normally strive for quality developments that will exceed these minimum requirements. 
2.3	The Comprehensive Plan adopted by resolution of the County Commission of Meriwether County is established as the official policy of the County concerning land uses. The incorporated areas of the County are divided into land use categories consistent with the Future Land Use Map in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the County, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not by itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. The Meriwether County Planning Commission shall examine the Future Land Use Map and zoning changes approved during the year on an annual basis to assure consistency between the two maps. 
2.4	The Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan shall be updated once each year. This update shall be used to identify current uses of land, emerging growth patterns and any significant change in land use policy as identified by the Future Land Use map of the comprehensive plan. This update shall also be used as policy in the County's consideration of proposed amendments to the official Meriwether County Zoning District Map or text of the zoning ordinance. All amendments to the Meriwether County Comprehensive Plan shall be in accordance with the Minimum Planning Standards and Procedures of the Georgia Planning Act. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word building includes the word structure, the word may is permissive and the word shall is mandatory. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in the ordinance, shall be given the meaning set forth in that section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, generally accepted meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
1.	Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement. 
2.	Accessory Building. A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main buildings. 
3.	Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
4.	Alley. A private or public thoroughfare that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
5.	Alteration of Building. Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls or partitions, beams, columns, girders) except such changes as may be required for its safety; an addition to or reduction of a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or moving a building from one location to another; or any change in the roof or the exterior walls. 
6.	Animated Sign. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
7.	Apartment. See "Dwelling, Multi-Family." 
8.	Apartment, Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
9.	Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
10.	Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is securely mounted to a pole or a building. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered a banner. 
11.	Building Marker. Any sign indicating the name of a building, date, and/or incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
12.	Building Sign. Any sign attached to any part of a building, as compared to freestanding sign. 
13.	Basement. The area below the first floor level in a building and having not more than one-half (1/2) of its height above grade. 
14.	Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
15.	Bed and Breakfast Facilities. A residential Bed and Breakfast is a structure occupied by its owner(s) of record, wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast only are provided to guests for compensation. The dwelling unit in which the Bed and Breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator(s) and said operator(s) shall live in the structure when the Bed and Breakfast is in operation. 
16.	Buffer Area or Buffer Strip. 
16.1	Screen. A landscaped open area unoccupied by structures and facilities except as permitted by this ordinance and/or in some instances as specified a screen of shrubs, trees or similar plants as least eight (8) feet in height and dense enough to establish interrupted vision from one side to the other may be required. Both are established to separate different and possibly incompatible types of land use. 
16.2	River Corridor or Flood plain. Any area along the course of any river corridor or flood plain maintained in a vegetative, undisturbed and natural condition. 
17.	Boarding House. A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement, meals and/or lodging are provided for three (3) or more guests, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. 
18.	Building. Any roofed structure designed, built, or intended for shelter, support, housing, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
19.	Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
20.	Building Line. The line that represents distance a building or structure must be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or street centerline, according to the terms of this ordinance. 
21.	Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the plot on which it is situated. 
22.	Canopy Sign. Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
23.	Certificate of Occupancy. Issued by the Zoning Administrator certifying that the structure complies with the International Building Code and the International Residential Code and all applicable regulations of Meriwether County. 
24.	Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of these regulations. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this article. 
25.	Child Care Center. Agencies, organizations or individuals which render service on a regular basis, with or without remuneration, in the form of providing day time care, boarding, feeding, supervising, or tutoring to children who are not members of the family, foster children, or legal wards of the attendant, including day nurseries, kindergartens, nursery schools, and similar services. This definition does not include tax-supported public schools. 
26.	Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
27.	Clinic. A facility where medical and dental patients, who are not normally lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or a group of physicians practicing medicine. 
28.	Club or Lodge. Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or other legally established group of persons for social, fraternal, civic, cultural, literary, political, educational or recreational purposes on a non-profit basis operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
29.	Comprehensive Land Use Plan. A comprehensive, long range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region that typically includes inventory and analytic sections leading to recommendations for the community's future economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, community facilities, and land use, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these elements. 
30.	Conditional Zoning. The imposition of conditions in the grant of a rezoning application which are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance and which are related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use, height, setbacks, and other non-use requirements, physical improvements to the property and infrastructure serving the property. 
31.	Condominium. A building containing three (3) or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas as defined by laws of the State of Georgia. 
32.	Convenience Food Store with Self-Service Fuel Sales. Any retail establishment offering for sale automotive fuels, pre-packaged food products, beverages, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same. Further there shall be no automotive repairs done on site. 
33.	Day Nursery. See A Child Care Center. 
34.	Deck. A roofless accessory attached or detached platform without exterior walls generally constructed of wood, which adjoins a residence. Rails or safety features shall not be deemed to be exterior walls. 
35.	Deed Restrictions/Private Covenants. Private stipulations, usually pertaining to residential subdivisions that govern lot size, minimum floor area, uses permitted and in some instances architectural design. These may be stricter than or not as strict as provisions included in the zoning. 
36.	Density. The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referring to residential area, density is defined as the number of housing units permitted per acre in the respective zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of this zoning ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance. Unless otherwise stated, density figures are to be in terms of net acres, or the land devoted to residential use exclusive of streets or other public lands. 
37.	Developments of Regional Impact (DRI). Public or private development that because of its location, scale, use type or public service demand or any combination could affect the growth, development and quality of life of the region. 
38.	Developer. Any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of any owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
39.	District. A section of Meriwether County within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
40.	Drainage. A general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping. 
41.	Drive-in. A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the consumer on the outside of the principal building. 
42.	Duplex. A single-story residential structure designed for two-family occupancy with each family in a separate dwelling unit. 
43.	Dwelling. A building or portion thereof which is designed or used for residential purposes, including single family, two (2) family, multiple family dwellings and manufactured housing, but not including hotels, motels, or mobile homes. 
44.	Dwelling, Single-Family. Detached dwelling, containing not more than one dwelling unit, designed or occupied exclusively by a single family. 
45.	Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for three (3) or more adjoining dwelling units, occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of one another, with each dwelling unit having a party wall and/or party floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums, or any other type of multi-family structure. 
46.	Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed, constructed, altered, or used for two (2) adjoining dwelling units, joined by common wall or common floor and occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other. Includes "Duplex". 
47.	Dwelling Unit. A dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 
48.	Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from land-disturbing activity. 
49.	Existing Grade. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
50.	Fabricating. The process of assembling using standardized parts. 
51.	Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons, occupying a single dwelling unit, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit. The term "family" does not include any organizational or institutional groups such as those occupying a lodging house, hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house, or group home. 
52.	Flag. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
53.	Floor Area. Total number of heated square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls of the several floors of a structure. Also, the gross leasable floor area for any business or industry based on interior dimensions. 
54.	Freestanding Sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
55.	Frontage. That dimension of a lot measured along the front street line. If said front street line is curved, then the dimension along the chord of the arc. 
56.	Garage, Mechanical/Repair. Building(s) and premises designed or used for the purpose of providing the services of maintenance, minor repair, washing, adjusting, equipping and/or major commercial repair of motor vehicles provided that the body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises. A mechanical garage that provides for the storage of vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts for sale or repair shall be classified as a junk yard. 
57.	Garage, Private. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for private storage of permitted motor vehicles. 
58.	Halfway House. A center for formerly institutionalized individuals, as mental patients or drug addicts, designed to facilitate readjustment to private life. 
59.	Hardship. A condition that shall be considered to exist only when one or the other of the following apply to a particular piece of property and such condition has not been created by the applicant's own acts or for economical purposes only. 
1.	The owner cannot comply with the provisions of this Ordinance without violating some other resolution or section (s) of this Ordinance. 
2.	The topography of the land or shape of a particular lot precludes a conforming use.
60.	Heavy Manufacturing Establishment. Manufacturing establishments, other than those classified as light manufacturing, including those involving the conversion of raw materials into usable finished products, provided that manufacturing that will generate liquid waste from the manufacturing process or air pollutants shall comply with antipollution standards established by the state and county. 
61.	Home Occupation. An occupation or profession for gain or support conducted entirely within a single-family dwelling and which is carried on solely by a member or members of the family residing on the premises and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The occupation/business may require access by the public. 
62.	Hospital. Any institution that receives in-patients, or a public institution that receives out patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of the mentally disturbed, drug addicts, epileptic seizures, chronically ill and physically handicapped, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
63.	Hotel. A building in which overnight accommodations are provided for ten (10) or more individuals of the general public for compensation and in which provisions for cooking are made in a central kitchen and not in the individual rooms or suites and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office. 
64.	Industrial Park. A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner that provides a park-like setting for industrial establishments. 
65.	Industrialized Building. A term used only in Georgia, "industrialized building" replaces the now obsolete term "Factory-Built Housing," and describes certain manufactured housing regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines Industrialized Building as "any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof". Industrialized Buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Buildings Act", Georgia Law 1982 (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). An industrialized building must meet all requirements of the District in which it is located. This term includes "modular homes". 
66.	Institution. Premises occupied by a non-profit corporation or non-profit establishment for public use. 
67.	Intermediate Regional Flood (IRF). A one-hundred year frequency flood, as defined on flood hazard maps, which has a probability of occurring once every one hundred (100) years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
68.	Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris including but not limited to junk vehicle or vehicles, junk vehicle parts, discarded appliances, and other mechanicals, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. 
69.	Junk Vehicles. Any vehicle that cannot be moved under its own power and does not have a current license plate. 
70.	Junk Yard. An uncovered lot or part thereof, whether enclosed or not, used for the collection, storage, keeping, sale, abandonment, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvage house wrecking, and structural steel material and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of three (3) or more disabled automobiles, not bearing current auto tags/decals, mobile or manufactured homes or other machinery, appliances or parts thereof. 
70.1 Storage Area- Property and/or buildings used for the permanent or temporary storage of inoperable vehicles, machinery or other equipment or materials awaiting salvage, restoration, or sale, but not including exterior displays of new or used merchandise in operable condition for retail or wholesale distribution. 
71.	Kennels. Facility for the overnight boarding of domestic animals, usually limited to dogs and cats. Breeding and training of dogs and cats and the sale to the public of puppies and kittens is classified as a kennel activity. 
72.	Land Use Permit, Manufactured Home. A temporary permit that allows for the placement and occupancy of a home or manufactured home on a parcel in which it would not ordinarily be permitted. 
73.	Land Use Plan. A professionally prepared and formally adopted document and map depicting the desirable future location of residential, commercial, public, and industrial land uses and thoroughfares. Also, narrative text describing present and future land use needs of the local government for which it was prepared. 
74.	Licensed Day Care Center. A child care center licensed and regulated by the State of Georgia and/or Meriwether County that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision of children, where such children are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
75.	Light Industry. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
76.	Light Manufacturing Establishment. An establishment for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods or products; however, the manufacturing and production of any product which emits noxious odor or fumes, noise, bulk storage of flammable materials for resale, and other heavy manufacturing uses listed herein, shall not be permitted. 
77.	Lot. A parcel or portion of land of varying size, described as a single unit of property and held in a single ownership by one person or in common ownership by more than one person, occupied or intended to be occupied by a particular use, building or group of buildings devoted to a particular use or interest; together with the customary accessory buildings and uses and open spaces belonging to the same. A parcel that has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the uses proposed for the tract of land. The lot shall have its principal frontage upon a county road, street, thoroughfare, state highway or a dedicated easement for ingress and egress on record in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia; includes the terms "plot" and "parcel" and shall mean the same as "zoning lot"; however, the term "lot" will not be construed to mean "land lot". 
78.	Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on two (2) or more public streets at their intersection. 
79.	Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
80.	Lot Line. 
80.1 Front- The front line of an interior lot separating the lot from the frontage street right-of-way; across which the primary access to the property passes and which shall be used to identify the street address of the property in question. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line upon which the principal building entrance will front. 
80.2 Rear- The lot line generally opposite the lot line along the frontage of the lot and intersects the side lot lines. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front line not less than ten feet long lying wholly within the lot farthest from the front lot line. 
80.3 Side- Any property line not designated as front or rear. 
81.	Lot of Record. An area designated as a separate and distinct lot or parcel of land which has been lawfully recorded by subdivision plat or deed on the public records of Meriwether County, Georgia, on or before August 22, 2006. 
82.	Manufactured Home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. 
83.	Manufactured Housing. Manufactured housing units are defined as single-family dwellings if all requirements are met, as set forth in Article 10 Section 10.2 and all subsections of 10.2 of this Ordinance. 
84.	Manufactured Home Community (a.k.a. Mobile Home Park). A lot, or parcel of land or place where three (3) or more manufactured homes are parked for residential purposes, or where space is set aside and offered for rent for manufactured homes. Lots consist of appropriate and adequate community services, recreational facilities, utilities, streets and sidewalks provided by the developer. 
85.	Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
85.	Marquee Sign. Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
86.	Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and built prior to June 15, 1976. 
87.	Modular Home or Building. A factory-fabricated single-family dwelling which is constructed in one (1) or more sections and is manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the rules of the commissioner of community affairs. Each modular home shall meet the standards of an industrialized building of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and shall bear the seal of approval as issued by the Georgia Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs. 
88.	Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, offered to the general public for compensation, having separate entrances for each room or suite of rooms, and for which automobile parking is provided for each room or suite of rooms. To be used primarily for automobile transients and including such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge". 
89.	Mini-Warehouse. A building or portion thereof used for storage, mainly of excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses. Mini-warehouses shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any commercial use. 
90.	Nonconforming Sign. Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
91.	Nonconforming Use. Any building, structure, or land use which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of Zoning Ordinance or subsequently amended thereto and which does not conform, after the passage of such ordinance and/or amendments, to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
92.	Nursing Home. An orphanage, rest home, care home, convalescent home, boarding home for the aged, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, alcoholics, drug addicts, and not including nursery schools. 
93.	Official Zoning Districts Map. A map officially adopted by the governing body of a political jurisdiction that illustrates the various zoning districts of the jurisdiction. 
94.	Open Space. That required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by enclosed buildings and available to all occupants of the project. This space shall not be devoted to driveways or off-street parking, but shall be usable for green space, recreational use and other passive, leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
95.	Owner. The person vested in the fee simple title or record, or a vendee under contract or purchase agreement. If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least ten percent (10%) of the outstanding shares; and any agent of the owner, including a developer. The term "owner" may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of property. 
96.	Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
97.	Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, or corporation, or any other legal entity capable of ownership. 
98.	Personal Care Home. A residence providing the protective care of residents who do not require chronic or convalescent medical or nursing care. Personal care involves responsibility for safety of the resident while inside the building and may include daily awareness by the management of the resident's functioning and whereabouts, making and reminding a resident of appointments, the ability and readiness for intervention in the event of a resident experiencing a crisis, supervision in the areas of nutrition and medication, and the actual provision of transient medical care. See Personal Care Home, Group and Personal Care home, Congregate. 
99.	Personal Care Home, Congregate. A home for adults that offers care to sixteen (16) or more persons. 
100.	Personal Care Home, Group. A home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character and appearance, which offers care to seven (7) through sixteen (16) persons. 
101.	Personal Care Home, Family. A home for adults in a family type residence, non-institutional in character an appearance, which offers care to two through six persons. 
102.	Planning Commission. The Meriwether County Planning Commission. 
103.	Plat, Final. A complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official recording of that subdivision in accordance with the Plat Laws of the State of Georgia. 
104.	Porch. A roofed open area, which may be screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from a building. 
105.	Portable Sign. A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, but not including trailer signs (as herein defined); signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu or sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations 
106.	Principal Use. The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure as distinguished from an accessory or secondary use. 
107.	Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants. Private deed restrictions or covenants as imposed on land by private landowners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of the present owners and subsequent purchasers. The deed restrictions and covenants are enforced through the homeowners association and not by any County or other public agency. 
108.	Professional Office. Structure wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations such as law, doctor, optician, audiologist, accounting, tax preparation, real estate, stock broker, architect, engineer, manufacturer representative, professional counselor, dentist, investigative services, photographer, insurance, contractor, land surveyor, telephone sales, political/campaign, veterinarian, travel bureau, etc. 
109.	Projecting sign. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
110.	Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle or portable structure transportable on a mobile chassis, designed to be a temporary dwelling not hooked to any permanent utilities such as electricity, water or sewerage. It includes travel trailers, motorized dwellings, pop-up campers, pickup campers, coaches, and other similar recreational equipment. 
111.	Recreational Vehicle Park. Any lot or parcel of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. 
112.	Remodeling. To construct an addition or alter the design or layout of a building or make substantial repairs or alterations so that a change or modification of the entrance facilities, toilet facilities, or vertical access facilities is achieved. 
113.	Residential District Sign. Any sign located in a district for residential uses. 
114.	Restaurant. An establishment however designated at which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, or park operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
115.	Roof Sign, Integral. Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. Any roof sign that extends vertically beyond the framing of the roof shall not be permitted. 
116.	Secondary Detached Residence. A subordinate building on the same lot with the main building which is used, designed, or intended for dwelling purposes, such as guest houses and employee quarters, including tenant dwellings, but not including any dwelling which is rented, leased, or occupied by anyone other than the occupant of the main building or his guests, immediate family, or employees. 
117.	Salvage Operation/Salvage Yard. For the purpose of this ordinance, a salvage operation or salvage yard is a business the principal activity of which is buying, selling, exchanging, storing, sorting, packing, or dismantling of waste, used or secondhand material or three (3) or more inoperable, unlicensed vehicles. A commercial recycling operation or junkyard (as defined in this section) engaged in salvage operations. 
118.	School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
119.	Service Station. Any building or land used primarily for the dispensing, servicing, or offering for sale at retail any automobile fuels, oils, grease, batteries, tires, or general automotive accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automobile repairs, but where no part of the premises is used for the storage or dismantling of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
120.	Setback. A required open space on a lot or parcel of land upon which no building or structure is erected except as permitted by this Ordinance and is the shortest distance measured by a perpendicular line from the lot line or centerline of a street, highway or road and the nearest load bearing wall of the principal building or structure on a lot, load bearing walls do not include cornices, steps, open terraces, open entrance hoods, and the like which do not project more than six feet (6') from the building. 
121.	Setback Line, Rear. The interior boundary of the rear setback area (or rear yard) being a line equidistant from the rear property line and extending from the side property lines at the minimum depth specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
122.	Setback Line, Side. The interior boundary of a side setback area (or side yard), being a line equidistant from the appropriate side property line(s) and extending from the front setback line to the rear setback line at a minimum depth as specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
123.	Setback Line. The minimum required distance from the street right-of-way line or any other property line that the principal building must observe. 
124.	Sewage (Individual Disposal System). A septic tank and seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other sewage treatment device for one lot as approved by the County Health Department. 
125.	Sewage (Central System). A community sewage system including collection and treatment facilities serving more than one lot in a subdivision, approved by Meriwether County Health Department. 
126.	Shopping Center. Two (2) or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
127.	Sign. Any attached or free-standing outdoor advertising display of any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter, for the purpose of conveying some information, knowledge, idea to or attracting the attention of the public and which is placed in general view of the public. 
128.	Sign Setback Line. An imaginary line created by this Ordinance to establish an easily determined setback from any public thoroughfares for the placement of temporary signs. The sign setback line shall be ten feet from the back of the street curb edge of pavement or stabilized shoulder. 
129.	Site-Built Home. A single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by Meriwether County. 
130.	Special Use. A use for a particular piece of property that may be allowed by the County Commission when specifically listed in and provided for by this Ordinance. A special use is subject to such restrictive requirements as in the opinion of the County Commission would be necessary to insure that the use is not detrimental to surrounding property. 
131.	Streamer. A streamer is defined the same as a pennant for purposes of this Ordinance. 
132.	Street. A public right-of-way, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane or other way, that is dedicated or devoted to public pedestrian or vehicular use by deed, plat, and/or prescription, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
1.	Arterial Streets. These streets are intended to provide higher travel speeds between or within communities or to and from collectors and expressways. Access is controlled so that only community significant land use may have direct access to these streets. 
2.	Collector Streets. Collector streets connect residential streets to the highway system's major and higher (minor) arterials to provide access to nonresidential uses and arterials. Collectors form barriers between neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are residential streets. Because non-congested traffic flow is necessary for their effective functioning residential uses are prohibited access to collectors. Collectors are classified as major collectors and minor collectors. 
1.	Major Collector. The primary function is to carry traffic for most major intra-urban trips over one mile, particularly during peak hours. These streets provide only limited direct access to adjacent land. This direct access is usually focused on major facilities, shopping centers or other significant traffic generators. Major collectors are usually designed with four (4) travel lanes and may be either divided or undivided. On street parking cannot be permitted. 
2.	Minor Collector. The primary function is to carry traffic for short to medium (one-half to one mile) intra-urban trips and serves primarily local traffic. These strips receive traffic from residential streets and transmit it to major collectors and arterials. Minor collectors spaced to relieve excessive traffic volumes on local streets, are commonly designed with two (2) travel lanes. 
133.	Structure. Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires a fixed location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to the following: site built buildings, industrialized buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes and fall-out shelters. 
134.	Subdivision. A subdivision shall be defined as all divisions of a tract or parcel of land under common ownership into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes re-subdivisions and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and resultant lots are equal to the standards of the zoning district in which it is located. 
135.	Suspended Sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
136.	Temporary Sign. Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted to a structure. 
137.	Temporary Uses. A use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
138.	Trailer Sign. Any sign designed to be transported by means of wheels, whether or not the wheels remain attached, located on the ground and permanently attached thereto, and which is usually a two-sided sign and including any single- or double-surface painted or postered panel, or any variation thereof. 
139.	Trailer, Travel. A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper" or "travel" trailer. 
140.	Travel Trailer Park. See recreational park. 
141.	Truck Terminal. A building and premises catering primarily to trucks which may include warehousing facilities, and may include the functions and services of a mechanical garage, but shall not include the storage of trucks or other vehicles for the purpose of using parts for sale or repair. 
142.	Undisturbed Natural Buffer (Greenbelt). A tract of land dedicated to the county in its natural undisturbed state where no vegetation can be removed or planted without a permit. No herbicides, pesticides, or other chemicals, either natural or man-made can be used in this buffer. 
143.	Use, Permitted. Those uses specifically listed in this ordinance as "uses permitted inherently" not to include uses herein defined as "nonconforming uses". 
144.	Use, Principal. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
145.	Use, Special. Those uses that are permitted in a particular zoning district, but only under certain specified conditions. 
146.	Variance. A deviation from or modification of the strict terms of the zoning regulations granted by the Planning Commission where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought and not as a result of any intentional action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship provided, however, that no variance shall be granted which shall authorize a land use or lot size not otherwise permitted in a particular district. 
148.	Wall Sign. Any sign attached parallel to but within six inches of a wall; painted on the wall surface of; or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
149.	Water System, Individual. A potable water system other than a public water system serving a single building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
150.	Water System, Public. A potable water supply system other than individual water systems owned by Meriwether County or any municipality inside the boundaries of the county. 
151.	Window Sign. Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination, thereof, designed to communicate any information that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
152.	Yard Sale. A one to two days sale of common household items from a residential lot or lots. Also garage sale carport sale, rummage sale. 
153.	Yard. A space on the same lot with the principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except where encroachments and accessory building are expressly permitted. Yards shall be delineated by the "setback" and "setback line" definitions. 
153.1	Front- That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building (or front setback line) of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
153.2	Rear- That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building (or rear setback line) on the lot and on the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
153.3	Side- That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building (or side setback line) on the lot extending from the front yard or front setback line (or front lot line where no front yard/setback line is required) to the rear yard or rear setback line (or rear lot line where no rear yard/setback line is required). 
154.	Zoning Board of Appeals. The legally established Board of Zoning Appeals for Meriwether County. 
155.	Zoning. The delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. 
156.	Zoning Map. The legally adopted "Meriwether County Zoning Districts Map of Meriwether County, Georgia". 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
4.1	Use of land. No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
4.2	Use of Buildings. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located. 
4.2-1	Location of Buildings. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall be located on lots as herein defined except as approved by the Planning Commission in the form of a variance. 
4.2-2	Height of Buildings. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which it is located except for the following: 

 
Public and semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions and schools, may be erected to a height not to exceed one hundred (100') feet; churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75') feet, provided the required side yard and rear yards shall be increased by at least three (3') feet for each one (1) foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
4.2-3	Dimensional Regulations. No building or use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the minimum space requirements (i.e. the lot area, floor area, building height, etc.) for the district in which such building is located. 
4.2-4	Temporary Buildings. Temporary buildings shall not be permitted in any district except when they are used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building either commercial or residential. Such building shall be used for a period not to exceed one (1) year and shall be removed when the construction of the permanent building is completed. Construction of the permanent building is deemed complete at the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
4.3	Interpretation and Application. In interpreting and applying this ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance. Except as hereinafter provided, this ordinance shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
4.4	Zoning Affects all Land and Buildings. No buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
4.5	Principal Building Per Lot. Unless provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, there shall be no more than one (1) principal building or structure upon any lot in any residential district. 
4.6	Required Open Space May Not be used by Another Building. No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure. 
4.7	Reduction of Yards or Lot Areas. Unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 5. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
5.1	Lots of Record. Any lot of record which is legal prior to the date of adoption of this Ordinance, may be used subject to the following: 
5.1-1	Use of Substandard Lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance does not own sufficient area and width to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, the lot may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in the zone in which it is located; provided the owner has the approval in writing of the Meriwether County Health Department and Meriwether County Building and Zoning. 
5.1-2	Residential Use of Substandard Lots. In addition to Section 5.1-1, in any residential district, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that has a width or area less than that required by this Ordinance may be used as a building site, or for any permitted use in residential districts. When it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the Planning Commission is empowered to hear the request for a side yard variance. If a minimum ten (10') foot side yard is not possible then a variance for minimum width for single-family dwelling may be requested. 
5.2	Area, Yard and Height Regulations. 
5.2-1	Lot Area. Hereafter, no lot shall be reduced in size so that lot area per family requirement of this Ordinance is altered except when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
5.2-2	Yards and Open Space. 
1.	Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
2.	Every part of a required yard shall be open so that projections such as sills, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features may not extend into a required yard. 
3.	Other provisions of this ordinance notwithstanding, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street sides of corner lots shall violate the corner visibility provisions of this ordinance. See 5.3 — Corner visibility. 
5.2-3	Front Yards. 
5.2-3a	Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
5.2-3b	On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street.
5.2-3c	Corner lots shall meet the minimum front yard requirements on the side adjacent to both streets. 
5.2-3d	Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces, which are not covered by a roof or canopy and do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the required setback area six (6) feet or less. 
5.2-3e	Within the same block and zoning district, when twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the existing buildings are located within two hundred (200') feet on each side of a lot and have less than the minimum required setback, the required front setback of such lot should not exceed the average of the existing front setbacks. 
5.2-4	Side Yards. 
For the purposes of the side yard regulations, a group of commercial buildings separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches and other public or semi-public buildings in residential districts shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Where a side yard is adjacent to a business or commercial district, then the width of that yard shall be as required for the district in which the building is located. 
5.2-5	Fences and Walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight (8') feet in height. 
5.3	Corner Visibility. No sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting or other obstruction to vision, extending to a height in excess of three (3') feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points twenty-five (25') feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
5.4	Accessory Uses and Structures. 
5.4-1	An accessory structure shall not be permitted in any required front yard, except as specified in Section 5.4-8. 
5.4-2	No accessory building or structure shall be erected beyond a required yard line along any street. 
5.4-3	Residential accessory uses such as garages, greenhouses or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for commercial purposes unless the provisions of a home occupation are met. 
5.4-4	All residential accessory buildings must be located at least ten (10') feet from the principal building. 
5.4-5	Areas in which the accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer or travel trailer is permitted shall not include the required front yard. 
5.4-6	Gasoline station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided that they shall not be less than fifteen (15') feet from street lines; canopies, whether attached or detached from the principal building must be at least fourteen (14') feet in height and the outermost edge shall be five (5') feet from any property line. 
5.4-7	All non-residential accessory buildings shall only be used by the owners, employees, lessee or tenants of the premises; and shall meet the setback requirements of the principal building. 
5.4-8	An open or unenclosed swimming pool may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that the pool is not located closer than six (6') feet to a rear lot line or ten (10') feet to an interior side lot line. A three feet (3') wide walk space shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. 
5.5	Residential Home Occupations. The conduct of business in R-1 and RD zoned districts may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to ensure the following: 
5.5-1.	Compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in residential zoning districts; 
5.5-2.	Maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods and provide peace, quiet and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods. 
5.5-3	Residential home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements:
5.5-4	A home occupation is subordinate to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. No more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in connection with a home occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. 
5.5-5	No more than one (1) home occupation shall be permitted within a single dwelling unit.
5.5-6	The residential home occupation is limited to employment of residents of the property and not more than one (1) additional non-resident of the property. 
5.5-7	A home occupation shall produce no noise or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perceptions outside the principal structure. 
5.5-8	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing off-street space and located in rear or side yard. 
5.5-9	On the premises, retail sales are prohibited except for the retail sales of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
5.5-10	There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
5.5-11	No on street parking of business related vehicles (either marked or commercially equipped) shall be permitted at any home. No business related vehicles larger than a van, panel truck or pick up truck is permitted to park overnight on the premises. There can be only one (1) business related vehicle. 
5.5-12	A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal use. No residential home occupation shall store goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation in accessory buildings or garage that are attached or detached. 
5.5-13	Permitted residential home occupations:
Architectural services 
Art Studio 
Consulting services 
Data Processing 
Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Jaffra, Mary Kay, Tupperware etc.) provided there is no production on premises. 
Drafting and graphic services 
Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing (1 machine) 
Electronic Assembly 
Engineering service 
Financial planning or investment services 
Flower arranging 
Home office 
House Cleaning service 
In-home child care, but not more than six (6) children at a time, including the caregivers own pre-school children 
Insurance sales or broker 
Interior design 
Laundry and ironing service 
Locksmith 
Real estate sales, broker or appraiser 
Telephone answering, switchboard call forwarding 
Tutoring, including all indoor and outdoor instructional services limited to two (2) students at a time. 
Writing, resume services, computer programming 
5.5-14	Prohibited residential home occupations:
1.	Ambulance service
2.	Restaurants, food preparation
3.	Veterinary services (including care, grooming and boarding).
4.	Automobile repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing, washing services
5.6	Rural Home Occupations. Rural home occupations in the Low Density Residential District shall be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of the section to ensure the compatibility of rural home occupations with other uses permitted in the Low Density Residential District; maintain and preserve the rural character of the area and not create a nuisance for residents in the area by exceeding traffic, smoke, noise or be a fire hazard. 
The purpose of rural home occupations is to provide a means for residents in the larger lot rural residential district to participate in the type of businesses permitted in residential districts, be able to conduct the home occupation in an accessory building where necessary, and to park, on-site, vehicles required for home occupations. Rural home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
5.6-1	The minimum lot size is five acres. For lots less than five acres, the home occupation is limited to the provisions of Section 5.5. 
5.6-2	The rural home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the principal use of the parcel and shall not change the residential character of the area. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling shall be used in connection with the home occupation or storage purposes. 
5.6-3	The rural home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling or within an accessory building provided all structure uses are harmonious in appearance with the rural residential or single-family district. 
5.6-4	One accessory building not exceeding 1,000 square feet may be used in connection with the rural home occupation. 
5.6-5	The business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies or products shall not be conducted on premises except under the following circumstances: 
1.	Orders previously made by telephone or at sales parties may be filled on premises; and 
2.	Incidental retail sales as may be necessary or in connection with the permitted home occupation. 
5.6-6	The existence of the rural home occupation shall not be apparent outside the dwelling or accessory building in which the rural home occupation is conducted, except that one display sign limited to nine square feet of sign area shall be permitted. The display sign added to all other signs on the parcel shall not exceed the maximum signage allowed in the district. 
5.6-7	No outside storage of equipment or materials used in the conduct of the rural home occupation, other than trade vehicles, is permitted. 
5.6-8	The rural home occupation is limited to residents of the property and not more than two additional non-residents of the property. 
5.6-9	No additional points of access to any street shall be permitted, unless necessary to provide safe and proper access to the proposed use. 
5.6-10	Permitted rural home occupations:
1.	All occupations permitted in Section 5.5-10.
2.	Appliance repair.
3.	Barber shops/Beauty shops (limited to two stations).
4.	Cabinet making.
5.	Ceramics.
6.	Contracting, masonry, plumbing or painting.
7.	Tow truck services.
8.	Upholstery.
9.	Veterinary services.
10.	Antique Shop.
11.	Small scale garden plants for sell to retail commercial gardening and supply stores.
5.7	Farm Based Business. 
5.7-1	The uses permitted under this section apply to the Agricultural (A-1) and Rural Residential (RR) zoned districts. Farm occupations may involve any one of a wide range of uses, so long as the use is compatible with the primary agricultural use of the land. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator the farm based business is compatible with the rural setting and shall not create nuisances for nearby residents. 
5.7-2	No more than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area in any one building shall be occupied by the farm-based business. 
5.7-3	No more than one acre shall be devoted to the farm-based business including the structure, parking, storage, and driveway (if separate from the primary residence driveway). 
5.7-4	Where practical, farm-based businesses shall be conducted within an existing building located on the farm parcel. However, any building constructed for use by the farm-based business shall be: 
1.	Located behind a residence; or
2.	Setback a minimum of 100 feet from any public street right-of-way.
5.7-5	Any building constructed for the use of the farm-based business shall be of a nature that it can be converted to agricultural use or removed from the property if the farm-based business is discontinued. The structure shall blend with surrounding agricultural setting. 
5.7-6	A site development sketch shall be submitted to the Building and Zoning Department for approval. The sketch shall show the location of any building, distance from property lines, parking and location of signage. 
5.7-7	No farm-based business shall be located within 100 feet of any adjoining side or rear property line, nor within 100 feet of any adjacent residential zoning district. Such distances shall be measured as a straight line between the closest points of any structure or any other physical improvement of the farm-based business and the adjoining property line. 
5.7-8	Any outdoor storage of supplies, materials or products shall be in an area least visible to the public, stored in an orderly fashion and adjacent to the building in which the farm-based business is located. Such outdoor storage shall be screened from adjoining roads and properties in accordance with the buffers specified in Article 9. 
5.7-9	An on premises, freestanding sign is permitted for the farm-based business and shall be in accordance with Chapter 10, Signs, of the Meriwether County Code or Ordinances. 
5.7-10	The Meriwether County Zoning Administrator may also require such other reasonable conditions as deemed appropriate. 
5.7-11	Permitted farm based businesses:
1.	All uses listed in 5.5-10 and 5.6-10.
2.	Farm equipment sales and service.
3.	Greenhouse or nursery sales.
4.	Flea market
5.	Livestock sales or auction Facility.
6.	Pet and dog grooming.
7.	Produce stand.
8.	Any farm based business approved by the Meriwether County Commission.
5.8	Bed and Breakfast Home. This use is allowed as a special exception in A-1, RR, RD and R-1. 
5.8-1	Rooms for rent are located in single-family dwelling units.
5.8-2	The bed and breakfast is occupied by the owner as his/her principle residence.
5.8-3	The same rental occupants shall not reside at the bed and breakfast for more than seven consecutive days. 
5.8-4	Breakfast is the only meal served and only to registered overnight guests.
5.8-5	No person not a resident is employed at the bed and breakfast.
5.8-6	The exterior appearance of the dwelling unit is not altered from its residential character except for safety purposes. 
5.8-7	The freestanding sign shall be no larger than two sq. ft. and not internally lighted.
5.9	Bed and Breakfast Inn. This use is allowed as a special exception in R-1 and is a use of right in the NHC zoned district. 
5.9-1	A building or dwelling unit, not necessarily owner-occupied, that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for four or more guest rooms for compensation provided: 
5.9-1a	There is compliance with the same licensing, inspection and taxation requirements as hotels, motels and restaurants. 
5.9-1b	If within a residential district the dwelling or building shall maintain residential character of the neighborhood. 
5.9-1c	Breakfast is the only meal served and only to overnight guests.
5.9-1d	The owners may have employees other than owner and owner's family.
5.9-1e	One off street parking space shall be provided for each employee.
5.9-1f	One off street parking space shall be provided for each rental room.
5.9-1g	In residential zoned districts signage shall be limited to one sign no more than two square feet. 
5.10	Cemeteries. All proposed cemeteries whether public, private or in conjunction with a religious institution shall not be located in a floodplain area as delineated by Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for Meriwether County. Cemeteries shall be set back not less than 50' from any right-of-way line. 
5.11	Property Maintenance. To ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Meriwether County the following regulations shall be established for the maintenance of property in the County: 
5.11-1	Non-functioning appliances shall be stored in an enclosed accessory or principal building. Any non-functioning appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, stoves, etc., shall have doors removed prior to storage. 
5.11-2	Any major auto repairs such as rebuilding motors, transmissions or heavy body work shall be done in an enclosed accessory building or on a section of property nor visible from the public street. 
5.11-3	Non-licensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed accessory building. No more than three non-licensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored on property unless application for a junkyard has been issued by the Meriwether County Building and Zoning Department. 
5.11-4	Yard sales shall last for a specified duration only. There shall not be any continuous yard sales in Meriwether County. Storing of yard sale items shall be in an enclosed accessory or principal building and shall not be on display in any yard except during the hours of the yard sales. Yard sales may last eight hours a day no more than three days a week at the same residence. 
5.11-5	No abandoned mobile or manufactured homes shall be used as a storage or accessory building. Abandoned mobile/manufactured homes shall be removed from property at owner's expense upon notification by the Codes Enforcement officer. 
5.12	Junkyards, Junk Business or Salvage Operation. To ensure the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of Meriwether County the following shall be the regulations necessary for junkyards, junk businesses and salvage operations: 
5.12-1	The minimum lot area for a junkyard, junk business or salvage operation shall be no less than ten acres and be zoned Industrial. 
5.12-2	All junkyards, junk businesses or salvage operations shall be buffered in accordance with Article 8, Buffer Requirement 8.1-5. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 6. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 
6.1	Establishment of Districts. In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, unincorporated Meriwether County is hereby divided into the following districts: 

 
6.1-1	Agricultural District (General Farming) (A-1). This district is intended to provide low density residential areas with land uses compatible with more intense agricultural uses. 
6.1-2	Rural Reserve District (RR). The purpose of this district is to allow for less intense agricultural uses and low density residential. This district is intended to assist in preserving the rural character of Meriwether County. 
6.1-3	Low Density Residential District. This district is created to allow for a transition between low and medium density residential district. It also allows low intensity agricultural uses such as pasture land, keeping of horses, cows or dog kennels for personal pleasure (non commercial). 
6.1-4	Rural Development District (RD). The purpose of this district is to provide a medium density residential area with no public sewerage and to preserve the rural character of Meriwether County. 
6.1-5	Single-Family Residential (R-1). The purpose of this district is to provide a medium to high density residential district that is served by public water and sewer systems operated and maintained by municipality that currently or may be licensed by EPD as a municipal sewer system. 
6.1-6	Multi-Family Residential (MR). This district is designed to provide high density residential areas which have public water and public waste water facilities. 
6.1-7	Manufactured Home Park (MHP). This district is designed to encourage the development of manufactured home parks and related facilities within a well planned environment. 
6.1-8	Neighborhood Commercial (NHC). This district is established to provide a location for commercial growth in neighborhoods creating commercial nodes rather than strip commercial along highway corridors. 
6.1-9	Industrial District (I). This district is established to provide appropriate locations for industrial operations. 
6.1-10	Planned Unit Development District (PUD). This district is designed to allow mixed uses and greater density for residential development. This district shall allow for conservation subdivisions, developments containing apartments or own houses in conjunction with single family residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
6.1-11	Commercial Industrial Park District (CID). This district is designed to provide for the retailing of goods and services, the light manufacture and assembly of products, and the warehousing and distribution of such products within the controlled environment of an attractive, park-like setting. 
6.1-12	Planned Industrial District (PID). This district is designed to provide for a comprehensively planned district for the overall growth and development of certain industrial uses which are mutually harmonious with other industrial district and also harmonious with residential, commercial and other uses permitted in nearby districts. The Planned Industrial District caters to basic industries requiring large tracts of land. It is intended to be protected from encroachment by commercial, residential and other land uses adverse to the location and expansion of industrial development. 
6.2	Zoning District Map. The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the Official Meriwether County Zoning Districts Map of unincorporated Meriwether County. The Zoning Map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this Ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein, which zoning district map is properly attested and is on file with the Meriwether County Zoning Administrator and available for public review. 
6.3	District Boundaries. 
6.3-1	The district boundaries shown on the zoning district map are generally intended to follow streets, alleys or lot lines; where the districts designated on said map are bounded by such street, alley or lot line, the centerline of the street, alley or lot line shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map. In all other cases, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Official Zoning Map. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 7. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 
7.1	District, Lot and Height Standards. The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zoning district shall be met as indicated in Article 5 General Provisions and Table 7.1: Zoning District Area, Yard and Height Requirements. Please note the districts not listed in this table have standards in separate articles of this ordinance. 
Table 7.1: District Area, Yard and Height Requirements 

 
Notes  *  Public Road Frontage Requirements qa
** This measurement is from the centerline of the road 
7.2	Appearance Standards. Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings including site-built housing, industrialized housing, and manufactured houses. Approval shall be granted upon finding that such development shall meet or exceed the Appearance standards as shown on Table 7.2: Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings. 
Table 7.2: Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings 

 
Notes: 
1.	The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the building and zoning department of Meriwether County. 
2.	The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal lap, vinyl lap, or other materials of like appearance approved by the building and zoning department of Meriwether County. 
3.	Permanent foundations shall meet the requirements of standard building code. For manufactured homes, a masonry curtain wall solid except for the required ventilation and access must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to the ground level. 
4.	For manufactured homes, a landing area is required and its width and length must be greater than or equal to the width of the entrance doorway. 
5.	Manufactured homes are required to remove all towing devices.
6.	Manufactured homes that cannot remove towing devices shall be screened by plantings and the structure shall be skirted. 
7.3	Permitted Uses. No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in Table 7.3. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. The letter "X" indicates a permitted use in that zoning district. A principal use denoted by the letter "S" is permitted only if a special use permit is granted by the Meriwether County Commission. Special use permits are subject to standards for special uses stated in Article 16. Any blank area indicates the use is not permitted in that zoning district. For uses not included on this list where the Zoning Administrator is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the Planning Commission for an amendment to this table under provisions of this Ordinance for text amendments to the zoning ordinance and in accordance with the Zoning Procedures Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq. Permitted uses for the zoning districts not listed in this table are located in the Articles for the district. 
Table 7.3:  Permitted and Special Uses 

 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2); Ord. of 4-10-13) 
ARTICLE 8. - BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
A buffer shall be required whenever two adjoining properties are in dissimilar zone districts as shown in following Table 8.1. 
TABLE: 8.1  BUFFER REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN DISSIMILAR ZONE DISTRICTS 
Least Intensive Uses .....Most Intensive Uses  

 
8.1	Determination of Buffer Requirements Between Residential, Commercial and Industrial Zones. When two adjoining properties are dissimilar residential, commercial or industrial zone districts as indicated in Table 8.1, the property within the zone district allowing the most intensive uses is required to provide the buffer when acquiring a building permit unless the buffer was pre-existing. When two adjoining vacant parcels are in dissimilar zone districts as indicated in Table 8.1, no buffer is required when the parcel zoned for the less intensive use acquires a building permit. 
8.1-1	Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of plantings or a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), or a berm, which meets the screening standards of Section 8.3. If plantings are chosen as the method of screening, the planting area shall have a minimum base width of twelve (12) feet. 
8.1-2	Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall not less than a twenty (20) foot base width and shall consist of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), or a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of Section 8.3. 
8.1-3	Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of a fifty (50) foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a twenty (20) foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of Section 8.3. 
8.1-4	Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of a one hundred (100) foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a twenty (20) foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of Section 8.3. 
8.1-5	Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of either a non-vegetated five hundred (500) foot setback or two hundred (200) foot vegetated setback from the adjoining property line. A two hundred (200) foot minimum setback shall consist of seventy-five (75) feet of vegetated buffer area, measured along the entire portion of the property line abutting said use, and such buffer shall extend an additional one hundred-twenty-five (125) feet in each direction along the common property line. The seventy-five (75) foot vegetated buffer shall meet the planting requirements contained in Section 8.3. 
8.3	Screening Standards. Screening is a method of visually shielding or obscuring one use from another by fence, walls, a berm or densely planted vegetation. 
Plantings. Plantings shall consist of either trees or shrubs or any combination of both. Planted areas shall be located along the abutting property lines or in areas that will provide the best screening effectiveness. If trees or large shrubs are used solely as the screening device, they shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the Zoning Administrator that, under normal growing conditions, will attain a minimum height of eight (8) feet and a canopy spread of ten (10) feet within four (4) years. They shall be planted a minimum twenty (20) feet on center. 
Small trees shall be planted thirty (30) feet on center, and large trees forty (40) feet on center. Shrubs shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the Zoning Administrator planted four (4) feet on center. Shrubs shall initially be of any size, which would normally attain a minimum height of six (6) feet within three (3) years after planting. 
Walls. Walls shall be of masonry construction and a minimum height of eight (8) feet. The wall shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intensive land use. 
Fences. Fences shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and constructed of standard wood fencing materials and methods or chain link with woven inserts that will provide ninety percent (90%) visual blockage. The fence shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense land use. 
Berms. Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
8.4	Buffer Design. All buffers required by this article shall conform to the following specifications: 
8.4-1	Prior to development, a buffer plan shall be required to show the types and locations of all plantings within a required buffer. If a site plan is required, a buffer plan shall be incorporated as part of the site development plan. 
8.4-2	Landscaping within buffer areas shall be used to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units and transformers. 
8.4-3	Existing on-site trees may be credited as meeting the requirements of this Article if the Zoning Administrator determines that such plant materials achieve the purposes of this Article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06)
8.5	Location of Buffers. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel along all lot lined adjoining dissimilar zones including adjacent property lines, which may be separated by an existing or proposed public right-of-way. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of existing, dedicated or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
8.6	Variances. The requirements of this Article may be waived by the Zoning Administrator under any of the following conditions: 
8.6-1	It is clearly demonstrated that the existing topography and/or vegetation will achieve the purpose of this Article. 
8.6-2	It is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, no required screening device could possibly screen the ground level activities of the use from the first floor view of the residential structure abutting the use. 
8.6-3	The adjoining property owners mutually agree in writing that the required buffer is not necessary for a satisfactory use and enjoyment of their property rights. 
8.6-4	It is clearly demonstrated that an existing (or) proposed public right-of-way separation between adjoining properties will achieve the purposes of this Article. 
8.7	Use of Existing Buffers. An existing buffer used for some forms of passive recreation such as pedestrian, bike, equestrian trails, or as a stormwater retention area may be used provided that: 
1.	No planted materials shall be eliminated; and
2.	The total width of the required buffer area shall be maintained.
8.8	Maintenance. The responsibility for maintenance of buffers shall remain with the owner of the property. Any required plant that has died shall be replaced. Maintenance of planted areas shall consist of mowing, removal of litter and dead plant materials and necessary pruning. Fences and walls shall be kept in a condition that meets the requirements of this Article. 
8.9	Failure to Comply with these Provisions. See Article 16-23 of this Ordinance for penalty provisions. 
8.10	Surety for Buffer Installation. When the date for issuing a Certificate of Occupancy does not coincide with the planting conditions that are necessary to install a required buffer, the Zoning Administrator shall accept a letter of credit or other acceptable surety for the buffer installation. Such surety shall be in the amount and form satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator and shall certify the following: 
1.	That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount to cover the cost of installing all buffers approved by the Zoning Administrator; 
2.	That in case of failure of the developer to complete the specified improvements, the creditor shall pay the government immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of the secured credit; and 
3.	That the letter of credit or other surety may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount until released by the Zoning Administrator after final inspection and certification of approval of the buffer. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 9. - COMMUNICATION TOWER REGULATIONS 
9.1	Definitions 
1.	Alternative Tower Structure. Shall mean man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal presence of antennas or towers. 
4.[2.]	Antenna. Shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
5.[3.]	FAA. Shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
6.[4.]	FCC. Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
7.[5.]	Height. Shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
5.[6.]	Tower. Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, etc. 
9.2	Purpose 
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish general guidelines for the sitting of towers and antennas. The goals of this ordinance are to: 
1.	Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout Meriwether County; 
2.	Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
3.	Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the County is minimal; 
4.	Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way to minimize the adverse visual impact to the county; 
5.	Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the county quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
9.3	Aesthetics. The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas governed by this ordinance. 
1.	Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
2.	At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping which will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
3.	If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color or colors that is identical to, or is closely comparable with, the supporting structure and/or surrounding area so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
4.	Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the Zoning Administrator may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design which would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
9.4	General 
1.	Height Limitations: The height limitations set forth in the section of the Zoning Ordinance as applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antenna. Towers and antenna shall be governed by the Special Use Permit procedures set forth herein. 
2.	Tower Height Threshold: These standards shall only be applicable to antenna and towers in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
3.	The County Commission may consider for approval a site plan specific request that is in substantial conformance with the requirements listed herein. 
9.5	Special Use Permit 
9.5-1	Special Land Use Permit shall be required for all television, land mobile, communication, microwave, radio transmission antennae and towers. 
9.5-2	Federally licensed amateur radio antennas under seventy (70) feet in height are exempt from Special Use Permit requirements. 
9.6	Requirements 
1.	All towers and antennae in excess of seventy (70) feet located in an industrial zone shall be set back according to front yard requirements stated in Table 7.1. Towers with trigger links shall be set back one-half (1/2) the distance of the length of the tower when located in areas zoned general commercial and setback the full height of the tower if located in any residential or rural development zoned district. 
2.	At the time of filing the application for a tower, the applicant shall provide a site plan and information regarding topography, coverage zone, and tower height requirements. 
3.	Shared usage of towers and antennae facilities is encouraged, and towers shall be designed to accommodate such uses. 
4.	Accessory structures shall be limited to usages associated with operation of the antennae or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. 
5.	All towers and antennae shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device such as a six (6) foot wall, fence or other appropriate devices to prevent unauthorized access. 
6.	All towers and antennae must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission or such governing agency guidelines as may be established by named agencies. 
7.	At the time of application for a building permit, the plans for tower or antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable codes. Cost of engineering evaluation shall be the responsibility of the individual or corporation applying for the building permit. 
8.	Applicants are required to explore and fully utilize existing tower and antennae space.
9.	Non-residential sites are encouraged for tower location where possible and use of platted lots in existing subdivisions are discouraged. 
10.	In addition, all such towers and antennae shall be designed to minimize visual and scenic impact when located on slopes greater than fifteen (15%) percent or on top of such slopes. 
11.	Any tower approved under the provisions of this ordinance which is not utilized by any communications service provider for any communications related purpose for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall lose any privilege of special use previously granted by the County Commission and must therefore be re-submitted for approval prior to use for any purpose. 
9.7	Co-location of Antennas 
9.7-1	Co-location. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunications antennas according to the following: 
1.	For towers up to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, which ever is greater; 
2.	For towers greater than 150 feet in height the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater. 
9.7-2	Co-locating Antennas on Existing Towers. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued is not required to apply for a Special Use Permit. Administrative approval by the Zoning Administrator may be granted upon proof that the tower is structurally capable of holding the antenna and submission of the following: 
1.	The name of the person or entity co-locating the antenna.
2.	The name of the owner of the tower.
3.	The tower's permit number.
4.	The location of the tower.
5.	The remaining structural capacity of the tower.
6.	Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
9.7-3	Location of Antennas on Non-Residential Structures. Any person or entity locating an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances on or around existing non-residential structures is not required to apply for a Special Use Permit, but shall be required to obtain administrative approval by the Zoning Administrator upon proof that the structure is capable of holding the antenna and related equipment and submission of the following: 
1.	The name of the person or entity locating the antenna.
2.	The location and use of the structure being used to locate the antenna.
3.	Permission from structure's owner to locate antenna.
4.	Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
9.8	Landscape Buffer/Screening Requirements 
9.8-1	Unless otherwise noted within this section's requirements, or otherwise approved by the County Commission, any commercial tower or antennae which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum forty (40) foot setback from the residential property, fifteen (15) feet of which shall be a landscaped, screening buffer between the tower and the residentially zoned property. 
NOTE: Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case where required buffers and setbacks are in conflict the more stringent shall apply. 
Additionally, necessary private utilities and/or access drives may be allowed through, over, or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over, or across a designated, undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
9.8-2	Objectives: The above required landscape screening buffer shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal;
2.	Control or direct vehicular and pedestrian movement;
3.	Reduce glare;
4.	Buffer noise; and
5.	Establish privacy.
9.8-3	Standards: The required landscape buffer/screening requirements are subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of rows of evergreen trees and shrubs, deciduous trees and evergreens taller than the required five (5) foot minimum; 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to site and appropriate for design situation;
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffers should provide maximum visual barrier to adjoining properties and public streets; 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is to be five (5) feet for trees;
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
6.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner(s) to ensure that the above objectives and standards are met; 
7.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required landscape buffer should be undisturbed; provided, however, the buffer may be crossed by an access drive and/or necessary utilities as shown on the site plan. 
8.	Any appeals from a determination by the Zoning Administrator regarding the landscape buffer shall be considered by the Planning Commission. 
9.9	Action by County Commission 
9.9-1	Upon receipt of Special Use Permit Application there will be a public hearing regarding the Special Use and building permit. 
9.9-2	Public notification. Legal notice of the public hearing before the County Commission shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in Meriwether County in which the legal advertisements of the County are published. 
The application advertisement shall include date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the date of the first hearing by the County Commission. 
9.9-3	The County Commission shall approve or deny any special use permit request and require any conditions deemed necessary or appropriate to maintain safety, health, scenic value, and welfare of Meriwether County. Any special use permit for communications towers that is denied shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
9.10	Standards for Review: 
9.10-1	The County Commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to approve this proposed use: 
1.	Height of the proposed tower/fall zones;
2.	Proximity of the tower to residential structures or uses which may be incompatible with the towers (such as private or public airports); 
3.	Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
4.	Surrounding topography;
5.	Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
6.	Proposed ingress and egress; and
7.	Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures.
9.10-2	Availability of Suitable Existing Towers or Other Structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
1.	No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.	Existing towers and structures do not have sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.	Existing towers and structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
4.	The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
5.	The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
6.	The applicant demonstrates there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unreasonable. 
9.11	Action by County Staff 
1.	Upon approval by County Commission the Special Use Permit and Building Permit shall be issued upon receipt of the fee as assessed in compliance with the schedule posted in the County Building and Zoning office of Meriwether County. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 10. - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 
10.1	Purpose. The purpose of the Article is to provide standards and regulations to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Meriwether County. Meriwether County recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing if developed in accordance with comparable standards. These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes on single lots or within parks used for permanent residential occupancy, as well as recreational vehicle parks used for temporary occupancy, in unincorporated Meriwether County, Georgia. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the Meriwether County Planning Commission, the Meriwether County Health Department, and the Building and Zoning office to review the development of manufactured home sites, manufactured home parks, and recreational vehicle parks, within the unincorporated areas of Meriwether County for compliance with standards as stated in this ordinance. 
10.2	Manufactured Homes 
10.2-1	Nonconforming Use. Nonconforming mobile/manufactured home parks lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, the manufactured home park shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations prior to its being occupied again. Any expansion or addition to an existing manufactured home park shall be in compliance with these regulations, as amended. 
10.2-2	Issuance of Permit. Any owner of a manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said manufactured home, shall obtain a permit from the Building and Zoning office of Meriwether County indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed manufactured home. 
10.2-3	Permit Application Procedures. A manufactured home permit to move a manufactured home into or within the County shall not be issued until the following conditions have been met in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
10.2-3.1	All manufactured homes located in Meriwether County shall be no more than ten (10) years old at the time of placement in the county. 
10.2-3.2	All manufactured homes must be located at an approved manufactured home space, or in an approved manufactured home park subject to the requirements of this ordinance. 
10.2-3.3	For individual lots outside of a manufactured home park, a septic tank certificate shall be obtained from Meriwether County Health Department for on site sewage disposal, or in the event that sewer will be provided, a letter shall be provided by the local government providing the service verifying they will allow public sewer hookup. 
10.2-3.4	For purposes of this Section, the Building and Zoning office shall issue the aforementioned building permit, and the Health Department shall issue the aforementioned septic tank certificate. Upon issuance of the required permits, a manufactured home may be moved into the County or within the County and installed for occupancy. 
10.2-3.5	All manufactured homes located on individual lots shall adhere to the appearance standards set forth in Article 7. The type of appearance standard required depends on the zoning district where the manufactured home is located. 
10.2-4	Minimum Construction Standards. Each newly installed manufactured home in Meriwether County shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD), as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C., Section 5401, et seq., before that manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said manufactured home. It is the intent of this Section of this Ordinance to prohibit moving manufactured homes into Meriwether County that do not conform to the applicable Housing and Urban Development Construction Standards, as expressed in 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that Act. To that end, no manufactured home shall be allowed to locate or relocate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this County unless that manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by HUD, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanent label or tag certifying the compliance. Manufactured homes that do not display certification compliance shall not be eligible for a Meriwether County building and/or occupancy permit. Any manufactured home in Meriwether County that legally exists at the time of adoption of this ordinance that does display certification compliance shall not be required to have certification. However, any manufactured home that does not display certification shall be considered a nonconforming structure and shall not be relocated to any other site within the county. 
10.2-5	Installation Requirements. All newly installed manufactured homes shall be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service in compliance with applicable health codes and Chapter 120-3-7 Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes plus Appendix A of Chapter 120-3-7, made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. All manufactured homes shall be installed on an approved pier system and secured with approved tie-downs devices, an approved plumbing system, an approved electrical system and an approved landing at each exit as required by the aforementioned rules, regulations and in compliance with appearance standards for the appropriate zoning district. Each manufactured home shall be installed such that the finished floor level of the manufactured home shall not exceed an average height higher than eighty (80) inches in elevation from the finished grades, in accordance with Chapter 120-3-7. All manufactured homes shall be installed to meet the manufacturer's regulations. At the time of inspection, the space beneath each manufactured home shall be enclosed, with the exception of ventilation and access openings, and according to the appearance in Article 7 it must be in compliance with (type I, II or III). The residential zone of each manufactured home will dictate which type it must meet (see permitted use Table 7.3). The enclosing materials shall extend from the lower edge of the exterior walls of the manufactured home to the ground surface level of the pad on which it is located. All ventilation and access openings shall be covered with wire mesh screen or its equivalent. 
10.2-6	Inspection for Manufactured Homes. The following requirements shall pertain to the installation of manufactured homes on individual lots or in parks. 
10.2-6.1	Foundation. The foundation shall comply with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured homes, as may be subsequently revised. These Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes are incorporated as a part of this Ordinance by reference. Until the foundation is inspected and approved by the Building and Zoning Office, no additional work will be approved. 
10.2-6.2	Plumbing. The external plumbing system, including water and sewage hookups, shall comply with Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the appropriate, applicable, accepted plumbing codes used by the Building Inspector for site built homes. Until the plumbing system is inspected and approved by the Building and Zoning Office, no additional work will be approved. 
10.2-6.3	On-site Sewerage. Where individual on-site sewerage systems are installed with public or community water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than required in the zoning district in which the home is located. All on site sewerage systems shall be subject to the Meriwether County Health Department approval. 
10.2-6.4	Electrical. The external electrical system shall comply with the current National Electrical Code, as amended. 
10.2-6.5	Gas. The gas system shall comply with current Standard Gas Code, as amended. 
10.2-6.6	Inspections. Until all inspections have been made and the manufactured home is found to be in compliance with all applicable codes, no permanent power will be approved, and no occupancy shall be permitted. Evidence of compliance will be shown by written documentation provided to the applicant and a sticker attached to the electrical meter base. 
10.2-7	Occupancy of Recreational Vehicles. No recreational vehicle shall be permanently occupied within any manufactured home park development nor connected to permanent water or electrical power and no manufactured home location permits shall be issued for recreational vehicles. 
10.2-8	Standards for Installation of Pre-Owned Manufactured Homes. 
10.2-8.1	Definitions. The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
(a)	Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the unincorporated area of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(b)	Building Inspector means the Meriwether County Building and Zoning Director or the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits, and inspections; the building official or any of his or her assistants. 
(c)	Certificate of Occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this Ordinance, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
(d)	Guarantee of Condition Bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by Paragraphs (1) and (2) of Subsection (a) of Section 10.2-8.3 of this Ordinance reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the County. 
(e)	Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
(f)	Jurisdiction means the unincorporated area of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
(g)	Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
(h)	Pre-owned Manufactured Home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
10.2-8.2	Conditions. All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
10.2-8.3	Permitting, Inspection, Certificate of Occupancy, and Fees. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(a)	Permit. To obtain a permit, Applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
(1)	A $1,000.00 letter of credit from a banking institution or $1,000.00 refundable cash deposit guaranteeing compliance; and 
(2)	The permit and inspection fee required by Subsection (d) of this Section.
(b)	Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, Applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(c)	Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the Applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this Ordinance have been met. 
(d)	Fee. A reasonable permit and inspection fee shall be charged to the Applicant to cover the cost to the County to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow up inspection. The Applicant shall be charged a reasonable fee for each additional follow up inspection that may be necessary. 
(e)	Alternative Inspection. At the request of the Applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the county. 
10.2-8.4	Minimum Health and Safety Standards. All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(a)	HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(b)	Interior Condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight, and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(c)	Exterior Condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(d)	Sanitary Facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(e)	Heating Systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(f)	Electrical Systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(g)	Hot Water Supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(h)	Egress Windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(i)	Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(j)	Smoke Detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
10.2-8.5	Enforcement. 
(a)	Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)	Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)	The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
10.2-8.6	Penalties. Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by forfeiture of the cash deposit or letter of credit as set out in 10.2-8.3(a)(1) above. 
10.3	Manufactured Home Parks. 
10.3-1	Procedures for Development. All manufactured home parks developed after adoption of this ordinance shall meet the following site plan requirements: 
10.3-1.1	Site Plan Approval Required. All manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures and requirements established herein. Site plans required herein for the placement of three (3) or more residential units shall contain the seal of a Georgia Registered Engineer or Surveyor. No building permits shall be issued for sites within any development until final approval is granted subject to all park plan requirements. 
10.3-1.2	Park Plan Submittal Requirements. All park plans shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator accompanied by the required fee payment as established by Meriwether County. 
10.3-1.3	The name of the proposed park, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
10.3-1.4	Location map and legal description of the manufactured home park, north arrow (designated magnetic or true). 
10.3-1.5	Complete plans to scale of one inch equals not more than one hundred (100) feet and specifications of the proposed park showing: 
10.3-1.5a	The area and dimensions of the tract of land; including topographic data at a contour interval of not more than five (5) feet or an interval appropriate for decision making on the tract; and including the location and type of soils on the tract. Statement of accuracy signed by surveyor or engineer as applicable. 
10.3-1.5b	The number, location and dimensions of all manufactured home lots.
10.3-1.5c	The location and width of streets; the location and size of drainage mechanisms proposed, including the size of each application drainage area. 
10.3-1.5d	The location of service buildings (laundry service, office, community building etc.) and other proposed structures. 
10.3-1.5e	The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
10.3-1.5f	Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewerage disposal facilities.
10.3-1.5g	Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the park. 
10.3-1.5h	The location of street lights, if applicable.
10.3-1.5i	The location of bulk refuse containers, perimeter walls, and park identification signs.
10.3-1.5j	A soil erosion and sedimentation plan meeting the requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
10.3-1.5k	Certification from the appropriate authority on water and sewer acceptability.
10.3-1.6	Development Compliance. All required improvements, according to the site plan approved by the Planning Commission, shall be installed in each phase before the issuance of building permits. 
10.3-2	Regulations. 
10.3-2.1	Soil and Ground Cover Requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall adhere to the following: 
10.3-2.1a	All streets shall be constructed so as to reduce dust, and in accordance with stipulations as shall be required by the Zoning Administrator to ensure properly constructed streets. 
10.3-2.1b	All areas designated as yards shall be planted with grass or acceptable vegetative shrubs or flowers. 
10.3-2.1c	Any walkways to front or back entrances shall be covered with stone or other solid material capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. 
10.3-2	Location and Frontage. A manufactured home park development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of one hundred (100) feet on a public street. 
10.3-3	Site Drainage Requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every park site shall be graded and equipped to drain all water in a safe, efficient manner. 
10.3-4	Streets. All mobile manufactured home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and shall have one unobstructed access to a public street or highway. The following requirements shall apply to the development of the park street system: 
10.3-4.1	All internal streets shall meet the minimum requirements of Meriwether County Standards for roads. 
10.3-4.2	All cul-de-sacs shall be constructed with a minimum fifty (50) foot radius.
10.3-4.3	All park streets shall be maintained in good repair at all times by the owner(s) of the park. 
10.3-4.4	Street design, base preparations, and surface construction materials shall meet the requirements of the county street and road standards. Written approval of the street system by the Zoning Administrator shall be required before the first building permit is issued. 
10.3-6	Off-Street Parking Requirements. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per lot shall be provided in all manufactured home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. 
10.3-7	Lot Area and Width. A manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of ten (10) contiguous acres with 30% for streets and other improvements. 
10.3-8	Recreation and Other Community Facilities. Not less than ten (10%) percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other facilities. 
10.3-9	Setbacks Required: 
10.3-8.1	No manufactured home or accessory building or structure shall be located closer than fifty (50') feet to any park perimeter property boundary. 
10.3-8.2	Each manufactured home shall be setback from any other manufactured home by at least forty (40') feet. 
10.3-8.3	There shall be a minimum distance of twenty-five (25') feet between any individual manufactured home and an adjoining street, common parking areas, or other common areas. 
10.3-10	Perimeter Buffer Required. An undisturbed buffer consisting of trees and other landscaping material at least fifty (50') feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the entire exterior perimeter of a manufactured home park. Provided, however, any underground utilities may be placed within this buffer, but no closer than twenty-five (25') feet from the perimeter of the park boundary. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the buffer, which shall be so maintained as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
10.3-11	Lighting. All manufactured home parks shall have lighting of height, spacing and intensity so that each home site is accessible and parking is appropriately illuminated. Mercury vapor, or high or low pressure sodium lights shall be installed at not more than two hundred (200') feet intervals with a minimum height of eighteen (18) feet. 
10.3-12	Water Supply. 
10.3-12.1	Governmental Water System: All manufactured homes parks shall connect to an existing public water system if such system is located within one thousand (1,000') feet of the proposed park. The availability and adequacy of a public water supply shall be confirmed by the applicable agency having jurisdiction. If the public water supply is determined to be unavailable or inadequate for service, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement and allow an alternative water supply source. 
10.3-12.2	Non-Governmental Water System: If a single well is proposed to serve fifteen (15) or more service connections, or twenty-five (25) or more persons, then such well and water distribution system must meet the standards for a Community Water System in accordance with the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-5, "Rules for Safe Drinking Water", as amended and be approved by the Meriwether County Health Department. 
10.3-13	Sewerage Disposal and Treatment: All manufactured home parks shall be required to provide either: 
10.3-13.1	A public sewerage treatment system approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources or 
10.3-13.2	An onsite sewerage management system approved by the Meriwether County Health Department.
10.3-14	Electrical: All electric installations shall meet the requirements of the current National Electric Code, as amended. 
10.3-15	Refuse Collection Facilities: Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least one (1) individually covered refuse container having a capacity of ninety (90) gallons or more for each occupied lot. Bulk container shall be enclosed with a minimum of four (4') feet high chain link fence and placed upon a concrete pad, extending at least eighteen (18) inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
10.3-16	Service Buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well being of park residents. Such structures shall conform to the Georgia State Building Codes adopted by Meriwether County, as amended, and may include, but are not limited to the following uses: 
Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
Community postal facilities. 
Indoor community recreation areas. 
Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for park residents. 
10.3-17	Restrictions on Occupancy: A manufactured home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it has met the installation requirements in this ordinance. The manufactured home shall require the approval and inspection by the Building Inspector of Meriwether County. 
10.4	Recreational Vehicle Parks. RV Parks shall be allowed in districts as shown in Table 7.3, and shall comply with the regulations of this article. RV parks are for the convenience of tourists, transient visitors to Meriwether County and are not intended to provide permanent housing for citizens of the county. 
10.4-1	Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles are allowed as a temporary residence. They shall be placed in a recreational vehicle park only and residents which own recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to rent RV's or to attach RV's to electrical or water hookups in yards of single-family or multi-family residential areas. RV's shall not be located in Manufactured Home Parks and rented as a permanent residence. 
10.4-2	Site Plan Requirement. Any proposed RV Park shall submit to the Planning Commission for approval a site plan that shall conform to the regulations set forth in 10.3-1. 
10.4-3	Development Permit. A development permit shall be required prior to any grading, installation of facilities or advertising of proposed park. Development permits may be obtained from the Meriwether County Planning and Zoning office during normal business hours. 
10.4-4	Development Standards. All RV Parks located in unincorporated Meriwether County shall conform to the following development standards: 
10.4-4.1	Lot Area. Each individual space for use by an RV shall be 1,000 sq. ft. The lot area shall be graded and gravel inserted and surrounded on three sides by landscape timbers or other similar material, to ensure space provided for the RV to park is level and capable of sedimentation and erosion control. 
10.4-4.2	Minimum Lot Size. For the purposes of the development of a RV Park the minimum lot size shall be 2 acres. 
10.4-4.3	Shower Facilities. Any RV Park shall provide one shower and restroom facilities for every six rental spaces. 
10.4-4.4	Electrical. Each individual space shall provide electrical hookup for the RV in accordance with current National Electrical Code as amended. 
10.4-4.5	Water. Each individual space shall provide water source for the RV to fill water storage tanks. 
10.4-4.6	Individual Spaces. Individual space in the park shall include a concrete picnic table, benches and a charcoal grill constructed of wrought iron or other similar material, permanently attached to a concrete pad. 
10.4-4.7	Streets. Streets that provide access to the individual spaces shall be constructed to Meriwether County standards and shall be of all weather construction. The street system shall be maintained by park owner and shall not be the responsibility of Meriwether County. 
10.4-4.8	Solid Waste. Each RV Park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least two (2) individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of thirty (30) gallons or more for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall be enclosed with a minimum of four (4') feet high chain link fence and placed upon a concrete pad, extending at least eighteen (18) inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
10.4-4.9	Ingress and Egress. The entrance and exit to a RV park from a major arterial, collector or local street shall be no more than 80 feet in width. There shall be only one ingress and egress from a U.S., State, County or local road, with an internal street system providing access to individual spaces. 
10.4-4.10	Frontage. The RV park shall position individual spaces so RV's shall be reverse frontage to U.S., State, county or local roads, with street system constructed and maintained by park owner. Interior street system for park shall be constructed to County Standards and approved by County Zoning Administrator. 
10.4-4.11	Waste Water Treatment Facility. All RV parks shall construct a minimum of one wastewater disposal system approved by the Meriwether County Health Department. Each unit shall be a minimum of 1,000 gallon capacity. 
10.5	Hunting Camps, Clubs or Lodges. All owners of temporary recreational vehicles or camps that stay overnight in Meriwether County; or fishing and hunting clubs or lodges shall apply for a permit from the Meriwether County Building and Zoning Department. 
10.5-1	Permit applications shall require the following information:
10.5-1a	A certificate or permit from the Meriwether County Health Department stating they have satisfied Meriwether County requirements and have an approved system for disposal of sewerage. 
10.5-1b	A minimum 90 gallon solid waste receptacle (trash container).
10.5-1c	Length of stay in Meriwether County.
10.5-1d	24 hour contact name, address, phone number and location of temporary camp, lodge or club. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2); Ord. of 12-8-10(2), §§ 1—6)
ARTICLE 11. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
11.1	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide regulations to foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians on private and public streets and to minimize nuisances from on-street parking. 
However the provisions of this Article 11 will not apply to the off-street parking within either a Commercial Industrial Park District or a Planned Industrial District since the off-street parking issues are specifically addressed within Articles 14 and 15 set forth herein. 
11.2	Off-Street Parking. 
11.2-1	Off-Street Automobile Parking and Storage. Off-street parking and storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the uses mentioned in this section are established. Such automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth in Table 11.1. Each automobile parking space shall be at least nine (9') feet wide and twenty (20') feet long. 
11.2-2	If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the Zoning Administrator may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is within five hundred (500') feet of such principal use. Such space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
11.2-3	All off-street automobile parking and storage space except for single-family residential uses shall be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road or highway when leaving the premises. 
11.2-4	Gross leasable area (GLA) is the total building floor area in square feet that a developer may lease. Gross floor area is the sum of the areas of floors of a building, including all areas for human occupancy, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls but excluding unenclosed porches, interior parking spaces or any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six (6') feet, six (6") inches. 
11.2-5	Improvement and Maintenance. Off-street parking areas shall be graded to insure proper drainage. Surfaces with all-weather gravel, asphalt or concrete materials and shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust free condition. 
11.2-6	Bumper Guards. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with all-weather gravel materials, a bumper guard or wheel stop shall be installed to mark each space. 
11.2-7	Marking. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with concrete or asphalt, each parking space shall be painted with stripes, not less than three (3") inches wide, running the length of each of the longer sides of the space or by other acceptable methods which clearly delineate the parking space within the parking lot. 
11.2-8	Handicapped Parking. Parking for the handicapped within a non-residential district shall be provided at a size, number and location according to the requirements of the ADA accessibility guidelines (ASAAG) published by the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barrier Compliance Board (ATBCB), as amended. 
11.3	Residential Parking. All parking areas serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following requirements. 
11.3-1	No inoperable vehicle shall be permitted in any residential district for more than fourteen (14) days unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs shall be in an enclosed garage in residential districts. 
11.3-2	No commercial vehicle as licensed by the State with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding 11,000 lbs shall be allowed to park in R-1 or Multi family residential districts unless it can be completely enclosed. 
11.3-3	Commercial vehicles, licensed by the State, busses and recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in R-1 or Multi-Family districts. 
11.3-4	Recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in any R-1 or Multi-Family residential district. 
11.3-5	Recreational vehicles are prohibited from parking in the front yard of any residential district and must be parked in an area of the yard least visible from any public street. 
Table 11.1 

 
11.4	Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space. Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, a street. Such space shall be so arranged that no vehicle is required to back into a public street, road or highway in order to leave the premises. 
11.4-1	Retail Business and Services. A space ten (10') by twenty-five (25') feet for each 20,000 square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
11.4-2	Wholesale and Industry. One space ten (10') feet by fifty (50') feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor space plus one additional space for each 60,000 additional square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
11.4-3	Bus and Truck Terminal. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of busses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 12. - NONCONFORMITY 
12.1	Nonconforming Lots. Any lots for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in Meriwether County Clerk of Superior Court prior to the adoption of this ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance, or if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided that in either case: 
1.	Minimum requirements of the district for front, side and rear yard, height and floor area shall be complied with. 
2.	A lot to be used for duplexes, multi-family dwellings, residential group development projects, or manufactured homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for these uses in the district. 
12.2	Nonconforming Uses of Land. Nonconforming uses of land consists of the open use of property (including such uses but not limited to storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, manufactured housing parks and similar open uses) where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: 
1.	When a nonconforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any other nonconforming use. 
2.	Nonconforming uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses.
3.	A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
4.	When any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
12.3	Nonconforming Uses of Structures. Nonconforming uses of structures consists of structures in use, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, nonconforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
1.	An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall only be changed to a conforming use. 
2.	An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
3.	A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
4.	When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one (1) year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
12.4	Nonconforming Signs. 
1.	A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except when the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or replacement of removable letters and numbers on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
2.	Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted to maintain a safe condition and neat appearance so long as the sign remains substantially the same as it was on the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance. However, no changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
12.5	Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structures. When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than fifty (50%) percent of the value of the structure. If the nonconforming structure is damaged more than fifty (50%) the structure may be rebuilt only if it conforms to the zoning ordinance as adopted. Nonconforming manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park may be replaced according to Type III appearance standards. Structures that do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall also be governed by this provision. 
12.5	Restoration to a Safe Condition. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any structure or use to a safe or sanitary condition, nor shall the ordinance prevent regular maintenance of any nonconforming use or structure. 
12.6	Change, Enlargement or Reestablishment of a Nonconforming Use. The County Commission of Meriwether County may grant the change, reestablishment or enlargement of a nonconforming use or the enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming structure upon the following findings: 
1.	The change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use. 
2.	The structure cannot be economically modified so as to be suitable for uses in the district. 
3.	The structure would have to be removed to permit development of the property for conforming uses. 
4.	The structure has such value that removal to permit development of the conforming uses would cause economic hardship to the owner. 
5.	The proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, replacement or repair would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Zoning Ordinance. 
6.	The requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for rezoning would prevent the current zoning from being changed to a classification that would allow the proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement. 
12.7	Applications. Applications submitted to the County Commission requesting the change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming use or structure shall include the following information: 
The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the County Commission that the use or structure: 
12.7-1a	Shall not cause substantial detriment to the public good;
12.7-1b	Could not be economically converted to a conforming use;
12.7-1c	That the present use is legally nonconforming;
That change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use; 
That the structure has such value, that removal, to permit conforming structures, would cause economic hardship to the owner; 
12.7-3a	The applicant shall submit a plat or an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot, size and location of all structures and their distance form all property lines, the names of all streets which the property abuts and all parking spaces. 
12.7-3b	If the request is for a commercial use or structure, a written description shall be submitted to describe the business. This description shall include hours of operation, number of employees, equipment used, products made or sold, type of signs, and other information as needed for the County Commission to reach an informed decision. 
12.8	County Commission Action. If the requested change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement is approved, the County Commission may place conditions on the approval to ensure protection of the surrounding area. The applicant is responsible for conformance with these conditions. 
12.9	Changes in Zoning. Any nonconforming use created by approval of changes to this ordinance shall be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 13. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 
13.1	Purpose and objectives of zone. It is the objective of this zone to establish procedures and standards for the implementation of comprehensively planned, multi-use projects. It is also intended that this zone provide a more flexible approach to the comprehensive design and development of multi-use projects than the procedures and regulations applicable under the various conventional zoning categories. In so doing, it is intended that this zoning category be utilized to foster an overall improved development pattern for Meriwether County. The specific purposes of the zone are: 
13.1-1	To encourage orderly, staged development of comprehensively planned, multi-use centers by providing procedures for various zoning and plan approvals, including development phasing; 
13.1-2	To encourage design flexibility and coordination of architectural style of buildings and signage; 
13.1-3	To ensure the integration and internal compatibility of applicable residential and nonresidential uses by providing a suitable residential environment that is enhanced and complimented by commercial, recreational, open space, employment and institutional uses and amenities within all land use components of the multi-use project; 
13.1-4	To ensure compatibility of the proposed land uses with internal and surrounding uses by incorporating higher standards of land planning and site design than could be accomplished under conventional zoning categories and to provide a superior quality of development exceeding what could be achieved under conventional zoning regulations and procedures; 
13.1-5	To encourage the efficient use of land by: locating employment and retail uses convenient to residential areas; reducing reliance on automobile use and encouraging pedestrian and other non-vehicular circulations systems; retaining and providing usable open space and active recreation areas close to employment and residential population; and providing for the development of comprehensive non-vehicular circulation networks, separated from vehicular roadways, which constitute a system of linkages among residential areas, open spaces, recreational areas, commercial and employment areas, and public facilities; 
13.1-6	To provide superior natural environment by the preservation of trees, natural topographic geologic features, wetlands, watercourses, and open space, and 
13.1-7	To allow development only in a staged or phased fashion to ensure the adequacy for the provision of public facilities and the concurrent implementation of community amenities. 
13.2	Size, Location and Requirements. The PUD zoning classification and accompanying development plans may be approved upon findings that the application is proper for the comprehensive and systemic development of the County, is capable of accomplishing the purposes of this zone, is an internally and externally compatible form of development and is consistent with any applicable planning and land use policies of the county. In order to enable the county to evaluate the conformance with the standards contained herein, specific sets of plans shall be submitted in accord with section 13.9 herein, and the County is authorized to approve said plan or plans if such plans are found sufficient to accomplish the above purposes in compliance with the standards and requirements of this zone. 
13.2-1	Minimum size, location, and development requirements. 
13.2-1a	Minimum area. No land shall be classified in the PUD zone unless it contains a minimum of six hundred acres. Parcels or tracts less than the minimum acreage may be permitted if they are contiguous to an existing PUD zoned area and may be harmoniously integrated into the PUD area, consistent with the objectives and purposes of this zone. 
13.2-1b	Location. Such land shall be located adjacent to and readily accessible from existing or planned roadways, sufficient to carry the increased capacity of the development, and are in an approved construction program. It is intended that adequate access be available to such sites so that traffic does not have an adverse impact on the surrounding area or cause internal circulation or safety problems. 
13.2-1c	Public water and sewer. No development shall be permitted unless served by public water and sewer owned and operated by a municipality or the developer. An escrow account must be established by the developer equal to 100 percent value of the system with funds available to repair or replace the system as required. 
13.2-1d	Signage. Signs shall be allowed in accordance with the specifications and standards established in the final site plan and the Meriwether County Sign Ordinance. 
13.2-1e	Connectivity. Parcels shall not be zoned PUD unless configured to connect to adjacent streets and promote the overall connectivity for pedestrians and vehicles within the development. 
13.2-1f	Large undeveloped land tracts. Large undeveloped land tracts within the county shall be considered for the PUD zone in order for the county to be planned in a more comprehensive and less piecemeal manner. Large tracts of land should be zoned PUD to include a mix of land uses instead of being developed under one conventional zoning category in order to meet the purposes and objectives of this zone. 
13.3	Traditional neighborhood development principles. Land developed in the PUD zone should be developed consistent with the principles of traditional neighborhood developments, which emulate the historic pattern of development in the county and will be generally more compatible with existing developed areas of the county. These principles are listed below: 
13.3-1	Walk ability: Most daily needs can be satisfied within a five-to-ten minute walk of home and work (quarter-to half-mile radius). Pedestrian-friendly street design includes buildings close to the street, front porches, continuous tree cover, on-street parking, hidden parking lots, garages relegated to a rear lane, and narrow, slow-speed vehicular trajectories. 
13.3-2	Connectivity: An interconnected street grid network disperses traffic and increases walkability by allowing most streets to be narrow. A high quality pedestrian network and public realm makes walking comfortable, pleasant, and interesting. 
13.3-3	Mixed-use: A mix of shops, offices, apartments, houses, recreation, on site. Mixed-uses within the neighborhood, the block, and buildings. 
13.3-4	Diverse housing: A range of architectural types, sizes, and prices located in close proximity. 
13.3-5	High-quality architecture and urban design: Emphasis on aesthetics, human comfort, and creating a sense of place. Special placement of civic buildings and sites within the community. Architectural styles and exteriors shall vary but no more than 25% of the total dwelling units shall be constructed as vinyl or metal siding. 
13.3-6	Increased density: More buildings, residences, shops, and services closer together, to encourage walking and to enable a more efficient use of resources and time. 
13.3-7	Smart Transportation: A transportation network connecting neighborhoods, business districts, cities and towns together. Pedestrian-friendly design encourages a greater use of walking, bicycles, roller-blades, and scooters as daily transportation. 
13.3-8	Sustainable: Minimal environmental impact of development and its operations. It has less use of finite land and fuel resources, more local production. 
13.3-9	Quality of life: taken together, all of the above contribute to an improved quality of life for community residents and for the human community as a whole. 
13.4	Uses permitted. 
13.4-1	Residential. All types of residential uses allowed by right in the R1 zoning districts shall be permitted, as well as all accessory uses thereto. 
13.4-1.1	The location and type of all residential uses proposed on the site must be shown on the plan submitted in accordance with the requirements of section 13.9 of this section, with the level of specificity increasing at each level of plan review. 
13.4-1.2	Residential uses may be mixed with propose commercial industrial uses, rather than located in a separate residential area on the site, upon a finding by the county commission that combining residential and non-residential uses at one location, within a site, will not adversely affect the overall development proposed. 
13.4-2	Commercial/industrial. All uses allowed by right or by special exception in the NHC zone is a permitted use, except for the following uses, which are specifically prohibited: 
Manufacture, compounding, and processing of goods and articles 
Drive-in theaters 
Automobile paint and boy repair shops 
Any use permitted in the Industrial zoning districts of the county 
Any agricultural use that includes the keeping or selling of animals (except domestic animals such as dogs, cats, or birds) 
13.4-2.1	The approximate location and general type of commercial and industrial uses proposed on the site must be shown on a sketch plan and schematic development plan submitted in accord with section 13.9 herein, with the level of specificity increasing at each level of plan review. 
13.4-2.2	In order to establish and appropriately mix character within the entire PUD-zoned area, a mixture of commercial uses including retail commercial, office institutional and other low intensity uses shall not exceed 30% percent, including parking and landscaping of the total project shown on a sketch plan. 
13.5	Density and intensity of development. 
13.5-1	Residential. The total number of dwelling units and the corresponding density, as well as the approximate location of such units, shall be established at the time of sketch plan approval pursuant to subsection 13.4-1. 
13.5-2	Lot size supporting commercial facilities and industrial use facilities may be authorized up to one hundred (100) percent lot coverage, provided a parking plan identifying parking alternatives in the immediate vicinity of the buildilng, acceptable to the Planning Commission, is developed for the proposed building. 
13.5-3	Building heights may not exceed forty (40) feet unless waived by the Planning Commission.
13.6	Minimum green area, landscaping and amenity requirements. 
13.6-1	The amount of green area, including designated parks, public and private open space, active and passive recreational areas, required for the residential portion of a mixed use development shall not be less than thirty five (35) percent of the total area shown for residential use. The minimum green area requirement, which shall include designated parks, private open space, active and passive recreational areas, for the commercial/industrial portion of a mixed use development shall be not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area devoted to commercial uses, except that comparable amenities and/or facilities may be provided in lieu of green area if the Planning Commission determines that such amenities or facilities are sufficient to accomplish the purposes of the zone, and would be more beneficial to the proposed development than strict adherence to the specific green area requirement. 
13.6-2	All recreation areas, facilities and amenities, and all open space and landscaped areas, shall be reflected on the application for PUD zone and site plan approved by the Planning Commission. With respect to such areas, facilities and amenities, the site plan or accompanying documents shall reflect: 
13.6-2a	That such areas, facilities or amenities shall not be constructed, converted or used for any purposes other than reflected and designated on the site plan unless said plan is amended by prior written consent of the Planning Commission. 
13.6-2b	A staging or construction timetable specifying the construction of all recreational areas, facilities and amenities. The staging or construction timetable may be related to the number of residential units under construction or complete, or population levels, or other appropriate standard. The adherence to the performance of such timetable may, at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners be secured by appropriate bond, letter of credit or security acceptable to the county or by the withholding and suspension of all permits for any project lying within the designated PUD zone. Subsequent to the completion of work, the county manager is authorized to declare as abandoned and forfeited any cash bond posted pursuant to a requirement of this chapter, and to relinquish proceeds thereof to the general treasury of the county, when after giving the applicant or permittee who posted the cash bond thirty (30) days written notice first by registered mail and if unclaimed by first class mail. Upon failure to request of the county the return of the cash bond, as provided herein, the applicant or permittee, its successors, heirs and assigns relinquish all claims to said bond. 
13.6-2c	A detailed plan with copies of proposed supporting covenants to be filed among the land records prior to the issuance of building permits, which shall enumerate the property owner's and all successors' obligations for perpetual maintenance of all common areas, green space, recreation areas, facilities and amenities, and all common landscaped areas. 
13.7	Public facilities and utilities. Roads must conform to standards set and adopted by the County. Each development must have on site water and sewer capabilities. All developers are encouraged to have sewer systems operated and maintained by a governmental body qualified to do so. All utilities shall be underground for PUD developments. 
13.8	Parking requirements. The planning commission may reduce the number of spaces required for any use allowed in the PUD zone if such reduction meets the purposes of the PUD zone. 
13.9	Application and processing procedures. Planned Unit Developments usually are subject to Development of Regional Impact review by the Chattahoochee-Flint Regional Development Center. At the time of application for rezoning and site plan approval the Zoning Administrator will apply to the Chattahoochee-Flint RDC for determination of Development of Regional Impact. Procedures for governing the application for the PUD zone and approvals necessary to seek building permits shall be subject to the following multiple step process: 
Application for site approval 
13.9-1.1	When rezoning and site plan are approved by the County Commission the developer shall have 24 months in which to complete the project or at a minimum the first phase of the project. 
13.9-1.2	Site Plan approval is a preliminary plan and does not ensure future approval or an indication that the project will be approved in future phases of review. 
13.9-1.3	An applicant shall file, together with the prescribed application fee, an application for site plan approval and rezoning as provided by the county, and in addition, shall submit for approval as part of the application for separate approval, a site plan reflecting at a minimum, the following: 
The boundaries of the entire tract or parcel. 
13.9-1.4	The location, size, capacity and elevation of all utilities and roads located on all adjacent lands. 
13.9-1.5	General location of existing and proposed external roads and adjacent land use and development. 
13.9-1.6	General location and description of various internal proposed land use components, including information as to proposed densities and intensities, proposed size and heights of development. 
13.9-1.7	General location, description and timing of proposed roads, proposed dedicated public lands and perimeter setback or buffer areas. 
13.9-1.8	Proposed phasing or staging plan of development, public facilities and information pertaining to the provision of public facilities as required by the county. 
13.9-1.9	General areas of woodlands, streams and watercourses and other areas intended for natural preservation. 
13.9-1.10	An illustrative plan providing for the physical layout of the entire development including all streets, lots, parcels, park and open spaces. 
13.9-1.11	Draft of architectural standards to govern covenants to be managed by the homeowners association and to act as the PUD compliance document. 
13.10	During the site plan approval phase, the Planning Commission and developer will engage in meetings and planning sessions to submit proposals to be considered by the Planning Commission. 
13.11	Application for schematic development plan approval. (Application for the PUD zone)
13.11-1	A schematic development plan shall be filed for approval, rejection or modification by the Planning Commission of all or portions of the area zoned PUD and reflected within the approved site plan, together with the required filing fee. The schematic development plan shall be scaled at one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
13.11-1a	Boundary survey and identification plat or survey plat.
13.11-1b	The use(s) of all buildings and structures within the schematic development plan area, as well as existing uses of adjacent property external to the PUD zoned area and proposed uses within adjoining PUD zoned areas. 
13.11-1c	The location, height, approximate dimensions and conceptual architectural elevations of all buildings and structures, and the setbacks and densities and/or square footage thereof. 
13.11-1d	The location of points of access to the site and all public and private roads, pedestrian and bike paths, in accordance with the applicable thoroughfare design standards. 
13.11-1e	The location and setbacks of all parking areas.
13.11-1f	Existing topography including:
13.11-1f(a)	Contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet;
13.11-1f(b)	One-hundred-year flood plains and flood ways including base flood elevations.
13.11-1f(c)	Other natural features, such as rock outcropping and scenic views;
13.11-1f(d)	Utility easements, if any; and
13.11-1f(e)	Historic buildings, structures or areas.
13.11-1g	All landscaped areas, proposed conceptual screen planting, open spaces, plazas, malls, courts, commercial signage standards, community identification signage, recreation and amenity areas. 
13.11-1h	Proposed phasing or staging plan of development and information relating to such plan's consistency with the provision of public facilities. 
13.11-1i	A proposed covenant or other form of agreement indicating how the area will be included in any homeowners association or other organization, and how any open space, community space or amenities located with the area subject to review will be perpetually maintained. 
13.11-1j	Eight (8) copies of required preliminary plan/plat submittal for review process (eighteen (18) [inches] by twenty-four (24) [inches]) or of a size acceptable to the Meriwether County Zoning Administrator. All plats and supporting information shall also be submitted to the Meriwether County Zoning Administrator. 
13.11-1k	Two (2) copies of previous plat;
13.11-1l	Two (2) drawings that inventory all wetlands, all watercourses and impoundments, and floodplain limits; 
13.11-1m	Two (2) copies of the erosion and sedimentation control plan;
13.11-1n	Two (2) copies of the storm-water management plan;
13.11-1o	Two (2) copies of the utility development plan (water, sewer, gas, electric, telecommunications);
13.11-1p	Transportation plan showing the interconnection on the subdivision and its relationship to all adjoining properties; 
13.11-1q	Required fees;
13.11-1r	Project narrative to include description of the type of project and who it will serve, developer information, contractor information, engineer information, contact information, anticipated start dates, completion dates, phasing description (if applicable), description of utility development plans including main sizes, lift station information, communications deployment plan and schedule, storm-water planning narrative, impact statement describing projects effects on surrounding transportation including traffic counts and flows from proposed project and existing counts, a narrative description of how traffic will be managed and controlled (and calmed) as appropriate for the development, description of green space and public/community space proposed for the project; and 
13.11-1s	Application must be signed by owner, developer and engineer (licensed in Georgia with stamp affixed). 
13.11-2	The County Commissioners shall take action on the application within ninety (90) days after the application is deemed complete. 
13.12	Final site plan review. Following approval of a schematic development plan and rezoning, an applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission a final site plan for approval, which shall be in accord with the approved schematic development plan and shall include the following: 
13.12-1	All information required pursuant to section 13.11 above;
13.12-2	Proposed phasing or staging plan of development and information regarding consistency of such plan with the provision of public facilities; 
13.12-3	Demonstration of compliance with the approved schematic development plan;
13.12-4	A proposed covenant, suitable for filing in the deed records of Meriwether County, which shall indicate in specific language that the property which is the subject of the application is restricted in its use and/or development standards to the schematic development plan and any accompanying or qualifying text material submitted with such plan, as such plan may be approved or modified by the County Commissioners at the time of final site plan review. The covenant to be filed in the deed records shall also indicate that such restrictions shall be in effect until such time as the property may be rezoned, at which time such restrictions shall be removed; and 
13.12-5	A site plan enforcement agreement to be signed by the applicant requiring the applicant to execute all of the features shown on the site plan and the sequences and timing when said features will be completed. The County Commissioners may in its sole discretion require that a bond, letter of credit or other security of a duration and amount acceptable to the county secure the performance of the terms of the agreement. Subsequent to the completion of work, the county manager is authorized to declare as abandoned and forfeited, any cash bond posted pursuant to a requirement of this chapter, and relinquish proceeds thereof to the general treasury of the county, when after giving the applicant or permittee who posted the cash bond thirty (30) days written notice by registered mail. Upon failure to request of the county return of the cash bond, as provided herein, the applicant or permittee, its successors, heirs and assigns relinquish all claims to said cash bond. The county shall also have the authority to suspend and withhold any and all permits for any work lying within the PUD zone to assure compliance with the standards and requirements set forth for the designated zone. 
13.13	Findings required. 
13.13-1	The county commission shall approve PUD zoning and the accompanying schematic development plan only upon finding that: 
13.13-1.1	The application meets or accomplishes the purposes, objectives, and minimum standards and requirements of the zone; and 
13.13-1.2	The application and site plan will be internally and externally compatible and harmonious with existing and planned uses in the PUD zoned areas and adjacent areas. 
13.13-2	The County Commissioners shall approve a schematic development plan only upon finding that: 
13.13-2.1	The plan is substantially in accord with the approved site plan; and
13.13-2.2	The plan meets or accomplishes the purposes, objectives and minimum standards and requirements of the zone; and 
13.13-2.3	The plan will be internally and externally compatible and harmonious with existing and planned uses in the PUD zoned areas and adjacent areas; and 
13.13-2.4	The existing or planned public facilities are adequate to service the proposed development contained in the plan; and 
13.13-2.5.1	The development staging or phasing program is adequate in relation to the provision of public facilities and private amenities to service the proposed development; and 
13.13-3	The County Commissioners shall approve a final site plan consistent with the findings required in section 13.12 and upon considerations, determinations and powers set forth in this section. The County Commissioners shall, as a condition of approval, require the posting of all necessary bonds or other security instruments, execution of required agreements, and recording of covenants. 
13.14	Procedures for amendment. Amendments to a final site plan may be permitted, and are to be approved by the County Commissioners in accordance with the submission requirements of this chapter. 
13.15	Urban and architectural regulations adopted as part of site plans. 
13.15-1	The county shall adopt, as part of a schematic development plan in the PUD zone, an urban and architectural code as regulations, rules or standards specific and unique to the application under consideration. 
13.15-2	Such rules, regulations and standards shall apply to:
13.15-2.1	Building/structure setbacks and lot coverage;
13.15-2.2	The location and type of accessory buildings and structures;
13.15-2.3	Type and nature of accessory uses; and
13.15-2.4	Appearance of buildings and structures, configuration of building elements and type of building materials. Provided however, no such rules, regulations and standards shall exceed any maximum development standard or be less than any minimum development standard or permit any use otherwise prohibited in the PUD zone. All owners of property subject to the final site plan and their assigns shall be notified (by the developer) of such rules, regulations and standards at the time of taking title to property located within the final site plan area. 
13.15-3	No person, firm or corporation may violate any requirement of this chapter, to include but not limited to deviation from the requirements of the final site plan, and any such violation shall be enforceable by the county and subject to such enforcement and penalties provided by zoning ordinance. 
13.15-4	A community architect shall be commissioned by the developer as a method of ensuring compliance with the urban and architectural code. Said architect shall be retained by the developer and/or homeowner's association until such time as the last lot in the PUD zone at issue is developed. 
13.16	Time for approval, disapproval; appeal. 
13.16-1	For each submission (application for site plan approval, application for schematic development plan approval, and application for final site plan approval) the County Commissioners shall have ninety (90) days to either disapprove or approve the application. If an application is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in writing and transmitted to the owner or agent of the property and the developer if those two entities are not the same. 
13.16-2	Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the County Commission may seek judicial review by filing for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Meriwether County within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 14. - COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT 
Purpose 
The purpose of the Commercial Industrial Park District is to provide for the retailing of goods and services, the light manufacture and assembly of products, and the warehousing and distribution of such products within the controlled environment of an attractive, park-like setting. Minimum lot sizes are defined, front, side and rear yards are required, signage is restricted, and landscaping and natural buffers are specified. 
Within a Commercial Industrial Park District as shown on the official Zoning Map for Meriwether County, Georgia, the following regulations shall apply: 
14.1	Uses Permitted 
Federal, state, county, city or public utility owned or operated buildings and uses. 
Hotels and motels. 
Office buildings. 
Warehousing, wholesaling, interior storage, and distribution in conjunction with manufacturing, assembly and office uses. 
Light manufacturing and assembly of premanufactured component parts. 
Recreational facilities intended primarily for use by employees and tenants of the Commercial Industrial Park development. 
Facilities for retail sale, including the following: 
(1)	Groceries, provided all sales occur inside an enclosed building.
(2)	Automobiles and trucks.
(3)	Home building supplies including building and lumber supplies, provided all exterior storage or other exterior activities are completely screened. 
(4)	Tires, batteries, and automotive accessories.
(5)	Industrial equipment supplies.
(6)	Machinery sales.
(7)	Agricultural equipment.
(8)	Bank or financial institutions.
(9)	Telephone offices and communications centers.
(10)	Gasoline stations.
(11)	Convenience stores with or without gasoline.
(12)	Machinery sales.
(13)	Public or private medical hospital, medical clinic, or ambulance facility.
(14)	Printing, blueprinting, and newspaper publishing establishments.
(15)	College or technical school facilities.
(16)	Restaurant.
(17)	Accessory structures and uses accessory to those permitted herein.
14.2	Density Controls 
14.2.1	Minimum lot size shall not be less than two (2) acres for each tract.
14.2.2	Minimum lot width of each tract shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet as measured at the minimum building line. 
14.3	Required Yards
14.3.1	All required yards shall be kept clear of parking, loading areas, accessory uses and buildings, provided, however, that a gate or security station may be located in a required yard. 
14.3.2	Yards facing an existing or proposed public street shall be considered front yards. Such yards shall have a minimum depth of fifty (50) feet from a major arterial and forty (40) feet from other public streets. On corner lots having two front yards, the required front yard shall be maintained on the street that the building front faces; the required front yard on the remaining street may be reduced to a minimum depth of thirty (30) feet, provided said street is not a major arterial. 
14.3.3	Minimum required depth of rear yard shall be twenty (20 feet with a berm and planting screen or thirty-five (35) feet without a berm and planting screen. 
14.3.4	Minimum required width of each side yard shall be ten (10) feet except where a side lot line abuts a residential district then there shall be provided a side yard of not less than thirty (30) feet with a berm and planting screen. 
14.4	Street Access and Frontage 
 Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred (100) feet on a public road, provided however, the Director of County Planning may approve a lesser frontage to a minimum of fifty (50) feet for lots located on cul-de-sacs or street curves. 
 Access to lots and building sites shall be via collector or arterial streets wherever possible. 
14.5	Off-Street Parking Requirements 
14.5.1	The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be as provided in Article 11 hereof. 
14.5.2	Parking areas shall not be placed in any required yard. All parking areas shall be paved and properly drained. No parking shall be permitted any place other than in paved parking areas. 
14.5.3	Loading areas shall not be placed within any front yard or any required side or rear yard and shall be located and properly screened, as well as practicable, so as to not be visible from any existing or proposed street. 
14.5.4	Parking and loading areas shall be landscaped and parking areas shall be lighted.
14.6	Height Requirements 
Maximum number of stories shall be ten (10). 
14.7	Landscaping Requirements 
 Every building site on which a building shall be placed shall be landscaped in the following manner. 
14.7.1	All yards required under this ordinance shall be landscaped and maintained. A minimum of one tree per fifteen (15) linear feet of distance for each boundary line shall be planted in the required yards. 
14.7.2	All off-street parking areas, to include drives within the parking areas, greater than either twenty (20) automobile spaces or six thousand (6,000) square feet shall have at least five (5%) percent of the interior of the parking area landscaped in planting islands or peninsulas. Width of islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum width of at least five (5) feet between backs of curbs and at least one tree per twenty (20) parking spaces shall be planted within the planting islands or peninsulas in addition to other landscaping materials and plants. 
14.7.3	All parking areas shall be screened from view of public streets as well as is practicable by the use of berms, fencing or buffers of plant materials. 
14.7.4	All mechanical and utility equipment, incinerators and trash containers, and accessory structures necessary for the conduct of a permitted use shall be adequately screened, as well as is practicable, by fencing or 1 landscaping so as to not be visible from any existing or proposed street or from the ground floor of adjacent buildings. 
14.8	Underground Wiring Requirement 
 All power, communication, and other wiring hereafter installed in a Commercial Industrial Park District shall be placed underground. 
14.9	Development Procedure for Tracts or Parcels 
14.9.1	Any land owner of property lying within a Commercial Industrial Park District desiring to dedicate any street, road, or right-of-way to the public must submit to Director of County Planning for approval a plan of the proposed street, road, or right-of-way. 
14.9.2	Anyone desiring to secure a building permit for the use of land lying within a Commercial Industrial Park District must submit to the Director of County Planning the following information, as appropriate for approval of plans: 
(1)	A site plan for traffic engineering analysis, showing location and design of buildings, driveways, driveway intersections with streets, parking areas, loading areas, maneuvering areas and sidewalks; 
(2)	A planting plan, including screen walls and fences, for analysis of adequacy of visual screening and landscape architectural design; 
(3)	Plans for all signs to be erected, including location and lighting of each sign.
The Director of County Planning shall review and approve by signature the proposed plot plan upon finding that the same complies with these regulations. If the proposed plot plan is not approved, the Director of County Planning shall state in writing on the proposed plot plan the cause for such disapproval. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 15. - PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
Purpose 
The purpose and intent of the Planned Industrial District Regulations are to provide for a comprehensively planned district for the orderly growth and development of certain industrial uses which are, by virtue of controls, mutually harmonious with other industries permitted in said Planned Industrial District and also harmonious with residential, commercial, and other uses permitted in nearby districts. The Planned Industrial District caters to basic industries requiring large tracts of land; it is intended to be protected from encroachment by commercial, residential, and other land uses adverse to the location and expansion of industrial development. 
The Planned Industrial District Regulations are intended to promote the health, safety, morals, welfare, comfort, and convenience of the inhabitants of this district and the surrounding lands. 
Within a Planned Industrial District as shown on the official Zoning Map of Meriwether County, Georgia, the following regulations shall apply: 
15.1	Uses Permitted 
 No building, structure, or land shall be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged, or maintained except for one or more of the uses herein cited and subject to the conditions stated herein: 
Commercial heliports and/or helipads. 
Computer and data processing services. 
Educational, scientific, and research organizations. 
Engineering, architectural, and design services. 
Federal, state, county, city or public utilities owned or operated buildings and uses. 
Manufacturing, processing, fabrication or assembly of the following: 
(1)	Apparel.
(2)	Automotive and implements.
(3)	Electrical and electronic machinery, equipment and supplies.
(4)	Food and kindred products intended for human consumption.
(5)	Lumber and wood products.
(6)	Machinery other than electrical.
(7)	Metal and metal products.
(8)	Plastics, glass and rubber products.
(9)	Printing and publishing.
(10)	Professional, scientific, and controlling instruments.
(11)	Research and development operations.
(12)	Textile mill products.
(13)	Transportation equipment.
Medical and dental laboratories. 
Office buildings for general office purposes. 
Research, experimental and testing laboratories. 
Warehousing, interior storage, and distribution in conjunction with manufacturing, assembly and office use. 
Wholesale storage, warehouse, and distribution facilities. 
Public utility buildings, excluding communication towers and antennae. 
Wholesale or retail sale of industrial equipment. 
Bottling plant. 
Exterior storage in conjunction with the above-mentioned uses completely screened from adjacent property lines and streets. 
Accessory structures and uses to those permitted herein. 
15.2	Required Yards 
15.2.1	Yards facing an existing or proposed street other than a controlled access highway shall be considered front yards. Such yards shall have a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet. 
15.2.2	All other yards shall have a minimum depth of fifty (50) feet.
15.2.3	All required yards shall be kept clear of parking, except as provided for in Sections 15.5.5 and 15.5.6, loading areas, exterior storage areas, and accessory uses and buildings, provided however, a gate or security station may be located in a required yard. 
15.2.4	Easements: There shall be provided an easement of not less than twenty-five (25) feet along each side and rear lot line for utilities and drainage. 
15.3	Density Controls 
15.3.1	Buildings only shall not cover an area greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the tract. Buildings and all improvements combined (including vehicular parking and tract loading) shall not cover an area greater than seventy percent (70%) of the total area of the tract. 
15.3.2	Minimum lot area shall not be less than ten (10) acres for each tract.
15.3.3	Minimum lot width of each tract shall not be less than two hundred (200) feet as measured at the building line. 
15.3.4	Maximum number of stories and maximum height are unlimited.
15.4	Street Access and Frontage 
15.4.1	Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred (100) feet on a public road.
15.4.2	Access to building sites shall be via collector or arterial streets wherever possible. No access roads serving plants shall be permitted which may place heavy traffic on residential streets that are not classified as major collector or arterial streets. 
15.5	Off-Street Parking Requirements 
15.5.1	The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for the following types of uses shall be provided as follows: 
(1)	One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of ground floor area plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of upper floor area for non-manufacturing uses to include offices, laboratories and technical support. 
(2)	One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of manufacturing and assembly area, plus one (1) space for each (2) two employees on the maximum working shift. 
(3)	One (1) space for each three (3) employees on the maximum working shirt, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle operating from the premises, for warehouse and storage area. 
15.5.2	All parking areas shall be paved and properly drained. No parking shall be permitted any place other than in paved parking areas. 
15.5.3	Loading areas shall not be placed within any front yard nor in any required yard and shall be located and properly screened, as well as practicable, so as to not be visible from any existing or proposed street. 
15.5.4	Parking and loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 15.6—Landscaping Requirements. 
15.5.5	Off-street parking for visitors, executives and handicapped persons may be permitted in the required front yard not to exceed three (3) spaces per one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public street and shall not encroach within seventy (70) feet of an existing or proposed street. 
15.5.6	Off-street parking areas and access ways in required rear and side yards are not permitted within thirty (30) feet of any side or rear property line. 
15.5.7	The provisions of this Section 15.5 shall control over any conflicting provisions contained in Article 11 hereof. 
15.6	Landscaping Requirements 
 Every building site on which a building shall be placed shall be landscaped in the following manner. 
15.6.1	All yards required under this ordinance shall be landscaped and maintained. A minimum of one tree per twenty (20) linear feet of distance for each boundary line shall be planted in the required yards. 
15.6.2	All off-street parking, loading and unloading areas shall be screened, as well as practicable, from view from streets by the use of earth berms or landscaping materials. 
15.6.3	Landscaping and lighting of off-street parking and vehicular use areas are required.
15.6.4	Each side and rear yard shall have not less than a thirty (30) foot wide strip of land adjacent to the property line planted and maintained; however if any yard faces an existing or proposed street, then it shall have not less than a seventy (70) foot wide strip of land planted and maintained except for main access drives into the site. 
15.7	Industrial District Plan 
15.7.1	Any landowner of property lying in a Planned Industrial District desiring to dedicate any street, road, or right-of-way to the public must submit to the Director of County Planning a plan of the proposed street, road, or right-of-way for approval. 
15.7.2	Anyone desiring to secure a building permit for the use of land lying in a Planned Industrial District must submit to the Director of County Planning a generalized plot plan of the tract to be developed for approval. Such generalized plot plan shall have shown thereon the following information: 
(1)	Location map showing the boundaries of the tract to be developed.
(2)	The location of all buildings proposed to be constructed.
(3)	The general location of parking areas, loading docks, proposed railroad spurs, and public and/or private access ways. 
(4)	Site grading and storm drainage plan.
(5)	Proposed utilities services.
(6)	Required screening.
(7)	Required and adequate easements.
The Director of County Planning shall review and approve by signature the proposed plot plan upon finding that the same complies with these regulations. 
 If the proposed plot plan is not approved, the Director of County Planning shall state in writing on the proposed plot plan the cause for such disapproval. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 16. - ADMINISTRATION 
16.1	This Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator of Meriwether County, in cooperation with the Planning Commission, and the County Commission of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
16.1-1	Zoning Administrator. 
There is hereby created the Office of Zoning Administrator of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
DUTIES AND AUTHORITY: The Zoning Administrator shall administer the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and shall: 
Serve as administrative secretary to the Planning Commission. 
Maintain public records concerning the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, including all maps, amendments, Certificates of Zoning Compliance, Special uses, Variances, and records of public hearings. 
Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices in order to be qualified to make recommendations to the Planning Commission, all of which must be approved by the County Commission. 
Undertake other relevant duties as may be delegated by the County Commission Chairperson. 
16.2	Meriwether County Planning Commission 
16.2-1	There is hereby created a Meriwether County, Planning Commission whose purpose is to carry out provisions of the Meriwether County Zoning Ordinance assigned to it and within applicable provisions of the laws of Georgia. This Zoning Ordinance, including the Official Zoning Map, may be amended by the Meriwether County Commission on its own motion, on a petition, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the Planning Commission in writing for review and recommendation. 
MEMBERSHIP: Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Meriwether County Commission. The Commission shall consist of five (5) members who are residents of Meriwether County and who shall be appointed for five (5) year terms, beginning on January 5 through January 5 of each year. No member shall hold any elective public office within Meriwether County. Any unexpired terms shall be filled by the appointment of the County Commissioners. Members are removable for cause by the County Commission. 
PROCEDURE: The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, (who shall be acting Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson) on an annual basis. 
16.2-2	The Chairperson (or in his absence the Vice-Chairperson) shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the Planning Commission and decide all points of order or procedure. The Chairperson shall appoint any committees that may be found necessary. The Chairperson shall be the deciding vote in any vote ending in a tie. 
16.2-3	The Zoning Administrator (Secretary to the Planning Commission) shall conduct all correspondence of the Planning Commission; keep a minutes' book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; keep records of examination and hearing and other official action; and shall carry out such other official duties as may be assigned by the County Commission Chairperson. 
16.2-4	Meetings of the Planning Commission will be held the 4th Monday of every month in County Commission chambers at 6:00 p.m. Notice must be provided to each member at least 48 hours prior to such meeting and that such other public notice as required by law is provided and abided by. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the members of the Planning Commission meetings. 
16.2-5	Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business. If only three members of the Planning Commission attend a meeting and the Chairperson is one of them, then the Chairperson becomes a voting member and can be part of the quorum. 
16.2-6	Neither the Zoning Administrator, nor any member of the Planning Commission shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the Planning Commission. 
No member of the Planning Commission shall hear or vote upon an appeal in which he or she is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial way. 
The order of business at the meeting shall be as follows: 
Roll Call 
Review and approval of minutes of previous meeting 
Report of committees (if any) 
Unfinished business 
Hearing of cases 
New business 
16.2-7	Failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings or any (4) meetings in a calendar year, shall be considered automatic resignation from the Planning Commission, and upon such resignation or other vacancies occurring in office, the Chairperson or the Zoning Administrator shall inform the County Commission of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the Commission may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
16.2-8	The Planning Commission of Meriwether County shall also have the authority to grant variances and interpret the tenets of the zoning ordinance. 
16.2-9	AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCES. The Planning Commission is authorized to receive, consider, grant, grant with conditions, or deny applications for variances to the dimensional requirements of this code, after a public hearing and after making written findings of fact that the conditions for variances specified herein have been fulfilled. In granting a variance, the Board may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the location, construction, maintenance and operation of any use or building, in addition to those expressly set forth in this ordinance, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. Decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may pursue appeals to the Courts of proper jurisdiction of the State of Georgia as provided by law. 
16.2-9a. VARIANCE APPLICATIONS. A property owner or his authorized agent may initiate a request for variance by filing an application with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The Zoning Administrator may require other drawings or materials essential to an understanding of the proposed use and variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. The variance application shall be considered complete when the Zoning Administrator accepts the application and fee. The application shall be submitted and accepted within the timeframe established by the Building and Zoning office and fee schedule as approved by the Meriwether County Commissioners. 
16.2-9b. CONDITIONS AND CRITERIA FOR GRANTING A VARIANCE. The Planning Commission, in cases where specifically authorized, may grant a variance only after consideration and adoption of findings of fact that all of the following conditions exist and criteria are met. 
16.2-9b(1)	There are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner's or occupant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
16.2-9b(2)	As a result of such unusual circumstance or conditions, there is an undue hardship or practical difficulty that renders it difficult to carry out the provisions of this Code. 
16.2-9b(3)	The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this Code. 
The variance approved is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
16.2-9b(4)	The variance does not permit a use of land, building or structure that is not permitted by right in the land use intensity district in which the variance is requested. 
16.2-10	STAFF INVESTIGATION AND REPORT. The Zoning Administrator shall make an investigation of all variance applications and shall prepare a report, considering applicable criteria. The investigation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. The investigation shall also be made available to the applicant prior to any public hearing scheduled on the matter. This provision shall not apply to appeals of administrative decisions of the Zoning Administrator. 
16.2-11	ACTION ON VARIANCES AND APPEALS. The Planning Commission shall make findings and render a decision within 32 days after the initial public hearing on the proposed variance. 
16.3	Initiation of Amendments: 
16.3-1	Applications to amend this Ordinance may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend the Official Zoning Map(s). An application to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission or the County Commission. An application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s) may be initiated by an individual property owner or his agent, the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission or the County Commission. Unless initiated by the County Commission or the Zoning Administrator, all applications to amend the Official Zoning Map(s) must be submitted by the owner or his agent and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee as seen in the Building and Zoning office, set by the County Commission. An application for an amendment to the Zoning Map(s) affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, said intervals to begin with the date of final decision by the County Commission. 
The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications initiated by the County Commission or Zoning Administrator, except for amendments to the Zoning Map(s) which were defeated by the County Commission, in which case the interval required for the subsequent application shall be at least six months. However, an application to alter conditions of rezoning may be submitted at any time. 
16.4	Application for Amendments: 
16.4-1	Each application to amend this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map(s) shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The initiation of all text amendments must be submitted by written request to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator and the Board of Commissioners must submit the request to the Planning Commission. An individual property owner shall submit a Zoning Map Amendment to the Zoning Administrator. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
16.4-2	Text amendment applications shall include the following:
Submitted by Zoning Administrator or Board of Commissioners. 
Current provisions of text to be affected by amendment. 
Proposed wording of text change. 
Reason for amendment request. 
16.4-2a	Standards for Text Amendments.
16.4-2a(1)	Is the proposed text amendment compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
16.4-2a(2)	Is the proposed text amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance? 
16.4-2a(3)	Will adoption of the amendment further the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare? 
16.4-3	Map amendment applications shall include the following:
16.4-3.1	A legal description of the tract(s) to be rezoned, including the street address and subdivision, if any, or area in which the tract is located. 
16.4-3.2	Seven copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of tract(s); floodplain and flood hazard areas; unusual topographical features; current zoning of subject tract and all adjacent properties; all existing structures. This plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect, planner with an AICP certification or land surveyor whose seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
16.4-3.3	When any applicant or his attorney for a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
16.4-3.4	The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and; 
16.4-3.4a	The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each contribution. 
16.4-3.4b	The disclosure required by this Section shall be filed at the time of application for the rezoning action. 
16.4-3.5	The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; together with a written notarized authorization for the owner(s) agents, if any, to seek rezoning. 
16.4-3.6	A letter of intent indicating specifically how the property is to be used.
16.4-3.7	The name and address of abutting property owners as indicated by Meriwether County Tax Records. 
16.4-4	Submitted Application. Any communication relative to an application for a zoning change will be regarded as informational only until a proper and complete application is accepted by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review any transmittal purporting to be an application for completeness within five (5) workdays following the submission deadline. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. Applications shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted annually by the Planning Commission which shall provide that each application shall be submitted at least 35 days prior to the date on which it is to be reviewed by the Planning Commission and in any event in sufficient time so as to permit advance advertising and notice of any public hearing(s) pursuant to the terms of this Section and State Law. Each application for an amendment to the Official Zoning Ordinance text or map shall be assessed a fee as posted in Building and Zoning office of Meriwether County to defray administrative costs. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the County Commission or Zoning Administrator. 
16.4-5	An application may be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this Section has first appeared. If applicant withdraws application after the legal advertising has been published the applicant will not receive any refund of zoning application. An applicant may also withdraw an application before legal advertising and in writing to the Zoning Administrator. Applications withdrawn before the legal advertising is published may receive a refund of 25% of the cost of the application. 
16.5	Planning Study 
16.5-1	The Zoning Administrator (or his/her designee) upon receiving an application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s), shall do the following: 
16.5-1a	With respect to an application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s), consider and evaluate each of the matters set forth in 16.8. 
16.5-1b	Consult with other departments of the County to fully evaluate the impact of any land use or zoning district change upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to schools, drainage, traffic, and related facilities. 
16.5-1c	Conduct a site review of the property and surrounding area.
16.5-1d	When required, submit a written record of her/his investigation and recommendations to the Planning Commission, said report shall be a matter of public record. 
16.5-2	The Zoning Administrator may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served, and the health, public safety, and general welfare secured. 
16.6	Planning Commission Action 
16.6-1	The Planning Commission shall hold a meeting on each application in accordance with a schedule as stated in Section 16.2-4 or as needed. The Planning Commission shall with respect to each application consider each of the matters set forth in section 16.8. As to each application, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The Planning Commission's action may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured. A written report of the Planning Commission's investigation and recommendation, along with the investigation and recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, shall be submitted to the County Commission and shall be public record. The failure of the Planning Commission to take any action as to a particular petition within thirty days of their review will be tantamount to an approval recommendation thereof. 
16.7	Public Notification 
16.7-1	Legal Notice: Due notice of the public hearing before the County Commission shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation for Meriwether County in which is carried the legal advertisements of the County by advertising the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearings at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing conducted by the County Commission. If the application is for amendment to the Official Zoning Map(s) and the application is filed by someone other than the Zoning Administrator, County Commission or Planning Commission, then this notice also shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
Signs Posted: As to an application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s), the Zoning Administrator (or a designee) shall post a sign at least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days in advance of the County Commission's hearings, in a conspicuous place on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign or signs containing information as to the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the County Commission. 
16.8	Standards for the Exercise of Zoning Power 
16.8-1	In addition to the standards enumerated in other sections of this ordinance, the Planning Commission and County Commission shall consider the following matters in reference to any rezoning application: 
16.8-1a	The existing land uses and zoning classifications of nearby property;
16.8-1b	The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes;
16.8-1c	The extent that the property values of the subject property are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
16.8-1d	The extent that the destruction of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
16.8-1e	The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
16.8-1f	Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned;
16.8-1g	The length of time the subject property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
16.8-1h	Whether the proposed zoning will be a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
16.8-1i	Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
16.8-1j	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools and 
16.8-1k	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the land use plan; 
16.8-1l	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
16.9	Conflict of Interest and Disclosure Rules 
16.9-1	Any Meriwether County Commissioner who knows or reasonably should know that he or she: 
has any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a rezoning action under consideration by Meriwether County Government; 
has a ten percent (10%) or more direct ownership interest in the total assets or capital stock in any business entity which has any direct ownership in any real property affected by a rezoning action under consideration by Meriwether County Government; or 
has a spouse, parent, sibling or child with any interest as described in previous 1 and 2, shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the Meriwether County Commission as soon as he or she knows of its existence. Such an Official, which shall include members of the County Commission, or Planning Commission also shall disqualify himself/herself from voting on the rezoning action and shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or herself or anyone else to influence action on the rezoning action. Any written disclosures made pursuant to this section which result in the inability of the County Commission to obtain a quorum for the purpose of making a final decision when considering a rezoning action, the County Commission shall initiate the special master process set forth in O.C.G.A. 36-67A-5, as amended. Moreover, questions of interpretation as to the application of this statute should be resolved by reference to the Georgia state law governing campaign contribution disclosures, O.C.G.A. 36-67A-3 as amended. 
16.9-2	When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application, and it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
16.9-2a	the name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
16.9-2b	the dollar amounts and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at least five (5) calendar days prior to the public hearing by the local government or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
16.10	Procedures for Public Hearing 
16.10-1	The Chairperson of the Meriwether County Commission shall open the hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and a description of the general rules for the conducting of the hearing. The Chairperson or his delegate may describe the authority and role of the Commission in any zoning decision. The Chairperson or his delegate shall chair the hearing and shall determine the relevance of any proposed comment or presentation to the Commission in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any presentation out of order if not relevant to the published purpose of the hearing. Any person addressing the Chairperson and Commission shall respond to questions of the Chairperson and Commission. Remarks shall be made to the Chairperson only and not to other members of the Commission or audience. Any unused portion of allotted time unused by either the applicant or opponent shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. The following rules of procedure govern the Public Hearing on rezoning or similar matters (special uses) before the Meriwether County Commission. These rules apply to all such public hearing items appearing on any agenda. 
16.10-1a	Procedures relating to application, notice, and advertisement of items on the public hearing agenda shall conform to the requirements of Georgia law and the Meriwether County Codes. 
16.10-1b	Exercise of the zoning power shall conform to the standards expressed in the Meriwether County Zoning Ordinance, as most recently amended, as well as with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
16.10-1c	The Zoning Administrator shall provide a limited number of copies of the policies required by O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq., which copies shall be available on request to interested members of the public. 
16.10-1d	Individuals desiring to address the County Commission regarding an agenda item are required to contact the County Commission Chairperson. Applicants and/or proponents of an item on the public hearing agenda shall be heard first and shall have a minimum of ten minutes and no more than twenty minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Failure of the applicant or his/her representative to be present for the hearing shall result in automatic termination of any proceedings on the amendment and a negative recommendation on the proposed amendment by the Chairperson and Commission of Meriwether County. Opponents of the issue may respond and shall have a minimum of ten minutes and a maximum of twenty minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Applicants or opponents will each be given additional five minutes for rebuttal. Either the applicant or opponent, however, shall not discuss new issues during the rebuttal. 
16.10-1e	In the event there is more than one speaker per side, speakers must divide their time or designate a spokesperson in order to complete their full presentation within the time allotment. Each side shall have equal time overall. 
16.10-1f	The time allotments described above may be modified by a majority vote of the Commissioners present at said meeting based on the request of the applicant and/or opponent. 
16.10-1g	Any remark amounting to an attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual, comment not factually supportable, comment in the form of an emotional outburst, comment not directed at the Chairperson, shall be considered to be non relevant to the purpose of the hearing and shall be ruled out of order. 
16.10-1h	The Chairperson or his delegate shall enter into the record after the presentation of the applicant or his/her representative any written comment, petition, or similar written statement received by the Chairperson and Commission prior to the hearing and the same shall be considered by the Chairperson and Commission along with comments and other relevant information of the hearing in making any zoning decision concerning the proposed zoning amendment. At the public hearing, the County Commission shall review the reports prepared by the Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission. 
16.10-1i	When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the Chairperson or his delegate shall declare the public hearing closed. No further public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment shall be required prior to the zoning decision. 
16.10-1j	Copies of these procedures shall be provided at each public hearing.
16.11	Action by County Commission. The County Commission shall not consider any application until a minimum of five (5) days has passed from the date of the public meeting before the Planning Commission that is set forth in 16.6-1 above. Furthermore, the County Commission shall consider the standards in 16.8 in evaluating each application. So that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served, health, public safety, and general welfare secured, the County Commission may approve the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, add or delete conditions of the application, deny an application, or defer consideration of an application to acquire additional information. An action by the Commission to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice, is required. Any amendment involving changes to the Official Map(s) must be made within five (5) business days after approval by the County Commission. 
16.11-1	After the presentation of positions by members of the public at the public hearing, and at the regularly scheduled meeting of the County Commission, a recommendation will be made from the Meriwether County staff (Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission). 
16.11-2	Following the staff recommendation, County Commission members may ask if anyone present have questions pertinent to the issue. 
16.11-3	Following questions and/or comments by County Commission members, a motion for action on the issue will be in order. A majority of affirmative votes of a quorum is required to pass any motion before the County Commission. 
16.11-4	So that the purpose of the Ordinance will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured, the Commissioners are authorized the following action with respect to any motion pending before it consisting of one of the following: approval, approval with conditions, approval of a different zoning district than requested, denial, withdrawal, or deferral to a time and date specified in minutes of meeting. No official action shall be taken until there is a majority vote of the Meriwether County Commission. 
16.12	Board of Zoning Appeals 
16.12-1	Purpose. These regulations establish a Board of Appeals and provide a mechanism for relief in an individual case where the applicant requests relief from a decision by the Planning Commission on variances due to hardship or from actions of the Zoning Administrator in the administration or enforcement of this code. The grant of authority and powers delegated by the Meriwether County Commissioners is limited to the provisions set forth in this ordinance. Any appeals of the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be directed to the appropriate court of Meriwether County. 
16.13	BOARD OF APPEALS. A Board of Appeals is hereby established. Said board shall consist of three voting members, who are residents and registered voters of the County, each of who shall serve for terms of three years beginning January 5, through January 5, of each year. None of the members of the Board of Appeals shall be a member of the County Commission or Planning Commission. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint the board members. Members are removable for cause by the County Commission. Failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings or any (4) meetings in a calendar year, shall be considered automatic resignation from the Board of Appeals, and upon such resignation or other vacancies in office, the Chairperson or the Zoning Administrator shall inform the County Commission of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the Commission may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
16.14	MEETINGS. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure as are necessary to carry out the purposes of its authority. Meetings shall be held only on an as-needed basis and shall be open to the public. The Board shall appoint a secretary, who shall be the Zoning Administrator unless otherwise designated, to record the minutes of its proceedings, showing the action of each board member upon each question. The Board shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and be public records. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the advisor to the Board, except in cases of an appeal from a decision of the Building and Zoning Department. The Board may adjourn any public hearing or meeting in order to obtain additional information, or to serve further notice upon such other property owners as it decides may be interested in the application or appeal; provided however, that the Board shall act on all applications within 60 days of the date the initial meeting on the matter was held. 
16.15	APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS. Any person, who alleges there is an error in, or who is aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator in the administration, enforcement, and/or interpretation of this code, may file an appeal with the Building and Zoning Office within thirty (30) days of the decision stating the grounds for such appeal. Decisions on variance made by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to hear and decide said appeals, after proper application, public meeting and adoption of relevant findings of fact. 
An appeal from a ruling of the Zoning Administrator or an appeal from a variance decision by the Planning Commission shall stop all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. The Board may affirm, overrule or modify, in whole or in part, the rulings of the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission variance ruling. In cases where an appeal is granted, the Board shall have all necessary powers to direct the issuance of building permits and land use permits not otherwise inconsistent with this code and any other code, resolution, or ordinance adopted by the County Commission. 
16.16	NOTICE AND HEARING. Upon the filing of a complete application for an appeal with the Zoning Administrator, a due process shall be scheduled and held on the proposed appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted as provided for in the previous section of this Code. 
16.17	Building Permit Required 
16.17.1	No building or other structure shall be located, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
16.18	Application for Building Permit 
16.18-1	All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a set of plans, drawn to scale, a copy of the deed and plat showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, setback distances, any parking spaces, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid. 
16.19	Certificate of Occupancy 
16.19-1	A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Zoning Administrator is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
16.19-1a	Any lot or a change in the use of the lot.
16.19-1b	A building hereafter erected or altered or a change in the use of an existing building.
16.19-1c	Any nonconforming use that exists at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or an amendment thereto that is changed, extended, altered, or rebuilt thereafter. 
16.19-2	The Certificate of Occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this ordinance. 
16.19-3	No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all provisions of this Ordinance. 
16.19-4	A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and a copy shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
16.20	Conditional Zoning. 
16.20-1	In order to maintain the health, safety, welfare, and morality of the citizens of Meriwether County the County Commissioners may impose conditions on rezoning requests. Conditions placed on the property as a part of approval of a rezoning application shall remain in force until such time as an appeal has been granted. Conditions shall be in writing and purpose for the conditions shall be established. 
16.20-2	Conditions placed on property at the time of rezoning shall become a written part of the minutes of the County Commission meeting and shall be attached to the amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The conditions imposed shall be part of the rezoning application and kept in the office of the Zoning Administrator. Conditions on the property travel with the property and stay in effect when property changes owners. 
16.21	Appeal Process for Conditional Zoning. Appeals for relief of conditions placed on rezoned property may be heard by the Meriwether County Commission only when the reason for the placement of conditions has been altered to allow the use of the property without the conditions. Appeals shall follow the same procedure as that of a rezoning application. Public hearings are required. 
16.22	Special Uses 
16.22-1	The Planning Commission shall review and the Meriwether County Commission shall approve or deny special uses that are specifically authorized by this Ordinance. Public Hearings are required. (See hearing requirements) 
16.22-2	CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS: The Planning Commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation that may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this Ordinance in its review and the Meriwether County Commission may impose conditions, requirements or limitations it deems necessary. If at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the Zoning Administrator finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the permit shall be terminated. 
16.22-3	PROCEDURE: Application for a special use shall be filed with the Office of the Zoning Administrator, and the Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to consider each request and make written recommendations to the County Commission. A public hearing is required by the County Commission (see Public Hearing Requirements). Upon receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission or after the thirty day period has expired, the County Commission shall schedule the proposed special use to be voted on at the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting. Each application shall contain a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
The general location of all existing structures and property lines. 
Present zoning of adjacent property. 
The existing use of adjacent property. 
Location of proposed buildings and land use. 
A legal description of the property. 
Setbacks. 
Parking spaces if applicable. 
16.22-4	Specifically, in order to grant approval of a special use, the County Commission must find the following standards have been met: 
16.22-4a	The available existing street system is adequate to efficiently and safely accommodate the traffic that will be generated by the proposed use or development. 
16.22-4b	The existing public utilities, facilities and services are adequate to accommodate the proposed use or development. 
16.22-4c	The use or development will not generate or cause conditions such as noise, light, glare, and an odor or similar objectionable features which would reduce the value, use or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
16.22-4d	The use would not have a detrimental environmental impact on the surrounding area.
16.22-4e	The use would not adversely affect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. 
16.22-4f	Each application for a special use shall be assessed a fee according to fee schedule posted in The Building and Zoning office set by the Meriwether County Commission to partially defray administrative and notification costs. 
16.23	Penalties 
16.23-1	Any person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished for each violation, according to the laws of the State of Georgia. Each day such a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
16.23-2	In the event any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, lot, or acreage is used in violation of this Ordinance, the County Commission, Zoning Administrator, or any other appropriate authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent said violation in the case of each such building or use. 
16.24	Compliance with Zoning Procedures Law 
This Article of the Meriwether County Zoning Ordinance, as from time to time amended, is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. 36-66-5, and copies of same shall be available to the public upon request. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
ARTICLE 17 - LEGAL STATUS 
17.1	Introduction 
This Ordinance is not intended to interfere with or annual any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this ordinance such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. 
17.2	Conflicting Regulations Repealed 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances, regulations, or laws passed by the County Commission of Meriwether County, Georgia, in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect. 
As stated in Article I, the existing Appendix A Zoning of the Code of Ordinances, Meriwether County is here by repealed in its entirety and replaced by this ordinance. 
17.3	Validity and Severability 
Should any part, section, or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declared invalid or unconstitutional part, section or provision shall be deemed severed from this Ordinance and shall not affect the validity of any remaining portion of this Ordinance. 
17.4	Adoption Date 
This Appendix A, Zoning Ordinance, as Amended 2006, of Meriwether County, Georgia is adopted after public notice and public hearing in the manner provided by law, and after the requisite two readings, by and after a public meeting held this 12th day of April, 2006. 
17.5	Effective Date 
Enforcement of these regulations shall be administered and become effective on the 12th day of April, 2006. 
17.6	Amendments 
All amendments, including rewording for clarity and other text changes shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Article 17 set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 4-12-06(2))
APPENDIX B FUTURE LAND USE PLAN[1] 
MERIWETHER COUNTY FUTURE LAND USE PLAN 
December 30, 1987 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein at the request of the county is the Meriwether County Future Land Use Plan as adopted December 30, 1987. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [] has been added for clarity.

[Sec. 1.] - INTRODUCTION 
The basic purpose of this narrative is to provide a guide for the general location and pattern of land use in Meriwether County over the next 20 years. 
The Meriwether County Future Land Use Plan should be considered as a general recommendation or suggestion rather than a "set in concrete" instrument. After the Planning Commission reviews this recommended Future Land Use Map, it can be modified to reflect the wishes of the Commission. The rationale which Chattahoochee-Flint APDC (CFAPDC) utilized in developing the plan is described below. This rationale should be closely examined prior to making suggested changes. 
[Sec. 2.] - METHODOLOGY 
The development of Meriwether County's Future Land Use Plan has entailed the consideration of a number of factors. Such factors include: (1) existing land use patterns and trends; (2) existing development problems; (3) existing and proposed transportation facilities; (4) existing and proposed public areas and community facilities; (5) existing and anticipated economic activity; (6) existing and anticipated housing composition; and (7) existing and anticipated population levels, composition, and distribution. CFAPDC has completed this suggested future land use plan which incorporates all of the observations noted. The existing land use survey map served as a base or beginning point prior to developing the plan. 
One very important factor which was considered was present traffic volumes and patterns and how they have changed during the past five to ten years. Development in other counties adjacent to Meriwether was considered. The impact of the expansion of the Atlanta metropolitan area was heavily weighted. 
The impact of the expanding Atlanta metropolitan area was considered in every aspect of the development of the plan. As noted in the attachment, the growth of Atlanta coupled with the continued traffic increase along Interstate 85 is viewed to be a primary catalyst for the future growth of Meriwether County. The selection of particular sections of the county for certain types of uses was derived by an analysis of past trends, current patterns of development, and what is ideally the best use of Meriwether's land, based on economic and social forecasts. 
[Sec. 3.] - RATIONALE 
The future land use plan map was not created randomly. The suggested uses are the result of detailed study of the entire county as it is developing according to the demand which is being placed upon it by local growth, metropolitan impacts, and improved transportation facilities. The suggested location of the various types of land uses is essentially based upon logic as dictated by transportation facilities (both present and projected), all utilities, the demand for living accommodations by the wide range of people in the various socio-economic strata, the types of living accommodations (for example, apartments versus large acreage single family households) and the location of employment sources and services. 
There are no grandiose or impractical projects suggested in this plan. The experience during the past 10—15 years strongly suggests preclusion of major speculative endeavors. Economic trends in the United States have proven to be far too unpredictable to warrant "grand plans" over an extended period of time. 
[Sec. 4.] - LAND USE CATEGORIES 
Examination of the future land use plan map discloses suggested uses that deviate little from present practices. The suggested land use categories include: 

 
[Sec. 4.1.] - Residential, Forest, Agricultural (RFA) 
This land use category encompasses by far the largest amount of land area. It is also quite explicit with regard to permitted uses of the land as will be identified in the proposed ordinance. Three subcategories are allowed in this district: single-family residential, crop/pasture land and forest. 
One of the most important phrases in this narrative is the term "Grandfather Clause." This provision allows any and all existing structures or facilities to remain wherever located regardless of how it might differ from the suggested land use as depicted on the land use plan map. 
Although Meriwether County is gradually changing from a traditionally agricultural county, a large area is still devoted to these endeavors. Such uses include row crops and pasture land. Nothing in this future land use plan suggests that this use be discontinued or discouraged. It has been successfully proven that single-family residential area can coexist with farm land. 
The third sub-category, forest, similarly successfully coexists with farm land and single-family residences. This plan does not advocate the reduction of this land. Market demand for this land for other uses should be the determining factor in any such reduction. 
[Sec. 4.2.] - Single-Family Residential 
Residential growth in Meriwether County is expected to continue in much the same pattern which is occurring at the present time. Besides continued residential development within the county's incorporated communities, almost all of the county's rural areas will experience residential growth. It is recommended that most of this growth take place adjacent to and near present residences along existing rural roads and highways in order to be able to utilize existing public utilities and facilities which might serve particular areas. Also, in areas of the County which are experiencing more concentrated types of growth such as subdivisions, such as around the city limits of Manchester, it is similarly recommended that continued development of this type be encouraged so that existing public utilities and facilities can be most efficiently utilized. 
[Sec. 4.3.] - Multi-Family Residential 
When the existing land use survey was conducted, only one modern multi-family complex was located in the unincorporated portions of Meriwether County. This facility consisted of apartments. It is apparent that an increasing demand for this type of housing is taking place. This type of housing has proven to be a viable alternative housing for the working age group that is currently seeking residence in the County, yet who are not in an income bracket to afford the purchase of conventional housing. Therefore, it is suggested that more multi-family complexes could be developed in areas where adequate water and sewer services exist. 
[Sec. 4.4.] - Manufactured Housing Subdivision 
Meriwether County has recently had an influx of manufactured home subdivisions, or divisions of land being sold per lot for the placement of manufactured housing. These subdivisions have much larger lots than manufactured home communities but should conform to lot sizes allowed in the Meriwether County Subdivision Regulations. 
[Sec. 4.5.] - Home Occupations 
Although the location of home occupations (whether within a residential structure or in a separate structure located on the same lot) are shown on the existing land use map, they are not depicted on the future land use map. These home retail and service operations are allowed in residential areas other than subdivisions if they do not create an undue amount of vehicular traffic and do not produce loud noises, objectionable odors, or an unsightly appearance. If the activities are located in separate structures from the residence, they should never contain more square feet or cubic footage than the residential structure and should never dominate the site so as to present a commercial appearance. 
[Sec. 4.6.] - Commercial 
The commercial areas depicted on the future land use plan map are designated areas that will best serve the anticipated growth of Meriwether County. Almost all of the sites shown on 
the map are located where existing commercial endeavors are presently located. Many of the outlying sites reflect the convenience store type of business. It is recommended that similar businesses locate at these sites as a type of shopping center complex. In some areas, it is apparent that major retail development along state and federal highways is taking place rapidly. This "strip development" has had a negative connotation in many places where growth was not controlled. Meriwether County should urge complete compliance with all codes to alleviate unsightly development. 
[Sec. 4.7.] - Industrial 
All industry cited on the future land use map is currently in existence. No recommendations are being made at this time for expansion of this district, but rather criteria should be set in examining future permit requests for industrial growth to comply with the Future Land Use Plan and established restrictive covenants. Any development should be in areas that will not infringe on residences and which will benefit from existing infrastructure, such as Interstate 85, rail lines, water, sewer, and other utilities. 
[Sec. 4.8.] - Public 
Although some public land is presented on this map, it is felt that official input is required to more accurately present the wishes of the citizens of Meriwether County. The location of a new landfill site provides an excellent example of official input. It is suggested that future public development consider the natural environment and resources of the County for their continued protection. 
[Sec. 5.] - ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT 
Meriwether County should continue planning activities in accord with the policies and provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. Accordingly, the County should identify salient elements of natural and manmade environments, their interrelationships, and major problems and/or opportunities they present for community development. To accomplish this, the County should assess those environmental factors which will: (1) minimize or prevent undue damage, unwise use, or unwarranted preempting of natural resources and opportunities; (2) recognize and make prudent allowance for major latent environmental dangers or risks such as floods and air and water pollution; and (3) foster the human benefits obtainable from use of the natural environment by use of the opportunities available such as the use of natural drainage systems for park and recreational areas. 
Meriwether County should seek, under the above policies and goals, to: (1) avoid adverse environmental impacts on the neighborhoods or community areas through the planning and careful location and development of community facilities; (2) provide environmental amenities to all areas being planned for, and access to such amenities; and (3) equalize the impact and burden of community change and development on living areas, rather than to concentrate them in areas where "sites are cheap." 
The County should also incorporate State of Georgia environmental policies and standards, including those developed in response to federal law regarding protection of air and water quality and control and abatement of noise. The County will also incorporate HUD environmental policies and standards for floodplain management and noise abatement and control. 
The land use plan which has been developed for Meriwether County will alter the existing environment in a number of ways. The expansion of residential land utilization into heretofore undeveloped land will exert the most noticeable changes in the environment. Similarly, the development of additional land for commercial, industrial, and public purposes will exert periodic changes in the environment. The activities which will accompany this development, such as the extension of water, sewer, and electric lines will result in temporary changes (trenches, holes, fills, and other byproducts of the actual construction of these utilities) in the environment in the immediate vicinity of a particular expansion project. In additional to these types of projects, there are various policies such as the Floodplain Ordinance, the recommended Certificate of Occupancy Procedure, and the Development Policies that will have an indirect effect upon the natural environment of Meriwether County. 
If the proposed plan is implemented, there will be beneficial as well as adverse impacts upon the environment. It should be the policy of the County officials to preserve and protect the environment for future generation of residents in Meriwether County. 
The proposals in the land use plan which might have an adverse impact which cannot be avoided included the construction of streets, sewers, water lines, and electric lines in conjunction with residential, commercial, and industrial development. Upon completion of expansion projects, the water and sewer system will have little effect upon the environment. Construction and improvements on streets will require certain safeguards to prevent siltation and erosion. These can be controlled by proper cleaning and grubbing and construction of sedimentation basins. Since Meriwether County is situated on rolling terrain, the effect of residential, commercial, and industrial locations could conceivably affect the environment in a negative manner, unless proper planning and safeguards are implemented. 
The alternatives to these proposals can have a more detrimental environmental impact than the proposed implementation. Not providing a public water system can lead to health hazards and an unsanitary environment. Not improving road conditions or properly constructing new streets could increase the possibility of accidents and reduce safety for the residents of Meriwether County. 
The shortterm use of man's environment with these improvements are necessary to prevent worse detrimental environmental impacts and for man's welfare. There should be no irreversible or irretrievable commitments of resources except for the raw material which will be used in construction. 
Clearing and grubbing on roads should meet the requirements of the State Department of Transportation. The water system should be installed according to the environmental safe guards of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency according to the guidelines established by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Housing and industrial location and building must meet local zoning requirements, along with proper building regulations and requirements. 
[Sec. 6.] - GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 
The main goal of a Future Land Use Plan is to achieve and maintain a suitable living environment for all the residents of Meriwether County. To reach this goal, the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners' office has enabled the Meriwether County Planning Commission to develop a growth policy that encourages residential, commercial, and industrial concentration so the provision of community services can be economically afforded to all residents of Meriwether County. 
Additionally, the Meriwether County Planning Commission should encourage the highest and best use of land within the framework of a logical pattern of land use with utmost consideration of existing patterns. 
[Sec. 6.1.] - Long[term] and Shortterm Policies for Physical Development 
1.	Longterm—The patterns of population growth and land development should foster an economically sound, socially effective, physically attractive, and healthful area in which to reside. 
2.	Longterm—Land development should reinforce optimum individual freedom of choice, opportunity, and mobility. 
(Criteria to implement policies) 
A.	Physical growth will be planned in an orderly and efficient manner.
B.	New development will be tied to the ability of Meriwether County to extend utilities, improve roads, and build new education facilities. 
C.	The County's planning program will take the greatest possible advantage of the strengths [and] flexibility of the private real estate market. 
D.	A variety of housing types and densities will be encouraged.
3.	Shortterm—Standards and programs should be developed and adopted by the County which maintain and enhance the quality of existing natural environment and protect the natural environment during development. 
4.	Shortterm—A cooperative effort should be undertaken between all departments of the Meriwether County government that provide direct impact on development in the county. Similarly, existing codes and regulations should be incorporated with future plans and ordinances to provide clarity and consistency when establishing cooperative relations with individual developers. 
Although a Future Land Use Plan and a Zoning Ordinance are similar in many ways, they are two entirely separate entities. They cannot be used interchangeably. The land use plan provides county officials with a guide and with a basis for making logical zoning decisions. 
The Future Land Use Plan will enable county officials to control and regulate growth in Meriwether County. The Zoning Ordinance is the vehicle for legally implementing the plan. 
Legally, the Future Land Use Plan establishes the criteria for zoning decisions. 
[Sec. 7.] - IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN 
For Meriwether County to realize the value of its Land Use Plan, the Plan must be implemented. Without implementation, the Plan is of little value. This section recommends the various means by which the Plan may be implemented. 
[Sec. 7.1.] - Adoption of the Plan 
The first step toward the effectuation of the Plan is its official adoption. Approval by the Meriwether County Planning Commission and subsequent adoption by the County Commissioners is a necessary initial step in the implementation of the Plan. This official adoption of the Plan pledges the County's support to the development of Meriwether County. 
[Sec. 7.2.] - Implementation Policy 
Once the Plan has been officially adopted, a policy of implementation must then be established. This policy should reflect Meriwether County's intention to carry out the land use recommendations set forth in the Plan. 
Specifically, such a policy for implementing these land use recommendations should outline the jobs to be done and specify the personnel best qualified to do them. Such a policy is recommended by CFAPDC. 

 
[Sec. 8.] - IMPLEMENTATION LEGISLATION 
The legislative tools necessary for implementing the Land Use Plan are as follows: 
Zoning Regulations 
Subdivision Regulations 
Building and Housing Codes 
Public Improvements Program 
[Sec. 8.1.] - Zoning Ordinance 
The Zoning Ordinance is probably the single most important legislative tool for implementing the Land Use Plan. Like most legislative tools, however, it is prohibitive or negative—it is designed to prevent density development that cannot be adequately serviced by County sewer, water (when present), etc., incompatible land use situations; over building of a lot, and the detrimental location of buildings. 
Notwithstanding the value of the Zoning Ordinance, its uses are limited. It cannot correct existing land use situations—IT IS NOT RETROACTIVE. At the time of its adoption, existing land uses, regardless of ordinance conformity, are not affected. They are permitted to remain. This is known as the Grandfather Clause. 
[Sec. 8.2.] - Subdivision Regulations 
The use of subdivision regulations in the implementation of the Land Use Plan is essential. As provided in the State Enabling Legislation, subdivision regulations are designed to help insure adequate street layouts and building lots, provide site improvements (sewer, water mains, street pavements, etc.) and promote conformance to the Land Use Plan. 
[Sec. 8.3.] - Building and Housing Codes 
The use of building and housing codes could provide Meriwether County with a means of implementing the Land Use Plan through the establishment of minimum health, sanitary and safety requirements. 
Housing codes prescribe the minimum conditions under which structures or parts thereof may be lawfully occupied as dwellings. Generally, they relate to such matters as: (1) minimum space per occupant, (2) basic sanitary equipment and facilities, (3) light and ventilation, (4) structural condition of buildings, (5) heating equipment, and (6) the safe and sanitary maintenance of buildings. 
Building codes, unlike housing codes, pertain to the structural safety of buildings, their safety from fire, their durability, and the proper installation of plumbing and electrical equipment. 
[Sec. 8.4.] - Public Improvements Program 
The purpose of a public improvements program is to set forth a comprehensive, long range approach to planning and financing major public improvements. Such a program would include: (1) listing all major improvements contemplated for a given period of time, (2) elevating the improvements in accord with planning goals, (3) establishing priorities, (4) scheduling proposals, and (5) setting forth a financial program of implementation. 
A public improvements program can encourage the development of some areas while discouraging the development of others. The location of public facilities and utilities can and does influence development. 
[Sec. 9.] - MERIWETHER COUNTY BASIN MAP 
[Sec. 9.1.] - As a Planning Tool 
This map delineates the drainage basins in the county and indicates basins in which the water quality has been compromised. The blue color indicates a basin where the surface water is already in use or is being considered for use. The yellow indicates that some water quality degradation is suspected due to the presence of industrial development, a sanitary landfill, and/or a direct discharge sewage treatment facility. The basin colored red indicates that water quality degradation has occurred and has been documented due to dense industrial and residential development. Uncolored areas are those basins where water quality has not been compromised. 
This map is a planning tool in that those basins of acceptable water quality should remain our future water supplies, and therefore should not receive any development which would negatively impact water quality (i.e., landfills, sewage treatment facilities, industrial development, etc.). As the blue basins are our current water supplies, they also should not receive further development of this type. 
Therefore, the basins colored yellow should be the primary targets for industrial development, sewage treatment facilities, sanitary landfills, hazardous waste storage, etc., because the surface water quality has already been compromised in those areas. In that way, economic development in Meriwether County can be fostered while minimizing the associated adverse effects on the environment. 
[Sec. 10.] - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
The 1980 census figures showed a drastic trend reversal insofar as population growth in Meriwether County. After years of constant decline, 1980 showed a 9.1 percent increase in population over the past decade. This could be attributed to a move away from the declining textile manufacturing toward more diversification of industry. Also, it is indicative of the influence that the metro Atlanta has had on surrounding areas. The extension of Interstate 85 south has provided increased access to employment in the metro area and Hartsfield International Airport. The airport personnel and individuals who are employed around the airport area have found convenient residential areas around south Atlanta and Peachtree City. Northeast Meriwether has benefited from the overflow of this residential development facilitated by the access of Georgia 85. 
The southwestern corner of the county is experiencing significant growth due to the availability of scenic residential properties around the Warm Springs area and due to the convenient commute to Columbus 35 miles south. 
In the past few years the growth of Meriwether has again begun to decline. This is due to the closings of two major manufacturers and a loss of employment for over 600. Many of these displaced workers have had to leave Meriwether to find employment. This unexpected dilemma makes projections difficult and Meriwether will probably not grow at the expected rate until it can make up for this loss. There is presently a concerted effort by the local government officials and the Chamber of Commerce to promote greater economic development in the county and to entice new major industry into the area. 
The current major economic development objectives or goals of Meriwether County are as follows: 
-	To encourage the industrial growth and diversification necessary for a sound, strong economic base in the area in order to reduce out-migration, out-commuting and unemployment, by creating new employment opportunities. 
-	To fully support efforts of the unemployed and underemployed to compete equally in Meriwether County job market. 
-	To expand on any economic benefits to the area that may be derived from tourism-related activities and commerce. 
-	To continue to improve the area's economy through the location of new markets, attraction of high technology food processing firms, and applied research toward more productive uses of farm and forest land. 
-	To reduce unemployment, improve the local tax base, and improve community appearance through downtown redevelopment and community revitalization. 
-	To provide safe and adequate water supplies for all residents of the Meriwether County area, and to provide for the water needs of expanded commerce and industry, while working to prevent and control pollution of area water resources. 
-	To protect the quality of the natural and human environment of Meriwether County from the dangers and nuisances of uncontrolled solid waste disposal. 
-	To sustain the continued economic development and quality safe environment by the promotion of wise management of energy resources through programs in the wise utilization of traditional energy resources, energy conservation, and the development and use of viable alternative energy systems. 
-	To continue working with all units of local government to provide adequate civil defense, fire protection, and rescue services for the residents, industries, and commerce of Meriwether County. 
-	To provide the best possible level of local government services within the limited financial resources available. 
-	To encourage surface transportation network improvements within and through the area which foster convenient circulation within the county and provide direct high-speed traffic arteries to link the county with major urban centers in Georgia. 
-	To insure the continued industrial and commercial growth of Meriwether County by providing for the rapid and efficient movement of raw materials, finished products, and commercial goods. 
-	To provide the highest quality public educational opportunities for area residents within the available financial resources. 
See following page for Population Trends. 
MERIWETHER COUNTY POPULATION 
PAST - PRESENT - FUTURE 
POPULATION TRENDS 1940-1985 

 
POPULATION PROJECTIONS 1990-2020 

 
MUNICIPAL POPULATIONS 1980-1984 

 
Source:  U.S. Census of Population, 1940-1980 Georgia Office of Planning & Budget, 1986 Chattahoochee-Flint APDC Projections, 1987 
[Sec. 11.] - TRANSPORTATION 
Transportation Planning is the prediction and directional control of patterns of growth and change in an area related to that area's transportation system. Transportation Planning includes long-rate strategies that could improve transportation systems and related land uses to benefit the people by increasing mobility and accessibility. 
Transportation Planning is a very vital part of a Future Land Use Plan. The allocation of space for future land use and reuse must be reviewed in relation to an efficient transportation network. 
[Sec. 12.] - EXISTING TRANSPORTATION 
[Sec. 12.1.] - Thoroughfares 
Meriwether County has a well developed network of highways and county roads which serve the residents of the county to a satisfactory degree. One federal route, US 27A, serves Meriwether County in a north-south direction, while eleven state highways transverse the county in many various directions. (see map). These state highways include 54, 41, 85E, 85W, 362, 100, 109, 18, 194, 173, and 190. The delineation of these routes is presented on the Map. 
Numerous paved county roads connect various portions of Meriwether County with the state routes and US 27A. These numerous county roads and state routes dramatically increase the transportation mobility in Meriwether County. 
Interstate 85 cuts through the northwestern corner of the county; however, at the present time there are no access or existing ramps serving Meriwether County. The lack of access to I-85 in Meriwether has been a barrier to not only mobility, but also to economic and population growth. 
[Sec. 12.2.] - Railroad 
At the present time Meriwether County is served by two lines of the Southern Railroad System and two lines of the Seaboard Railroad System. One line of the Southern Railroad System provides service from Greenville south to Durand to Columbus, Georgia; while the second Southern Line serves the Cities of Woodbury and Warm Springs in the southeastern part of Meriwether County. One line of the Seaboard System runs through the eastern part of the county in a north-south direction and passes through the Cities of Woodbury and Manchester. The second Seaboard Line runs through the southwestern section of the county and passes through the Cities of Durand, Warm Springs, and Manchester. 
[Sec. 12.3.] - Air 
Meriwether County has one public airport which is located approximately three miles north of Warm Springs on US 27A. The airport has one 4,000 foot asphalt paved, lighted runway. Tiedown facilities are also available. 
INSERT DIAGRAM MSP 1118 HERE 
APPENDIX C SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
A resolution regulating the subdivision of land in unincorporated Meriwether County, Georgia, requiring and regulating the preparation and presentation of preliminary and final plats for such purposes; minimum improvements to be made or guaranteed to be made by the subdivider; setting forth the procedure to be followed by the county planning commission in applying these rules, regulations, and standards; and prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Appendix C contains the subdivision regulations of Meriwether County, Georgia, adopted by resolution on October 14, 1991. A uniform style of punctuation and capitalization has been used; obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation, and material in brackets [] has been added for clarity. A parenthetical historical notation following a section indicates that such section has been amended by the legislation appearing therein. Conversely, absence of such a note indicates such section derives from the resolution of Oct. 14, 1991.
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; airport regulations, Ch. 2.5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; floodplain regulations, Ch. 7; signs, Ch. 10; taxation, licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; zoning, App. A; future land use plan, App. B.

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
In pursuance of authority conferred by the Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, No. 358, as amended, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the municipality; to encourage economically sound and stable land development; to assure the provisions of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and service to land development; to assure the adequate provisions of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land development; to assure the provisions of needed public open spaces and public building sites in land development through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; and to assure that land developed in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of Meriwether County, the County Commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia, do ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 301. - Definitions. 
When used in these regulations, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary meanings where not inconsistent with the context of these regulations. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "person" includes a "firm," "association," "organization," "company" or "corporation" as well as an individual. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
A.	County. The County Commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
B.	Comprehensive plan. Any part or element or the overall plan for development adopted by the planning commission as provided by the General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, No. 358, as amended. 
C.	Drainage plan. Shall mean any plan or element thereof which has been approved by the Meriwether County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Department. 
D.	Easement. A grant by the property owner of use, by the public, a corporation, or person(s) of a strip of land for a specific reason. 
E.	Final plat. Shall mean a plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of these regulations and is in form for recording in the office of the clerk of the superior court (see Georgia Plat Act). 
F.	Lot. A portion or parcel of land separated from the other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For purposes of this resolution, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
G.	Major street plan. Shall mean the major street plan as adopted by the planning commission as an element of the county comprehensive plan. 
H.	Planning commission. The Meriwether County Planning Commission. 
I.	Preliminary plat. Shall mean a tentative plan of a proposed subdivision submitted to the building and zoning department for its consideration. 
J.	Sanitarian. The Meriwether County Sanitarian. 
K.	Street. Is a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as such on the Major Thoroughfare Plan of Meriwether County, which serves primarily as a major traffic way for travel through and within the county. 
1.	Major or arterial street. Those streets designated as such on the Major Thoroughfare Plan of Meriwether County, which serve as major traffic ways for travel through and within the county. 
2.	Secondary or collector street. A street used to carry traffic from the "minor streets" to the "major streets" and includes, but is not limited to, the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision. 
3.	Minor or local street. A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
4.	Alley. A minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
5.	Cul-de-sac. A "minor street" having one (1) end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated with a paved turnaround. 
6.	Dead end. A stub street in a subdivision which will at a later time be continued into another portion of the subdivision. 
L.	Subdivider. Is the person, firm, corporation, syndicate or other legal entity having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceeding to subdivide such land under this regulation, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of undertaking activities covered by these regulations. 
M.	Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into five (5) or more lots, building sites or other division for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. 
(Res. of 1-28-92; Ord. No. 97-01, § 1, 5-12-97)
ARTICLE IV. - PLATTING JURISDICTION, ENFORCEMENT 

Section 401. - Platting authority. 
From and after the passage of this regulation, the building and zoning department shall be the official authority, and no plat of land subdivided shall be entitled to record in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia, unless it shall have the approval of the building and zoning department inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission as required by this resolution is declared to be a misdemeanor. 
Section 402. - Use of a plat. 
The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia, is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from penalties. 
Section 403. - Plat approval. 
After this resolution shall have been put into effect, any subdivision that fails to meet the requirements of this resolution shall be disapproved by the planning commission. 
Section 404. - Acceptance of streets. 
No public authority shall accept, improve or maintain any street not shown on an approved and recorded final plat unless such street shall have received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of this resolution. (Refer to official road specification ordinance of Meriwether County, Georgia, adopted September 22, 1987.) 
ARTICLE V. - TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT FOR SUBDIVISION 

Section 501. - Application and fees. 
All applications for plat approval for subdivisions shall be made to the Meriwether County Building and Zoning Department and accompanied by a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) minimum charge is the plat contains at least five (5) lot[s] but less than thirty (30) lots, or fifty cents ($0.50) per lot for a subdivision containing more than thirty (30) lots. 
(Ord. No. 97-04, § 1, 5-27-97)
Section 502. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision and the payment of fees, the subdivider shall submit to the building and zoning department the following: 
A.	A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat giving the name and address of a person to whom the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
B.	Five (5) copies of the preliminary plat and any other related documents to be utilized as follows: 
1.	Building and zoning department.
2.	Public works department.
3.	Health department.
4.	County commissioners.
The fifth copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent with a notation of the action taken by the planning commission. 
Section 503. - Review of preliminary plat for subdivisions. 
The building and zoning department shall check the plat for conformance to this resolution and shall give notification by mail to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval. 
Thereafter, the building and zoning department shall give tentative approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat, including a statement of the reasons for disapproval if the preliminary plat is disapproved. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one (1) copy added to the records of the building and zoning department. 
Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one (1) year unless an extension of time is requested by the subdivider or his representative and is approved by the building and zoning department. 
If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the building and zoning department within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt (excluding weekends and holidays), the preliminary plat shall be considered approved, and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRELIMINARY PLAT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Section 601. - Scale. 
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
Section 602. - Sheet size. 
Sheet size shall be no larger than seventeen (17) by twenty-three (23) inches. The complete plat must be shown on one (1) sheet of this size. It may not be shown on more than one (1) sheet for purposes of recording in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Section 603. - Ground elevations. 
The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey (or other approved datum plane) with contour lines at intervals of not more than twenty (20) feet for land that slopes more than five (5) percent or contour lines at intervals of not more than five (5) feet for land slopes less than five (5) percent. 
Section 604. - Information to be provided on the preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
A.	Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider.
B.	Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage.
C.	North point and graphic scale and date.
D.	Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision.
E.	Exact boundary lines of the tract of bearing and distance.
F.	Names of owners of record of adjoining property.
G.	Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjoining the tract.
H.	Proposed layout, including streets and alleys, to be reviewed by the building and zoning department, with proposed street names, lot lines with dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for the purpose other than single-family dwelling. 
I.	Block numbers and lot numbers.
J.	Provisions for water supply, sewage and drainage to be reviewed by the county sanitarian. Consult Meriwether County Health Department prior to submitting application. 
K.	Minimum building front yard setback lines as required by the county zoning resolution.
L.	Soil types of subdivision area from U.S. Conservation Department Soil Study.
Section 605. - Certificate of preliminary approval. 
A certificate of approval of preliminary plat by the building and zoning department shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of Meriwether County, Georgia, all the requirements of preliminary approval having been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was given preliminary approval by the Meriwether County Building and Zoning Department on ;daterule;, 19____________. 
This preliminary plat approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. This certificate of preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void on (one (1) year from preliminary plat approval). 

;daterule; Date 
ARTICLE VII. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 

Section 701. - Application for final plat approval. 
After the preliminary plat of the proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the building and zoning department, the subdivider may, within one (1) year from tentative approval, submit to the Meriwether County Planning Commission: 
A.	A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the final plat shall be sent. 
B.	Five (5) copies of the final plat and other related documents, as specified in Article VI. 
Section 702. - Review of final plat. 
The planning commission shall check the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat, and with the rules and regulations, and shall notify by mail the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval. 
Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action shall be made on the original tracing and all prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if the final plat is disapproved. If action is not taken by the planning commission during the next scheduled meeting, the final plat shall be considered approved, and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
Section 703. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon approval of the final plat it shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia. (The subdivider shall be responsible for recording of such final plat in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court, Meriwether County, Georgia.) 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Section 801. - Final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat with the following additions: 
The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on tracing cloth or other approved material. Sheet sizes shall be no larger than seventeen (17) by twenty-three (23) inches. It may not be shown in more than one (1) sheet for purposes of recording in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia. The final plat shall show: 
1.	Bearing and distances to the nearest existing street lines or benchmarks or other permanent monuments (one (1) required) shall be accurately described on the plat. 
2.	County and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
3.	Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by field survey.
4.	Name of subdivision, exact locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. 
5.	Showing street angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
6.	Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) foot and bearing to the nearest minute.
7.	Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically.
8.	Location, dimensions and purposes of easement and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
9.	Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers.
10.	A statement, either directly on the plat or in identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
11.	A certification of registered land surveyor stating that the land is not in a flood zone or floodway. 
12.	Soil erosion control permit request for all areas within the subdivision, including roads and streets where the entire project is over one and one-tenth (11/10) acres. 
13.	The following certifications:
A.	An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future" and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Land Subdivision Regulations of Meriwether County, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By____________, Registered C.E. No.____________ 
By____________, Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.____________ 
B.	An owner's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, Meriwether County 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, that all state, county, and city taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. 
Agent _____Owner _____ 
Date _____Date _____ 
C.	Certification of dedication. A certification by the owner setting forth the description of the areas and improvements he dedicates to the public and the extent of the title which he is dedicating should be attached to the final plat. 
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION: 
I (we) hereby certify that I (we) adopt this plan of subdivision, establish the minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walkways, and other open spaces to public use as noted. 
Date;daterule;, 19____________ 
Owner____________ 
Owner____________ 
D.	Certification of approval for recording, directly on the final plat as follows: 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Land Subdivision Regulations of Meriwether County, Georgia, and that it has been approved by the Meriwether County Building and Zoning Department for recording in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Date;daterule;, 19____________ 


ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Section 901. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is topographical or for other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected prior to final plat approval. No land shall be platted for use which would be in conflict with the floodplain or other zoning provisions in the county zoning resolution and the state flood zone requirements. [There shall be] no construction other than sewer lines or utilities in areas construed as wetlands. 
Section 902. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
Section 903. - Access. 
Subdivisions shall be located so as to gain access over a public street. 
Section 904. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
All streets, thoroughfares, and other features of the Major Thoroughfare Plan of Meriwether County, Georgia, shall be taken into consideration by the subdivider. 
When features of other plans adopted by Meriwether County (such as school or other public building sites, parks, or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
Section 905. - Large-scale development. 
The requirement of these regulations may be modified in the case of a large-scale community or neighborhood unit, such as a housing project or shopping center which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets, if the development is approved by the planning commission and if it is in conformity with the purpose and intent of these regulations. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Section 1001. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets adjacent to the subdivision shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall be less than the required width. 
Section 1002. - Street names. 
Street names require the approval of the building and zoning department. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate nor closely approximate those of existing streets. 
Section 1003. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 
Section 1004. - Cul-de-sac. 
A cul-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least sixty (60) feet with an outside pavement radius of at least fifty (50) feet. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided for dead end streets which are scheduled to be extended at a later date. Each lot shall contain at least two (2) acres and have at least fifty (50) feet frontage. 
Section 1005. - Development along major street, limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major street, a limited access highway, or a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street, or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separation in determining distances. Such lots shall have no access to a major street (or limited access highway), but only to the access street. 
Section 1006. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial developments. Alleys in residential subdivisions shall not be permitted, unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
Section 1007. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips which control access to streets, alleys, and public grounds shall not be permitted unless their control is placed in the hands of Meriwether County. 
ARTICLE XI. - STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Section 1101. - Street geometric requirements. 
Except as otherwise specified by county law, all streets shall meet the following geometric requirements: 
Sixty-foot wide right-of-way, legally deeded to the county. 
Thirty-foot wide, minimum total, road bed: 
A.	Twenty-foot wide road base with a minimum six-inch compacted (one hundred (100) percent) approved soil or gravel base. 
B.	Three-fourths-inch to one-inch, minimum thickness, triple surface treatment overlaid on compacted soil or gravel base, twenty-foot wide (No. 5's, No. 7's and No. 8's and No. 9's gravel layers, plus asphalt tar sealer and binder); or 
C.	Three-fourths-inch to one-inch, minimum thickness, asphalt plant mix road surface overlaid on compacted soil or gravel base, twenty-inch wide (type G, GP1 or GP2, including bituminous materials; asphalt leveling plant mix, including bituminous materials; and using bituminous tack coat). 
Five-foot wide shoulders, each side, minimum, compacted soil or gravel. 
Five-foot wide inside slope to ditch, each side, three (3) to one (1) slope or less. 
Two-foot wide by two-inch deep ditches, each side. 
Six-foot wide outside slope to ditch, each side, one (1) to one (1) slope or less. 
All shoulders and slopes set out in grass: fescue, bermuda, or approved alternative. 
Drainage: A fifteen-inch, minimum diameter, by twenty-inch long, minimum, approved drainage pipe under all driveways, and sufficient cross-drain pipes to handle the flow of water from the ditches to the point of drainage as determined by topography of the site. 
This shall be subject to inspection and approval by the county road supervisor, with final approval resting with the Board of County Commissioners of Meriwether County. 
If subdivision streets are to be accepted into the public road system of Meriwether County, the following must be accomplished: 
1.	Subdivision will be platted and recorded showing all street layouts, including street names. 
2.	Streets will be graded, based, drained, paved, and grassed by subdivider to Meriwether County specifications. 
3.	Streets will be accepted into the public road system under one (1) of the two (2) methods as listed below: 
A.	Streets acceptable at expiration of twenty-four (24) months period from construction date with acceptance conditioned upon conveyance of sixty-foot right-of-way and satisfactory maintenance by owner as per county specifications during twenty-four (24) months period. 
B.	Streets will be accepted into public road system upon construction completion according to county specifications upon receipt from owner of said streets of a deed conveying sixty (60) feet of right-of-way and performance bond in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) per linear foot for twenty-foot pavement and four dollars ($4.00) per linear foot for thirty-foot pavement. Said bond conditioned upon satisfactory maintenance of said streets for twenty-four (24) months period with twenty-four (24) months period commencing on date streets accepted by commissioners and recorded in the official minutes of said body. 
The above refers to subdivision streets. Not included is any street that would be classified as a through street. Through streets, though built by developer, would require different right-of-way widths and different specifications as to base, etc. 
Curb and gutter streets: 
Standard six-inch by twenty-four-inch raised edge. 
Twenty-four-foot pavement or triple surface treatment. 
Twenty-four-foot minimum back of curb to back of curb. 
Culverts shall meet county specifications: 
Galvanized pipe 01 or 12-gauge or concrete pipe C-2 or C-3. 
Culverts and cross-drains approved by county. 
Placement and size. 
Tail-ditch easements (minimum twenty (20) by two hundred (200)). 
Section 1102. - Right of way requirements for through streets and existing county roads. 
For streets classified as through streets or existing county roads which are incorporated in subdivisions a right of way eighty (80) feet wide shall be legally deeded to the county. 
(Ord. No. 00-06, § 1, 11-28-00)
ARTICLE XII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCK AND LOTS 

Section 1201. - Block lengths and widths. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
A.	Blocks shall not be less than fifteen hundred (1500) feet, except in unusual circumstances.
B.	Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots and minimum depth except where abutting upon major streets, limited access highways, or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
Section 1202. - Lot sizes. 
Residential lots shall meet lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning resolution. Residential lots with access to public water and sewer services may reduce lot size requirements to three-quarters (¾) of an acre, or lots with access to public water or sewer services may reduce lot size to one (1) acre, with approval from the Meriwether County Commission. Meriwether County Planning Commission and Meriwether County Building Official. Commercial and industrial lots shall be in conformity with the requirements of the Meriwether County, Georgia, Zoning Resolutions. 
Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
The face of each deed shall contain the statement, "No wells shall be allowed on this lot." 
(Ord. No. 97-03, § 1, 5-12-97)
Section 1203. - Lot lines. 
All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines unless not practicable because of topographic or other features unless otherwise stated. 
Section 1204. - Building lines. 
Building line (setback) shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Resolution. Lots which have reduced lot size to three-quarters (¾) or one (1) acre shall have a minimum road frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, § 2, 5-12-97)
Section 1205. - Lots abutting public streets. 
Each lot shall abut a dedicated public street. 
Section 1206. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SURVEY OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS 
In lieu of completion of the required improvements in a subdivision, the subdivider may deposit surety for the completion of such improvements and present the final plat for approval. 

Section 1301. - Requirements. 
To assure the construction and installation of required improvements, the subdivider shall deliver to the County Commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia, a certified check, surety bond or other acceptable surety in such aggregate amount as is estimated by the governing authority to be the total cost of the construction and installation of all public improvements which are the responsibility of the subdivider. 
Section 1302. - Conditions. 
Bonds or other surety posted shall run to Meriwether County, Georgia, and provide that the subdivider, his heirs or successors, and assignees, and their servants, will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of these regulations and any other applicable requirements; will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing said facilities or improvements in accordance with these regulations and any other applicable requirements; and that the subdivider shall be responsible to Meriwether County, Georgia, for any unnecessary expense incurred through the failure of the subdivider, his heirs, successors, and assignees, or their agents or servants, to complete the work of said construction in an acceptable manner, and from any damages growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform said construction and installation. Before acceptance, any surety shall be approved by Meriwether County. If a bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the State of Georgia. 
Section 1303. - Duration and release. 
Bonds and/or other surety posted pursuant to these regulations shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. Acceptance shall be in writing accurately identifying the improvements covered. Facilities shall not be accepted unless they conform to the applicable specifications and requirements. 
Section 1304. - Default. 
If the construction or installation of any improvements or facilities for which a bond or other surety is posted is not completed within three (3) months after substantial completion of any buildings or structures which said improvements or facilities are designed to serve, or within two (2) years after the date of recording of the final plat, whichever is sooner, or if said construction or installation is not in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements using the proceeds from such surety deposits to pay for such work, such work may be done under contract or by county personnel. To the extent that any portion of a cash deposit is not required or used, said excess cash shall be repaid to the person making the deposit. 
Section 1305. - Certification of receipt of surety for required improvements. 
The following form shall be printed on the final plat as follows, when a preliminary plat is not used: 
I hereby certify that a security bond certified check in the amount of $;$rule; has been received to assure completion of all required improvements in the subdivision plat attached hereto in the event of default by the developer. 
;daterule;, 19____________ 


ARTICLE XIV. - VARIANCES AND WAIVERS 

Section 1401. - [Variance from regulations.] 
Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and public interest secured; provided that such variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the official map, the land use plan, or the zoning resolution, if any or all of such exist. 
Section 1402. - [Waiver of requirements.] 
Where the planning commission finds that, due to the special circumstances of a particular plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such requirements subject to appropriate conditions. 
Section 1403. - [Conditions.] 
In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission [shall] require conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Legend:  Ord. = Ordinance qa Mo.  thin = Motion qa Res. = Resolution

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 